i table of contents division num general provisions num definitions and terms num bidding requirements and conditions num award and execution of contract num scope of work num control of work num control of materials num legal relations and responsibility to public num prosecution and progress num measurement and payment num mobilization and demobilization num value engineering change proposal num maintenance and control of traffic during construction num quality controlquality acceptance division num earthwork num staking num clearing and grubbing num removal of structures and obstructions num roadway and drainage excavation num borrow and excess excavation sites num embankment num subgrade num chemically stabilized roadbed num ditching and shouldering num embankment drainage blankets num final dressing num erosion control num water pollution control num geotextile construction num treatment of open sinkholes num settlement platforms division num aggregate base courses num trafficbound base num dense graded aggregate base dga and crushed stone base csb num pavement drainage blanket num geogrid reinforcement for subgrade and aggregate base courses ii division num asphalt pavements num asphalt mixing plant requirements num control and acceptance of asphalt mixtures num production and placement of asphalt mixtures num opengraded friction course ogfc num asphalt seal coat num asphalt curing seal and asphalt prime and tack coats num asphalt mixture for pavement wedge num asphalt pavement milling and texturing num asphalt mixture using reclaimed materials num asphalt pavement ride quality num asphalt wedge curbs and mountable medians num stonematrix asphalt sma division num pcc pavement and nonstructural concrete construction num jpc pavement pcc base and jpc shoulders num jpc pavement num num diamond grinding jpc pavement num breaking and seating jpc pavement num concrete sidewalks steps and entrance pavements num concrete curbs and gutters num concrete mountable median and standard barrier median num permanent concrete median barriers num temporary concrete median barriers num sealing and patching concrete with epoxy resin num grouting and epoxy bond coat num hook bolts with expansion anchors division num structures and concrete num concrete num steel reinforcement num foundation preparation and backfill num bearing piles num prestressed and precast concrete products num bridge restoration and waterproofing with concrete overlays num structural steel bridges num concrete bridges num reinforced concrete bridge slabs num concrete box culverts and concrete headwalls num precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections num structural plate soil interaction structures num retaining walls num maintenance cleaning and painting steel bridges num precast three sided structures iii division num drainage traffic and roadside construction num culvert pipe entrance pipe storm sewer pipe and equivalents num slotted drain pipe num slope protection and channel lining num underdrains num cored hole drainage box connector num encasement pipe num tunnels by use of steel liner plates num filling and capping safeloading and plugging abandoned underground structures num flume inlets and paved ditches num small drainage structures num prefabricated vertical wick drains num raised pavement markers num permanent pavement striping num durable pavement striping num panel traffic signs num roadway lighting systems num intersection markings num bridge end object markers num guardrail num metal handrails num fence num removing resetting or replacing fence num signal systems num planting vines shrubs and trees num crash cushions num rightofway monuments division num materials details num cement num admixtures for concrete num water num fine aggregates num coarse aggregates num asphalt materials num joint materials num waterproofing materials num structural plates for pipes pipe arches and arches num pipe and pipe arches num steel reinforcement num structural steels num miscellaneous metals num guardrail systems num cast aluminum bridge railing posts num wovenwire fencing materials num chain link fencing materials iv num wood products num tunnel lining materials num timber poles num structural steel coatings num elastomeric bearing pads num concrete curing materials num masonry materials num deicers num epoxy resin systems num erosion control materials num masonry coating materials num hardware for timber structures num retroreflective materials num construction zone temporary marking tapes num sign posts num sign substrates num roadway lighting materials num signal system materials num durable preformed pavement markings type i tape num extruded thermoplastic pavement marking materials num flexible delineator posts num ky type i glass beads num raised pavement markers num latex admixture num pavement striping paint num geotextile fabrics num mineral admixtures for concrete num fabric wrapped backfill drain materials num durable waterborne paint appendix a tabulation of construction tolerances appendix b index division num general provisions num section num definitions and terms num general .
these standard specifications for road and bridge construction are written to the bidder before the award of the contract and to the contractor after award .
the sentences which direct the contractor to perform work are written in active voiceimperative mood .
these directions to the contractor are written as commands .
for example a requirement to provide cold weather protection would be expressed as provide coldweather protection for concrete rather than the contractor shall provide cold weather protection for concrete .
in the imperative mood the subject the bidder or the contractor is understood .
all other requirements to be performed by others have been written in active voice .
sentences written in active voice identify the party responsible for performing the action .
for example the engineer will determine the density of the compacted material .
certain requirements of the contractor may also be written in active voice rather than active voiceimperative mood .
sentences that define terms describe a product or desired result or describe a condition that may exist are not written in either active voice or imperative mood .
these types of sentences that describe a condition use verbs requiring no action .
for example the characteristics of the soils actually encountered in the subgrade may affect the quality of cement and depth of treatment necessary .
num abbreviations .
the following abbreviations when used in the contract represent the full text shown .
aan american association of nurserymen aar association of american railroads aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials ada american with disabilities act adt average daily traffic achp advisory council on historic preservation acpa american concrete pavement association aci american concrete institute agc associated general contractors of america ai asphalt institute aia american institute of architects aisc american institute of steel construction aisi american iron and steel institute an advance notification ansi american national standards institute apd appalachian development highway system program apwa american public works program aq air quality aqr air quality report artimis advanced regional traffic interactive management and information system ara american railway association area american railway engineering association asa american standards association now ansi asce american society of civil engineers asla american society of landscape architects ast above ground storage tank system astm american society for testing and materials atssa american traffic safety services association avl automatic vehicle location awpa american wood preservers association awwa american water works association num aws american welding society ba biological assessment bdr bridge development report bhr bridge hydraulics report bmp best management practices btex benzene toluene ethylbenzene xylene bts bureau of transportation statistics caaa clean air act amendment num cad certified agricultural district cadd computer aided drawing and design cap communicating all promises cbd central business district cde chief district engineer ce categorical exclusion ceq council on environmental quality cercla comprehensive environmental response compensation and liability act cfr code of federal regulations cio chief information officer cmaq congestion management and air quality improvement program cms changeable message sign co carbon monoxide coa class of action coe us army corps of engineers cr county road cra cultural resource assessment csrp conceptual stage relocation plan crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute ctp comprehensive transportation plan cvo commercial vehicle operations daq knrepc division for air quality dba decibels aweighting dbe disadvantaged business enterprise dea division of environmental analysis deis draft environmental impact statement dep department for environmental protection dfwr kentucky department of fish and wildlife resources dhv design hourly volume doe determination of eligibility doi us department of the interior dow knrepc division of water drod draft record of decision dseis draft supplementation environmental impact statement dshe deputy state highway engineer dwm knrepc division of waste management ea environmental assessment eis environmental impact statement eo executive order epa us environmental protection agency er federalaid highway emergency relief program esa endangered species act esba endangered species biological assessment esal equivalent single axle load fapg federal aid policy guide fhpm federal highway program manual fhwa federal highway administration fia federal insurance administration num firm flood insurance rate maps flh federal lands highways program foia freedom of information act fonsi finding of no significant impact fppa farmland protection policy act fr federal register fra federal railroad administration fseis final supplemental environmental impact statement fss federal specifications and standards general services administration fta federal transit administration fws us fish and wildlife service fy fiscal year gis geographic information system gms groundwater management systems habs historic american buildings survey haer historic american engineering record har highway advisory radio hc hydrocarbons hes hazard elimination system hov high occupancy vehicle htf highway trust fund hud housing and urban development hzm hazardous material ia independent assurance icar intergovernmental coordination and review ijr interchange justification report im interstate systeminterstate maintenance program istea intermodal surface transportation efficiency act of num superseded by teanum its intelligent transportation system jpc jointed plain concrete kahc kentucky association of highway contractors kcpa kentucky concrete pavement association kepscri kentucky erosion prevention and sediment controlroadway inspectors km kentucky method knrepc kentucky natural resources and environmental protection cabinet krmca kentucky ready mixed concrete association krs kentucky revised statutes ktc kentucky transportation center kytc kentucky transportation cabinet leq h level equivalent for one hour lesa land evaluation and site assessment los level of service ltap local technical assistance program lrp long range plan maglev magnetic levitation transportation technology deployment program mcl materials central laboratory moa memorandum of agreement mou memorandum of understanding mpo metropolitan planning organization msa metropolitan statistical area mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways num mve motor vehicle enforcement naaqs national ambient air quality standards nac noise abatement criterion napa national asphalt pavement association ncat national center for asphalt technology nchrp national cooperative highway research program ncr nonconformance report ndr national driver registration nec national electric code nema national electrical manufacturers association nepa national environmental policy act nfip national flood insurance program ngvd national geodetic vertical datum nhi national highway institute nhpa national historic preservation act nhs national highway system nhtsa national highway traffic safety administration nist national institute for standards and technology nma nonmajor action nmfs national marine fisheries service noaa national oceanic atmospheric administration nov notice of violation nox nitrogen oxides npdes national pollutant discharge elimination system nphq national partnership for highway quality formerly national quality initiative nqi nps national park system nrcs national resources conservation service formerly scs nrhp national register of historic places nrmca national ready mix concrete association nsr noise study report nti national transit institute ntis national technical information service ntpep national transportation product evaluation program nwim national wetland inventory map oep fhwa office of environmental policy ogc office of general counsel transportation cabinet oms operations management system opa office of public affairs transportation cabinet osa office of state archeologist osha occupational safety and health administration pah polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons paiky plantmix asphalt industry of kentucky pccc percentage catalyst coldstart pccn percentage catalyst hotstart pe preliminary engineering pe professional engineer pmnum inhalable particulates pms pavement management system pms pavement marking system ppm parts per million qa quality acceptance qat quality acceptance team qc quality control qcp quality control plan ql qualified laboratories rcra resource conservation recovery act num rod record of division rs rural secondary rvp reid vapor pressure rwis road weather information station sae society of automotive engineers sashto southern association of state highway and transportation officials sch state clearinghouse scs soil conservation service sha state highway agency she state highway engineer shrp strategic highway research program shpo state historic preservation officer sic standard industrial codes sip state implementation plan sox sulfur oxides sp state primary state maintained spib southern pine inspection bureau sr state road ss state secondary state maintained sspc steel structures painting council stoc statewide transportation operations center stp surface transportation program stip state transportation improvement program supp supplemental road state maintained syp six year plan tcm transportation control measures tcp traffic control plan tdip technology deployment initiatives and partnerships program te transportation enhancement program teanum transportation equity act for the numst century num tebm transportation engineer branch manager tip transportation improvement program tma transportation management area tmc transportation management center trac transportation and civil engineering program trimarc traffic response and incident management assisting the river cities trb transportation research board tsd treatment storage and disposal tsm transportation systems management tso time sharing option tsp total suspended particulates ua urbanized area uats urban area transportation study ul underwriters laboratory unl unscheduled needs list upwp unverified planning work program usc united states code uscg us coast guard usda us department of agriculture usdot us department of transportation usgs us geological survey usnl unscheduled needs list ust underground storage tank vecp value engineering change proposal vph vehicles per hour num vms variable message sign wbe womanowned business enterprise wclib west coast lumber inspection bureau wer wetland evaluation report wma warm mix asphalt wmp wetland mitigation plan num definitions .
the following terms when used in the contract have the meaning described .
advertisement a public announcement inviting bid proposals to perform work or furnish materials .
authorized adjustment a written order issued by the engineer to the contractor detailing changes to the specified work quantities that do not increase or modify the scope of the original contract .
as built plans the final plans reflecting all changes to the original plans .
award the acceptance by the department of a bid proposal .
base course see definition for pavement structure .
best management practice plan the documentation detailing how the contractor intends to conform to the requirements of section num of the standard specifications .
bidder an individual partnership firm corporation or any acceptable combination thereof or joint venture submitting a bid proposal .
bid proposal the offer of a bidder on the prescribed form to perform the work and to furnish the labor and materials at the prices quoted .
bridge a structure including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction such as water a highway or a railway and carrying traffic or other moving loads via a track or passageway and with an opening measured along the center of the roadway of more than num feet between undercopings of abutments spring lines of arches or extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes .
bridge length the dimension of a structure measured along the center of the roadway between backs of abutment headwalls or between ends of the bridge floor .
bridge roadway width the clear width of a structure measured at right angles to the center of the roadway between the bottom of curbs or when curbs are not used between the inner faces of a parapet or railing .
cabinet the kentucky transportation cabinet .
calendar day any day shown on the calendar beginning and ending at midnight .
change order a written order issued by the engineer to the contractor detailing significant changes to the specified work quantities or that increase or modify the scope of the original contract .
upon execution by the contractor and commissioner the change order num becomes a supplemental agreement .
a change order may also necessitate the engineer to prepare and submit a construction revision i.e .
where changes involve adjustments to right of way typical sections or pavement structures major components etc .
a change order may additionally require the cabinet to execute an official order when project limits are adjusted or when major project scope changes are needed .
channel a natural or artificial watercourse .
codes code numbers listed with pay items are bid item code numbers used in project bid proposals .
commercial quality or grade materials readily available from commercial sources .
these materials require no sampling or testing .
commissioner chief executive officer of the department of highways or a duly authorized representative .
when this title is not formally assigned the secretary of the transportation cabinet assumes this role .
commonwealth the commonwealth of kentucky .
construction revision any change in the plans authorized by the department .
contract the written agreement between the department and the contractor setting forth the obligations of the each party for the performance of the prescribed work .
the contract includes the bid proposal contract form contract payment bond contract performance bond standard specifications supplemental specifications standard drawings plans special provisions special notes dbe utilization plan when applicable notice of award notice to begin work all change orders and all supplemental agreements all of which constitute one instrument .
contract form a document describing the work and the specifications to which the work shall be performed which when signed by an agent of both the department and the contractor binds both parties to the terms described therein .
contract payment bond the form of security furnished by the contractor and his surety and approved by the commissioner as security for the faithful payment in full of all legal accounts for labor materials and supplies furnished in the contract .
contract item or pay item a specific unit of work that a price is provided for in the contract .
contract performance bond the security furnished to the department to guarantee completion of the work according to the contract .
contract time the number of working days or calendar days allowed for completion of the contract .
when a calendar date of completion is shown in the bid proposal instead of a number of working or calendar days complete the contract by that date .
contractor the individual partnership firm corporation or any acceptable num combination thereof or joint venture contracting with the department of highways for performance of the work .
controlling item or operation an item or operation that if delayed will delay the completion time of the contract .
the engineer will determine the controlling items or operations based upon the contractors submitted scheduling documents .
when a critical path method schedule is required the controlling items or operations will be determined from the critical path .
county the county containing the project .
culvert any structure not classified as a bridge providing an opening under the roadway .
department the kentucky department of highways .
design quantity the original contract quantity not including contingencies .
detour disadvantaged business enterprise dbe the directing of traffic onto another roadway to bypass a temporary traffic control zone .
a for profit small business where socially and economically disadvantaged individuals own at least num percent interest and also control management and daily business operations of the company .
diversion the directing of traffic onto a temporary roadway or alignment placed in or next to the rightofway .
employee any person working on the project who is under the direction or control of or receives compensation from the contractor or subcontractor .
engineer the state highway engineer of the department or a duly authorized representative responsible for engineering supervision of the contract .
equipment all machinery and equipment together with the necessary supplies for upkeep and maintenance and also tools and apparatus necessary for the proper construction and acceptable completion of the work .
extra work an item of work not provided for in the contract as awarded but found essential by the engineer for the satisfactory completion of the contract .
federal project any project funded wholly or in part by the federal government .
final estimate the final contract payment amount for all quantities of work including all changes from the design quantity .
force account a basis of payment for the directed performance of highway construction work with payment based on the actual cost of labor equipment and materials furnished and considerations for num overhead and profit according to subsection num .
formal acceptance acceptance by the department upon completion of all the requirements of the contract which relieves the contractor of further obligation for the work .
highway a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the rightofway .
highway separation any structure carrying highway traffic over or under another highway or street .
highwayrailway separation any structure carrying highway traffic over or under the tracks of any railway .
holidays new years day .
the first day of january plus one other day determined by the governor of kentucky each year .
martin luther king day .
the third monday in january .
good friday .
friday before easter .
memorial day .
the last monday in may .
independence day .
the fourth day of july .
labor day .
the first monday in september .
presidential election day .
the first tuesday after the first monday in november of presidential election years .
veterans day .
the eleventh day of november .
thanksgiving day .
the fourth thursday in november plus the following friday .
christmas day .
the twentyfifth day of december plus one other day determined by the governor of kentucky each year .
these holidays are subject to subsequent changes by the general assembly of the commonwealth of kentucky .
independent assurance the departments division of materials will conduct testing to provide an unbiased and independent evaluation of all sampling and testing procedures used in the acceptance program .
inspector the engineers authorized representative assigned to make detailed inspections of contract performance .
laboratory the official testing laboratory of the department .
local traffic traffic that has either its origin or destination at some point within the limits of the project or an adjacent project .
local traffic includes traffic on all side roads that lead into the project without another satisfactory outlet over a passable road or street and school buses and mail delivery vehicles making stops within the project .
major and minor items all original contract items having a value of num percent or more of the original contract amount based on the original contract price and original estimated quantity are major items .
all remaining items are minor items .
masonry concrete or stone masonry .
materials any substances used in connection with the construction and num maintenance of any structure or the roadway and its appurtenances .
median the portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways for traffic moving in opposite directions .
minor structures any structure not classified or defined as a bridge or a culvert including catch basins inlets manholes retaining walls steps buildings fences and other miscellaneous items .
new never been used before .
nonconformance report a formal written document of notification detailing a deficiency or nonconformance in characteristic documentation or procedure which renders the quality of an item or activity unacceptable or indeterminate .
corrective action is required including but not limited to supportive documentation of correction for the deficiency .
notice of award written notice to the contractor stating that their bid proposal has been accepted by the cabinet .
notice to contractors the official notice inviting bids for the proposed highway improvements .
notice to begin work written notice to the contractor to proceed with the contract work .
when applicable the engineer will begin counting contract time working days starting with the notice to begin work date .
quality acceptance qa consists of all planned and systematic actions necessary including construction inspection and contract administration to provide adequate confidence that a product or service will satisfy specified requirements for quality .
qa serves to provide confidence in the contract requirements which include materials handling and construction procedures calibration and maintenance of equipment production process control and any sampling testing and inspection which is performed by the department for these purposes .
quality control the sum total of activities performed by the contractor to ensure the end product meets the contract requirements .
quality control plan a detailed description in manual format of the type and frequency of inspection staffing materials handling and construction procedures calibration and maintenance of equipment production process control sampling and testing deemed necessary to measure and control quality as specified by the contract documents .
qualified laboratories department approved laboratories used for sampling and testing of material .
pavement the combination of base course and surface course placed on a num structure subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the roadbed .
subgrade .
the top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders including curbs are constructed .
base course .
the layer or layers of specified or selected materials of designed thickness placed on a subgrade to support a surface course .
surface course wearing course .
one or more layers of a pavement structure designed to accommodate the traffic load the top layer of which resists skidding traffic abrasion and the disintegrating effects of climate .
pay item or contract item a specific unit of work that a price is provided for in the contract .
plans the approved contract drawings including the plan profile and cross section sheets general notes the working drawings supplemental drawings and construction revisions showing the location type character dimensions and details of the work required .
professional archaeologist an individual with a masters degree in archaeology or anthropology or an individual with society of professional archaeologists certification specializing in historic or prehistoric archaeology and having field experience in archaeological investigation .
profile grade the trace of a vertical plane intersecting the top surface of the proposed wearing surface usually along the longitudinal centerline of the roadbed .
profile grade means either the elevation or gradient of such trace according to the context .
project the specific section of the highway including approaches and all appurtenances and construction to be performed under the contract .
project completion the satisfactory completion of all work relating to both contract bid proposal items and items added by supplemental agreement .
project completion notice the notice issued by standard form that the project has been satisfactorily completed and is ready for final inspection .
proper local authorities officials authorized by law to act for counties and other civil subdivisions .
proposal guaranty the security furnished with a bid proposal guaranteeing that a bidder submitting an accepted bid proposal enters into the contract .
ramp an interconnecting roadway of a traffic interchange or a connection between highways at different levels or between parallel highways on which vehicles may enter or leave a designated roadway .
responsive bid a bid proposal which conforms to all requirements of the proposal pamphlet .
responsible bidder a bidder who is physically organized and equipped with the num financial resources to undertake and complete the contract .
responsible contractor a contractor that has the requisite skill resources desire and integrity to complete the work in conformance with the provisions of the contract .
rightofway a general term denoting land property or interest acquired for or devoted to transportation purposes .
road a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel including the entire area within the rightofway .
roadbed the graded portion of a highway within the top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure shoulders and median .
roadside a general term denoting the area adjoining the outer edge of the roadway .
extensive areas between the roadways of a divided highway may also be considered roadside .
roadside development those items necessary to the complete highway providing for the preservation of landscape materials and features the rehabilitation and protection against erosion of all areas disturbed by construction through seeding sodding mulching and the placing of other ground covers such suitable planting and other improvements as may increase the effectiveness and enhance the appearance of the highway .
roadway the portion of a highway within the limits of construction .
shoulder the portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses .
sidewalk that portion of the roadway outside normal vehicle paths constructed primarily for the use of pedestrians .
skew or skew angle the acute angle formed by the intersection of a line normal to the centerline of the roadway with a line parallel to the face of the abutments or in the case of culverts with the centerline of the culverts .
special notes see definition for specifications .
special provisions see definition for specifications .
specifications a general term applied to written directions provisions and requirements pertaining to performance of the work .
specifications are included in documents such as the special notes special provisions standard specifications or supplemental specifications .
special notes .
specifications developed for a specific item of work which may be appropriate only for a particular project but may become standard if regularly used as future projects using the item develop .
special provisions .
additions and revisions to the standard num and supplemental specifications covering conditions peculiar to an individual project .
standard specifications .
a book of specifications approved for general application and repetitive use by the department entitled standard specifications for road and bridge construction .
supplemental specifications .
additions and revisions to the standard specifications that are made subsequently to issuance of the standard specifications .
specified completion date the date by which the contract work is specified to be completed .
standard drawings detailed drawings approved for repetitive use .
standard specifications see definition for specifications .
state highway engineer the state highway engineer of the department acting directly or through an authorized representative .
street a general term denoting a public way for purposes of vehicular travel in a city including the entire area within the rightofway .
structures bridges culverts or minor structures .
subcontractor an individual firm or corporation who with the written consent of the department subcontracts any part of the contract .
first tier subcontractors are those to whom the contractor subcontracts a portion of the work .
second tier subcontractors are those to whom a first tier subcontractor subcontracts a portion of the work .
subgrade see definition for pavement structure .
substructure all of that part of the structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and tops of footings or rigid frames together with the back walls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
superintendent the contractors authorized representative in responsible charge of the work .
superstructure the entire structure except the substructure .
supplemental agreement a written agreement executed by the contractor and the commissioner with the consent of the surety when required covering significant changes and revised or new unit prices and items that supplements the original contract .
see also change order .
supplemental drawings drawings included in the plans to specify construction details .
supplemental specifications see definition for specifications .
num surety the corporation firm or individual other than the contractor executing a bond furnished by the contractor .
surface course wearing course see definition for pavement structure .
temporary structures structures required for the use of traffic during construction and not remaining a part of the permanent roadway .
through traffic all traffic other than traffic defined as local traffic .
titles or headings the titles or headings of the sections and subsections herein are intended for convenience of reference and shall not have any bearing on their interpretation .
traveled way warm mix asphalt the portion of the roadway used for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes .
an asphalt mixture which any of the approved warm mix technologies such as water injection chemical additives or wax additives have been utilized .
work the furnishing of all labor materials equipment and other incidentals necessary or convenient to the successful completion of the project or contract item and the performance of all duties and obligations imposed by the contract .
working day a calendar day exclusive of saturday sunday holidays or days when the weather seasonal or temperature limitations of the specifications or other conditions beyond the control of the contractor prevent as judged by the engineer construction operations from proceeding for at least num hours by the normal working force engaged in performing the controlling item or items of work .
working drawings stress sheets shop drawings erection plans falsework plans framework plans cofferdam plans bending diagrams for reinforcing steel or any other supplementary plans or similar data the contractor is required to submit to the engineer for review .
num section num bidding requirements and conditions num prequalification of bidders .
all organizations and individuals bidding on department projects and accepting subcontracts on department projects must apply for and receive department prequalification and possess a certificate of eligibility as provided in regulations published by the department according to krs section num .
the department reserves the right to waive this requirement on certain projects in connection with the letting of contracts not covered by the statutes .
the department will place a waiver of this requirement in the notice to contractors and the bid proposal for such projects .
num current capacity rating .
the department will determine the current capacity rating of a bidder as the net difference between the bidders maximum capacity rating as set forth in a certificate of eligibility and the total value of uncompleted contract work held as a prime contractor that the bidder is performing for any owner .
the department will determine the value of uncompleted contract work held as a prime contractor that the bidder is performing from the last approved pay estimate for each uncompleted contract .
the department will not give credit for any work subcontracted .
the department will divide the total bid proposal of a joint venture equally among the participants in the joint venture .
the department will divide the total value of the uncompleted work of joint ventured projects equally among the joint venturers in determining a bidders current capacity rating .
the department will not consider bid proposals exceeding the current capacity rating of a bidder .
num contents of the bid proposal form .
the bid proposal form will be available on the department internet website httptransportation.ky.govconstructionprocurementpagesdefault.aspx .the form states the location and description of the contemplated construction and shows the approximate estimate of the various quantities and kinds of work to be performed or materials to be furnished and includes a schedule of items for which unit bid prices are invited .
the bid proposal form states the time allowed to perform the work the amount of the proposal guaranty and the date time and place of the opening of the bid proposals .
the form also includes any special provisions or requirements varying from or not contained in the standard specifications .
the department considers the plans specifications and other documents designated in the bid proposal form a part of the bid proposal whether attached or not .
num bidder registration .
the department reserves the right to disqualify or refuse to place a bidder on the eligible bidders list for a project for any of the following reasons num failure to comply with any prequalification regulations of the department num default under previous contracts num when a bidders existing uncompleted contracts and subcontracts with the department are behind schedule to the extent that they might hinder or prevent prompt completion of any additional contracts num when either the actual progress for all of a bidders existing grade and drain or grade drain and surfacing or bridge contracts and subcontracts is num percent or more behind the scheduled progress for the contracts and subcontracts or when any one of the bidders contracts or subcontracts is num percent or more behind schedule num when the average actual progress for all of a bidders surfacing or resurfacing seeding signing or other miscellaneous contracts and subcontracts is num percent or num more behind the scheduled progress or when any one of these contracts or subcontracts exceeds the original contract time or completion date without significant cause num failure to reimburse the commonwealth for monies owed on any previously awarded contracts including those contracts where the prospective bidder is party to a joint venture and the joint venture fails to reimburse the commonwealth for monies owed and num failure to reimburse the commonwealth for monies owed for plans and bid proposal forms .
the department will resume placing the bidder on the eligible bidders list for projects after the bidder improves his operations to the satisfaction of the state highway engineer .
num interpretations of quantities in bid schedule .
the departments estimated quantities appear in the bid schedule only for the purpose of comparing the bid proposals .
the department will pay the contractor only for the actual quantities of work performed and accepted or materials furnished according to the contract .
the department may increase decrease or omit the estimated quantities of work and materials furnished .
num examination of plans specifications special provisions special notes and site of work .
examine the site of the proposed work the bid proposal plans specifications contract forms and bulletins and addendums posted to the departments website and the bid express bidding service website before submitting the bid proposal .
the department considers the submission of a bid proposal prima facie evidence that the bidder has made such examination and is satisfied as to the conditions to be encountered in performing the work and as to the requirements of the contract .
professing ignorance or a misunderstanding regarding requirements of the work by the prime contractor or any subcontractor or supplier does not in any way serve to modify the provisions of the contract .
consider existing field conditions utilities soil characteristics traffic control and other jobsite characteristics as requirements of the contract to be dealt with accordingly .
num preparation of bid proposal .
num general .
submit the bid proposal on forms furnished on the bid express bidding service website www.bidx.com .
specify a unit price in figures for each pay item for which a quantity is given and show the products of the respective unit prices and quantities written in figures in the column provided for that purpose .
round the products by dropping all digits past the cent .
indicate the total amount of the bid proposal obtained by adding the rounded amounts of the items .
write in ink or type all figures .
when an item in a bid proposal allows a bidder to make a choice indicate a choice according to the specifications for that particular item .
bid proposals submitted shall use an eligible digital id issued by bid express .
when proposing as an individual indicate the name and post office address of the individual .
when proposing as a partnership indicate the name and post office address of each partnership member .
when proposing as a joint venture indicate the name and post office address of each member or officer of the firms represented by the joint venture .
when proposing as a corporation indicate the name of the corporation and the business address of its corporate officials .
num computer bidding .
subsequent to registering for a specific project use the departments expedite bidding program on the internet website of the department of highways division of construction procurement num httptransportation.ky.govconstructionprocurementpagesdefault.aspx .
download the bid file from the bid express bidding service website to prepare a bid proposal for submission to the department .
submit bid proposal electronically through bid express bidding service .
in case of a dispute the bid proposal and bid item sheets created by the highway bid program take precedence over any bid submittal .
furthermore the department takes no responsibility for loss damage of disks or the compatibility with the bidders computer equipment or software .
num irregular bid proposals .
the department will consider bid proposals irregular and will reject them when the bidder either num omits both a unit price for any pay item and an amount for the entire quantity of the same pay item except when the bid proposal allows a choice of authorized pay items or num submits zero as a unit price for any pay item or as an amount for the entire quantity of the same pay item except when the bid proposal form allows a choice of authorized pay items or num fails to submit the bid on the current revised pay items num fails to submit the bid on required addenda or num fails to have a bid bondcashiers check etc the department will consider bid proposals irregular and may reject them for the following reasons num when there are unauthorized additions conditional or alternate bids or irregularities of any kind which may tend to make the bid proposal incomplete indefinite or ambiguous as to its meaning or num when the bidder adds any provisions reserving the right to accept or reject an award or to enter into a contract pursuant to an award or num any failure to comply with the provisions of subsection num or num bid proposals in which the department determines that the prices are unbalanced or when the sum of the total amount of the bid proposal under consideration exceeds the bidders current capacity rating .
num bid proposal guaranty .
the department will reject and will not read any bid proposal that is not accompanied by a guaranty in the form of a cashiers check certified check or bid bond and in an amount no less than the amount indicated on the bid proposal form .
bid proposals must have a bid proposal guaranty in the amount indicated in the bid proposal form accompany the submittal .
a guaranty in the form of a paper bid bond cashiers check or certified check in an amount no less than the amount indicated on the submitted electronic bid is required when the electronic bid bond was not utilized with the bid express bidding service .
paper bid bonds must be delivered to the division of construction procurement prior to the time of the letting .
make the cashiers check certified check or bid bond payable to the kentucky state treasurer .
num delivery of bid proposals .
submit all bid proposals prior to the time specified in the notice to contractors .
submit all bids electronically using bid express bidding services and the requirements thereof .
num withdrawal or revision of bid proposals .
bid proposals can be withdrawn in accordance the requirements of the bid express bidding service prior to the time of the letting .
num num combination bid proposals .
the department may issue bid proposals for projects in combination or separately .
submit bid proposals on either the combination or the separate projects of the combination .
the department reserves the right to make awards on combination bids or separate bids to the best advantage of the department .
num public announcement of bid proposals .
the department will publicly announce all bid proposals at the time indicated in the notice to contractors .
num disqualification of bidders .
the department may consider any of the following reasons sufficient for the disqualification of a bidder and the rejection of the bidders bid proposals num more than one bid proposal for the same work submitted by an individual firm or corporation under the same or different name num evidence of collusion among bidders .
the department will not recognize participants in such collusion as bidders for any future department work until the department reinstates such participant as a qualified bidder .
collusive bidding is a violation of the law and may result in criminal prosecution civil damage actions and state and federal administrative sanctions .
num process agent .
every corporation doing business with the department shall submit evidence of compliance with krs sections numa.num numa.num numa.num numa.num and numa.num and file with the department the name and address of the process agent upon whom process may be served .
every individual residing in another state or members of a copartnership who reside in another state doing business with the department shall file with the department the names and addresses of at least num persons residing in kentucky upon whom process may be served .
when any change is made in any such corporations individuals or copartnerships process agent the corporation individual or copartnership shall immediately file with the department a statement of the change .
the former agent shall remain agent for the purpose of service of process until the bidder files a statement with the department designating the new agent .
submit or file evidence of compliance with the krs sections cited above andor designation of process agents as required by this section with the department at the time of qualifying or at the time of submitting a bid proposal or at any time prior to the issuance of the contract and work order andor purchase order .
num section num award and execution of contract num consideration of bid .
the department will tabulate the bid as soon as possible after opening the bid proposals and will compare the bids based on a correct summation of items at the prices bid .
the department will then make the result public .
in the event of a discrepancy between unit bid prices and extensions the department will use the unit bid price .
the commissioner reserves the right to reject any or all bid proposals and to waive minor technicalities if doing so is in the best interest of the commonwealth .
num award of contract .
unless rejecting all bid proposals the department will award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder without discrimination on the grounds of race creed color sex or national origin whose bid proposal complies with the requirements of the law the regulations and the contract .
the department may reject unbalanced bid proposals and award the contract to the next lowest acceptable bidder .
the department will normally award the contract within num working days after the date of receiving bid proposals unless the department deems it best to hold the bid proposals of any or all bidders for a period not to exceed num calendar days for final disposition of award .
the department may hold the bid proposal of the lowest bidder longer than num days if the bidder concurs .
the department will mail the official notice of award to the address shown on the contractors certificate of eligibility .
num cancellation of award .
the department reserves the right to cancel the award of any contract at any time before the execution of that contract by all parties without any liability against the department .
num return of proposal guaranties .
the department will return the proposal guaranties of all except the num lowest bidders within num calendar days after checking tabulating and comparing the bid proposals .
the department will hold the proposal guaranty of the lowest bidder and the proposal guaranty of the second lowest bidder as determined by the commissioner until the department awards the contract and executes and approves the contract and bonds of the successful bidder or until the department rejects all bid proposals .
if the department does not make an award within num calendar days the department will return all proposal guaranties .
the department will not release a bidder from the obligations of the bid proposal because of an alleged error in the preparation of the bid proposal unless the department retains the bidders proposal guaranty .
num requirement of contract bonds .
to be acceptable to the department the surety must have a minimum a. m. best rating of an a be listed on the u.s. treasury listing of approved sureties for an amount equal to or greater than the amount of the bond and be an admitted carrier in the commonwealth of kentucky .
submit contract bonds conditioned upon the faithful performance of the requirements of the contract and any modifications in conformity with the contract payment of proper compensation under the required labor and wage conditions as provided in the contract payment of claims against the contractor for materials labor and supplies and reimbursement to the department for any overpayment made on the contract .
maintain the contract bonds in full force for the time required by law .
if at any time during the performance of the contract the surety company falls below the minimum acceptable requirements the contractor shall file new bonds in an amount established by the commissioner or his designee within num calendar days of such failure to meet the minimum requirements .
the surety of the contract bonds shall only sign a prescribed form through a duly appointed power of attorney with certifications acceptable to the department .
file an attested copy of all certifications of attorneysinfact with the franklin county court clerk prior to submission to the department and file a certified copy with the department .
num all nonresident agents of kentucky signing the bonds as representatives of a surety company shall obtain the countersignature of a licensed kentucky agent of the insurer as required by law .
all appointments of attorneysinfact shall contain a provision that the appointment will not be revoked without giving the department notice in writing at least num calendar days prior to the effective date of the revocation and filing same with the franklin county court clerk .
more than one surety may execute a bond for any one contract and in such event when num or more sureties are provided on such bond each surety shall be liable and obligated for the full amount required herein before .
the department reserves the right to copy the surety on all of its communications with the contractor concerning the contractors performance or performance deficiencies on the project and further reserves the right to communicate directly with the surety to inform them of the contractors performance or performance deficiencies on the bonded project .
num execution of contract .
within num calendar days after receiving the contract execute and file it with the department along with the following items num the contract bonds required in subsection num num satisfactory evidence of required liability insurance num satisfactory evidence of compliance with subsection num num when the bidder lists proposed subcontractors in the bid proposal and the amount of work proposed to be subcontracted is not to be deducted from the bidders current capacity rating then submit form tc num confirmation of subcontract reported in the bid proposal .
sign submittal and obtain signatures of each proposed subcontractor .
verify all signatures by a notary public .
num when the bid proposal form designates a certain percentage of the contract as the disadvantaged business enterprise dbe portion submit the necessary number of agreements with dbes to meet or exceed these designated percentages .
execute an agreement with each dbe that includes the items of work the unit price that the dbe will be paid for each item and notarized signatures of both parties .
should the bidder fail to reach the designated dbe percentages then the department will consider whether the bidder made reasonable efforts to meet these percentages prior to issuing a work order .
execute the contract and bonds only on the form furnished by the department .
upon the filing with the department by the contractor of the executed contract accompanied by the listed items the commissioner will within the period not exceeding num calendar days from the date of such filing make final disposition of the contract and if contract bonds are approved will issue notice to begin work .
should the department withhold the notice to begin work in excess of the num calendar day period the contractor shall have the option of accepting or rejecting the contract without forfeiting the proposal guaranty .
num approval of contract .
the contract is not binding until the commissioner executes it and certain agencies of the commonwealth as required by law certify that sufficient funds are available .
num failure to execute contract .
the bidders failure to execute the contract or to comply with all requirements of subsection num within num calendar days after the contract has been received by the bidder will be just cause for the department to nullify the award .
it is understood by both the bidder and the commissioner that in the event of the annulment of the award the bidder will forfeit the amount of guaranty deposited with the bid proposal as agreed liquidated damages to the commonwealth not as a penalty but in liquidation of damages sustained .
the department can then make an award to the next lowest responsible bidder or readvertise the work or take other action as provided by statute on this subject as the commissioner may elect .
a bidder who forfeits a proposal guaranty according to this section will not be considered in future bid proposals for the same project unless there has been a substantial change in the design of num the project subsequent to the forfeiture of the guaranty .
num section num scope of work num intent of contract .
the intent of the contract is to provide for the construction and completion of the full scope of the work described .
furnish all labor materials equipment tools transportation and supplies required to complete the work according to the contract .
num alterations of plans or character of work .
num general .
at any time and without invalidating the contract or releasing the surety the engineer reserves the right to make in writing changes in quantities and alterations in the work when necessary to complete the project satisfactorily .
perform the work as altered .
when alterations or changes in quantities significantly change the character of the work under the contract the department will adjust the contract .
the department will not consider loss of anticipated profits .
before performing the significantly changed work reach agreement with the department concerning the basis for the adjustment .
absent an agreement the engineer will determine a fair and equitable adjustment .
if the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantly change the character of the work the department will make payment as provided elsewhere in the contract .
a significant change occurs when num the character of the work is altered materially in kind or nature from that involved or included in the original proposed construction or num the quantity of a major item of work as defined in subsection num increases above num percent or decreases below num percent of the original contract quantity .
the department will allow an adjustment in cost only for the quantity in excess of num percent of the original contract quantity or in case of a decrease below num percent to the actual amount of work performed .
num overrun and underrun formulas .
the department will use the following supplemental formulas to determine the adjusted unit prices for the items listed herein when a listed item is a major item and either an underrun or overrun of more than num percent occurs in its constructed quantity .
this formula does not apply to items not specifically listed in this subsection .
the excessive underrun of an item is defined as num percent of the original contract quantity of the item minus the final quantity of the item .
the excessive overrun of an item is defined as the final quantity of the item minus num percent of the original contract quantity of the item .
the department will apply this subsection when all the following conditions are met num an excessive underrun or overrun occurs for one or more of the bid items listed below num the affected item is a major item as defined in subsection num and num the final quantity of the affected item is at least num percent of the original contract quantity .
when the final quantity of the affected item is less than num percent of the original contract quantity the department will not apply the formula but will prepare a supplemental agreement according to subsections num and num .
the specified bid items which are covered by this subsection are pavement markers pavement striping temporary and permanent temporary marking tape delineators asphalt pavement milling and texturing num concrete overlay latex concrete overlay low slump concrete class m for full depth patching partial depth patching the department will apply this subsection to other bid items when specified in the contract .
for the excessive underrun and overrun quantities the department will adjust the payment according to the appropriate following formula excessive underrun formula np op fqci eu x num x op excessive overrun formula np op eo x num x op fqci where np new unit price op original unit price bid by contractor eu excessive underrun eo excessive overrun fqci final quantity contract item when the contractor submits a completed bid proposal for a project containing one or more of the listed items the contractor agrees to accept payment for excessive underruns or excessive overruns in the quantities of these items according to the appropriate formula .
the contractor further agrees that the formulas provide full and complete compensation for the excessive underrun or excessive overrun quantities including any and all unreimbursed expenses loss of expected reimbursement loss of anticipated profits delay inefficiency and all other costs .
num differing site conditions .
differing site conditions exist when one party discovers that num subsurface or latent physical conditions differ materially from those shown in the contract or num unknown subsurface or latent physical conditions differ materially from conditions normally encountered or from those generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract .
promptly notify the engineer and make written notice within num calendar days of encountering the differing conditions .
await guidance from the engineer before disturbing the conditions and before performing the affected work .
upon written notification the engineer will investigate the conditions and determine if the conditions materially differ and cause an increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performance of work under the contract .
when justified the engineer will make an adjustment in time or cost or both excluding anticipated profits and modify the contract in writing accordingly .
the engineer will notify the contractor whether or not the conditions warrant an adjustment .
the department will allow no contract adjustment unless the contractor provides the required written notice .
num extra work .
perform extra work for which there is no quantity or price in num the contract only by supplemental agreement .
the department will pay for this extra work at a unit price or lump sum price agreed upon and included in a written supplemental agreement executed by all parties to the contract as specified in subsection num .
the department will consider an extension of contract time for extra work according to subsection num .
when requested by the engineer provide justification and all necessary documentation to support proposed prices or time extensions .
the engineer may direct in writing timesensitive or emergency work be progressed while the supplemental agreement is being processed .
in the event work is directed without an executed supplemental agreement cost records shall be kept and reconciled daily conforming to specification num .
waiting for an executed supplemental agreement when the engineer directs work to progress as above waives the right to claim for delays associated with the subject extra work .
num rights in and use of materials found on the work .
the contractor with the engineers approval may use on the project stone gravel sand or other material found in the excavation that the engineer determines is suitable .
the department will pay both for the excavation of such materials at the corresponding contract unit price and for the pay item for which the excavated material is used .
replace all excavated material so removed and used with other acceptable material at no additional expense to the department .
the department will not charge the contractor for the materials found in the excavation and used in the work .
do not excavate or remove any material from outside the grading limits as indicated by the slope and grade lines without the engineers written authorization .
take ownership of and dispose of any materials of value such as merchantable timber or coal that may be encountered during construction of the project and that are not necessary to perform or complete the work .
leave a sufficient amount of material on the site to complete the project according to the contract .
num section num control of work num authority of department personnel .
num authority of the engineer .
the engineer will decide all questions regarding the quality and acceptability of materials furnished work performed and the rate of progress of the work all interpretation of the plans and specifications and the acceptable fulfillment of the contract .
the engineer will in writing suspend the work wholly or in part when the contractor fails to correct conditions unsafe for the workmen or the general public for failure to carry out contract provisions for failure to carry out orders for periods of unsuitable weather for conditions unsuitable for the prosecution of the work or for any other condition or reason determined to be in the public interest .
the engineer will decide all questions concerning the interpretation of the contract relating to the work and all questions concerning the acceptable fulfillment of the work performed by the contractor .
the engineer will determine the quantity and quality of the several kinds of work performed and materials furnished that the department will pay for under the contract and such decision and estimate will be final and conclusive .
in case any question arises the engineers estimate will be a condition precedent to the right of the contractor to receive any money due under the contract .
the contractor may appeal to the commissioner any decision of the engineer by procedures outlined in subsection num .
the engineer will answer any questions as to the meaning of the contract or any obscurity as to the wording of the contract and give all directions and explanations necessary to make definite any of the provisions of the contract or necessary to complete or give them due effect .
the contractor may request and the engineer will provide written instructions concerning any significant item .
staff engineers and engineering technologist supervisors have the authority to inspect the work coordinate inspection activities and reject substandard work and materials however all plan changes andor project decisions shall be authorized by the engineer .
num authority of inspectors .
inspectors employed by the department are authorized to inspect all work performed and materials furnished .
such inspection may extend to all or any part of the work and to the preparation fabrication or manufacture of the materials furnished .
the inspector is not authorized to alter or waive provisions of the contract .
the inspector is not authorized to issue instructions contrary to the contract or to act as foreman for the contractor .
however the inspector has the authority to reject work or materials until any questions at issue are referred to and as the engineer decides .
num inspection of work .
provide the engineer access to all materials and each part or detail of the work and furnish the engineer with such information and assistance as required to make a complete and detailed inspection .
at the engineers request at any time before acceptance of the work remove or uncover such portions of the finished work as directed .
after examination restore said portions of the work to the standard required by these specifications .
should the work thus exposed or examined prove acceptable the department will pay for the uncovering or removing and the replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed as extra work .
should the work so exposed or examined prove unacceptable perform the uncovering or removing and the replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed at no expense to the department .
as the engineer directs remove and replace at no expense to the department all work performed or materials used without the engineers supervision or inspection unless the engineer failed to inspect after having been given num working days notice in writing that the work was to be performed .
when any unit of government or political subdivision or any railroad corporation pays a portion of the cost of the work covered by the contract provide access to its respective representatives to inspect the work .
such inspection in no way makes any unit num of government or political subdivision or any railroad corporation a party to this contract and in no way interferes with the rights of either party hereunder .
num removal of defective and unauthorized work .
remedy or remove and replace in an acceptable manner at no expense to the department all work which has been rejected .
the department will consider any work performed beyond the lines and grades specified in the plans or as given except as herein provided or any extra work performed without a supplemental agreement as unauthorized and at no expense to the department .
the department will not measure such work for payment .
should the contractor decline or neglect to begin the removal and the replacement of any defective work or remove any unauthorized work within the amount of time stated in a written notice to do so has been given him the department may retain all monies due or which may become due the contractor until the requirements of these specifications have been met .
when deemed best by the commissioner the commissioner will employ the necessary labor to make good or remove such defective or unauthorized work and deduct the cost from any monies due or to become due the contractor .
num plans and working drawings .
roadway plans will in general show alignment profile typical section of improvement and general cross sections .
structure plans will in general show in detail all dimensions of the work contemplated .
when the structure plans do not show all dimensions in detail they will show general features and such details as are necessary to give a comprehensive idea of the structure .
when such drawings are necessary to give comprehensive idea of the structure submit detailed shop or working drawings to the department for review .
the contractor shall bear all risk for work done or material ordered prior to the departments review of these drawings for the structures involved .
submit working drawings for steel structures consisting of shop detail erection and other working plans showing details dimensions size of materials and other information necessary to completely fabricate and erect the work .
submit working drawings for concrete structures consisting of such detailed plans as required to successfully prosecute the work and which are not specified in the plans .
these may include plans for falsework bracing centering and form work cofferdams caissons layout diagrams and diagrams for bent reinforcement .
submit electrical shop drawings design data and descriptive literature for materials in electronic format to the division of traffic operations for approval .
drawings and literature shall be submitted for lighting and signal components .
notify the engineer when submitting information to the division of traffic operations .
do not begin work until shop drawings are approved .
submit shop drawings for traffic counting equipment and materials in electronic format to the engineer or the division of planning .
notify the engineer when submitting information directly to the division of planning .
do not begin work until shop drawings are reviewed and approved .
submit the working drawings in a timely manner to allow for a corresponding review and include this review time in the projects schedule . .
the department will review the contractors working drawings in general only .
the departments review does not relieve the contractor from any responsibility whatsoever .
upon final review of all working drawings submit to the department copies of the final detailed drawings and upon completion of the work surrender to the department the original tracings .
include in the contract price the cost of furnishing all working drawings .
num record plans .
record plans are those reproductions of the original plans on which the accepted bid proposal was based and signed by a duly authorized representative of the department .
the department will make these plans available for inspection in the central office at least num hours prior to the time of opening bids and up to the time of letting of a project or projects .
the quantities appearing on the record plans num are the same as those on which bid proposals are received .
the department will use these record plans as the controlling plans in the prosecution of the contract .
the department will not make any changes on record plans subsequent to their issue unless done so by an approved contract modification .
the department will make num sets of record plans for each project and will maintain one on file in the central office and one of file in the district office .
the department will furnish the contractor with the following num full size num half size and an electronic file copy of the record plans at the preconstruction conference .
num conformity with plans and specifications .
perform all work and furnish all materials in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades cross sections dimensions and material requirements specified in the contract .
where definite tolerances are specified in the contract the department will use such tolerances to establish the limits of reasonably close conformity .
where tolerances are not specified in the contract the engineer will determine the limits of reasonably close conformity in each individual case .
when the engineer finds the materials or workmanship of the finished product to be outside the contract requirements the engineer may allow the material and finished product to be left in place in instances where leaving such material and product in place is in the best interest of the department and the travelling public .
in this event the engineer will document the basis of acceptance by contract modification providing for an appropriate adjustment in the contract price for such work or materials as he deems necessary to conform to his determination based on engineering judgment .
when the engineer finds that the materials the finished product in which the materials are used or the work performed are not in reasonably close conformity with the contract and have resulted in an inferior or unsatisfactory product remove replace or correct the work and materials at no additional expense to the department .
when referenced standards such as those promulgated by aashto astm or other recognized organizations or the departments own specifications standard drawings or similar documents are revised subsequent to the letting date the contractor may propose to furnish materials or perform work conforming to the latest edition at the time the work is done .
the engineer may approve such a request if the material or work is deemed to be equal to or better than originally required however the engineer may require a reduction in bid prices before granting approval when the revision significantly reduces the cost of furnishing material or performing the work .
in the event of any dispute the department will select the referenced standard current at the date of advertisement for bid proposals or the standard specifically referenced in the contract to determine the cost .
num coordination of contract documents .
all documents defined under contract in subsection num are essential parts of the contract .
a requirement occurring in one is as binding as though occurring in all .
they are complementary and describe and provide for a complete contract .
in the case of a discrepancy the governing ranking will be dimensions num .
plan num .
calculated num .
scaled num num .
questions and answers from the division of construction procurement website documents num .
cap report num .
special notes num .
special provisions num .
plans num .
standard drawings num .
supplemental specifications num .
standard specifications do not take advantage of any apparent error or omission in the contract .
immediately notify the engineer upon discovering such an error or omission .
the engineer will then make any necessary corrections and interpretations deemed necessary for fulfilling the intent of the contract .
num cooperation by contractor .
maintain copies of the plans and specifications at the site of the work at all times and furnish copies to each foreman .
require each foreman to have with him on the site at all times a copy of that part of the plans and specifications applying to the work he is directing .
be present or have a representative present on the project at all times when construction is in progress to receive and carry out such instructions as the engineer may give .
provide reasonable facilities to enable the engineer to inspect the workmanship and materials entering into the work and cooperate in setting and preserving survey stakes bench marks etc .
and in all other things necessary to satisfactorily complete the work as contemplated .
when the department lets separate contracts within the limits of any one project or for adjacent projects conduct the work so as not to interfere with or hinder the progress or completion of the work being performed by other contractors .
cooperate with contractors working on the same project or adjacent projects .
in case of a dispute with other contractors the engineer will arbitrate and will make a final and binding decision .
progress work according to specification num .
the contractor shall assume all liability financial or otherwise in connection with the contract and shall protect and save harmless the department from any and all damages or claims that may arise because of inconvenience delay or loss experienced by him because of the presence and the operations of other contractors working within the limits of the same project .
the contractor shall assume all responsibility for all work not completed or accepted on the contract because of the presence and operations of the other contractors .
as far as possible arrange the work and place and dispose of the materials being used so as not to interfere with the operations of the other contractors within the limits of the same project or on adjacent projects .
join the work with that of the other contractors in an acceptable manner and perform it in proper sequence with the work of the other contractors .
informal partnering is encouraged between the department and contractor .
the partnering process is intended to encourage the foundation of a cohesive partnership between the department and the contractor .
this partnership will be structured to draw on the strengths of each organization to identify and achieve reciprocal goals within the bounds of the contract .
common objectives will be structured to meet each projects needs but will include such basic criteria as effective and efficient contract performance safety and contract completion on schedule and within budget .
the contractor and the department should both be aware that the partnering process includes more than their relationship .
the team should also include utility companies local officials emergency personnel such as fire and police and anyone else for which the project effects or who could affect the progress of the project .
the partnering process in no ways alters the contract itself .
also the establishment of a partnering process or charter for a project will not change the legal relationship of the parties to the contract nor relieve either party from any of the terms of the contract .
num scheduling onsite project meetings at a regular or asneeded basis is encouraged to discuss and resolve issues regarding the project throughout the duration of the contract .
contractor subcontractor and department personnel should attend these meetings and if need be any appropriate persons needed to discuss specific issues .
record the minutes of each meeting and distribute to all partners .
it will be the responsibility of the contractor and the department to act equally in hosting these meetings .
informal partnering will not be measured for payment and the department will consider all costs associated with the informal partnership incidental to the project .
num cooperation with utilities .
the department will notify all utility facility owners or other parties affected and endeavor to have all necessary adjustments of utility fixtures pipelines and other appurtenances in conflict with construction made as soon as practical .
the department will arrange to have the owners of all water lines gas lines wire lines service connections water and gas meter boxes water and gas valve boxes light standards cables signals sewers and all other utility appurtenances in conflict with the limits of the proposed construction relocate or adjust those facilities in conflict except as otherwise provided for in the contract .
consider all of the permanent and temporary utility facilities in their present or relocated positions as specified in the special note for utilitiesimpact on construction included in the bid proposal form when preparing a bid proposal .
the department will not allow any additional compensation for delays inconvenience or damage sustained by the contractor due to any interference from the said utility appurtenances or due to the operation of moving them .
the department will review requests for an extension of contract time for such delays according to subsection num .
prior to any excavation activities comply with the requirements for excavators in the underground facility damage prevention act of num which is contained in krs num through num .
num protection and restoration of existing roadway facilities .
protect and preserve all existing roadway facilities including num those which are to remain in place and remain in service as a part of the improved roadway num those which are to be removed and reused as a part of the improved roadway and num those which are to be removed and neatly stacked along the rightofway for future department use .
restore and replace in kind any such existing facilities damaged or destroyed by the contractor through faulty handling as the engineer directs at no expense to the department .
num construction stakes lines and grades .
unless the contract specifies otherwise the engineer will establish lines slopes and grades and will furnish the contractor with all necessary information relating to lines slopes and grades .
furnish set and preserve the stakes and marks necessary to construct the project according to the established lines slopes and grades as provided in section num .
num hauling .
num hauling to projects .
according to subsections num and num perform the hauling of materials and all other hauling in conjunction with the construction of a project so as not to violate any of the truck size gross weight axle weight or tire width limitations provided by law or regulation such as krs num krs num and all other regulatory statutes relating to the provisions outlined in this section .
num num hauling within project limits .
a grade and drain projects .
the department will not restrict vehicles operating at any phase of grade and drain construction as to any type of equipment or loading except as provided under subsection num and as specified hereinafter for hauling over structures .
b hauling over structures .
inspect and examine all structures including drainage structures existing and newly constructed to determine whether or not any structure has been damaged before beginning hauling .
for damaged structures request the department to appraise the existing damage and grant a release in writing from liability for the damage disclosed or otherwise stand liable .
repair all damage to the structure including joints that may be incurred as a result of the hauling operations at no expense to the department .
submit for the engineers review and approval all proposed methods to protect structures prior to the start of hauling .
the department additionally limits the operation of construction vehicles over structures as follows num obtain written approval from the engineer before any offhighway vehicle is operated empty or loaded over a structure num do not exceed the design load limits or rated load limits of the structure based on the equipments tire size wheel base axle weight and axle spacing without approval from the engineer num consider temporary dead loads of stored materials stationary equipment formworkfalsework etc .
when determining the load limits of the structure num limit the movement of offhighway construction vehicles across bridges to onelane operation centrally aligned with the bridge and at intervals between vehicles no less than num feet num maintain bridge floors free from spilled materials lumber or any other impact producing obstruction num do not use an earth cushion on bridge num prior to hauling construction loads over a bridge construct temporary approaches num feet in length with the num feet adjacent to each end of the bridge constructed to the finished grade elevation of the bridge .
maintain temporary ramps and approaches at the direction of the engineer to minimize the impact of moving construction loads onto the highway structure num for offhighway construction vehicles on the approaches and bridges do not exceed a speed of num mph and num protect from overloads by temporary fill or by other means culverts regardless of span pipe culverts and other items which are covered or which are to be covered by fill or backfill .
c hauling over pavements within project limits .
during the construction of surfaces or pavements equip all hauling vehicles operating over the subgrade and base intermediate and surface courses with rubber tires .
ensure that all hauling vehicles operating over the base intermediate and surface courses conform to the axle weight and tire width limitations provided by law or regulation .
limit hauling over pavements as follows num do not allow the gross weight to exceed the posted load limit of a bridge in any instance and num comply with any decreased gross weight limits when in the engineers judgment the roadway or structures would be damaged by allowing the posted load limit .
num num maintenance during construction .
maintain the work during construction and until the department accepts the project .
provide maintenance through continuous and effective work prosecuted day by day with adequate equipment and forces keeping the roadway or structures in satisfactory condition at all times .
in the case of a contract for the placing of a course upon a course or subgrade previously constructed maintain the previous course or subgrade until completing the succeeding course .
include the cost of all maintenance work in the unit prices bid on the appropriate pay items .
the department will be responsible for routine roadway maintenance operations such as mowing ditching snow removal signing lighting and pothole patching for portions of the roadway that remain open to traffic and unaffected by contractor operations .
the department will conduct these operations in a manner not to disturb the construction operations .
once a segment of permanent guardrail from terminal to terminal is installed in accordance to contract documents and payment has been made the department will pay for damage caused by vehicular accidents at the contract unit bid prices .
for segments of existing guardrail that are damaged due to a vehicular accident the department will pay to replace the guardrail at the contract unit bid prices or a supplemental price will be determined in instances where the item does not exist in the contract .
partially installed segments temporary guardrail and any guardrail damage due to contractor activities shall be maintained and repaired within num hours of damage at the contractors expense .
num final inspection and acceptance of work .
the department will not consider the work complete and will not make final payment until the contractor clears the rightofway borrow pits and all ground the contractor occupies in connection with the work of all rubbish equipment excess materials temporary structures and weeds .
place rubbish and all waste materials of whatever nature other than hazardous materials on either public or private property in a location out of view from the roadway and in a manner acceptable to the department that does not present an unsightly appearance .
restore in an acceptable manner all property both public and private that was damaged in the prosecution of the work .
drain all ditches and all borrow pits where practical and leave all space under structures unobstructed and in such condition that drift will not collect and induce scouring .
notify the engineer when the project is near completion .
the engineer will then advise in writing all work items that are unsatisfactory .
when these work items are complete to the engineers satisfaction the engineer will call the project complete and issue a project completion notice .
when there are seasonal limitations or other compelling situations the engineer may call the project complete without requiring correction of the unsatisfactory work items until weather permits or the situation is remedied .
when the project is called complete it is ready for the departments final inspection .
notify the engineer when all electrical items are complete .
the engineer will then perform an electrical final inspection and will notify the contractor in writing with the corrective work required .
electrical items will be inspected when the electrical work is complete and are not subject to waiting until the project as a whole has been completed .
the engineer will notify the division of traffic operations within num days that all electrical items are complete and ready for a final inspection .
a final inspection will be completed within num days after the engineer notifies the division of traffic operations of the electrical work completion .
energize all electrical items prior to notifying the engineer that all electrical items are complete .
electrical items must remain operational until the division of traffic operations has inspected and accepted the electrical portion of the project .
payment for the electrical service is the responsibility of the contractor from the time the electrical items are energized until the division of traffic operations has accepted the work .
complete all corrective work within num calendar days of receiving the original electrical inspection report .
notify the engineer when all corrective work is complete .
the num engineer will notify the division of traffic operations that the corrective work has been completed and the project is ready for a followup inspection .
upon reinspection if additional corrective work is required complete within the same num calendar day allowance .
the department will not include time between completion of the corrective work and the follow up electrical inspections .
the num calendar day allowance is cumulative regardless of the number of followup electrical inspections required .
the department will assume responsibility for the electrical service on a project once the division of traffic operations gives final acceptance of the electrical items on the project .
the department will also assume routine maintenance of those items .
any damage done to accepted electrical work items by other contractors shall be the responsibility of the prime contractor .
the department will not be responsible for repairing damage done by other contractors during the construction of the remaining project .
failure to complete the electrical corrective work within the num calendar day allowance will result in penalties assessed to the project .
penalties will be assessed at  the rate of liquidated damages established for the contract .
the department and other appropriate agencies such as fhwa will complete final inspections on all items of work for formal acceptance within num calendar days of the date of issuance of the project completion notice with the exception of striping seeding other erosion control items tree planting and landscaping .
the department will make final inspections on seeding and other erosion control items according to section num .
the department will make final inspections on tree planting and landscaping as the contract specifies .
the department will make individual final inspections on particular groups of work items such as structures electrical grade and drain and surface .
the department may make final inspections before the project is called complete on items of work that have been completed .
the engineer will issue written final inspection reports for items of work upon completion of each final inspection .
the reports will include a list of all uncompleted work and required corrective work .
the engineer will issue a comprehensive final inspection report that will include all inspection reports with the exception of striping seeding tree planting and landscaping .
complete all items of uncompleted work and all required corrective work listed in the final inspection reports within num calendar days of receiving the engineers comprehensive final inspection report .
when the specified seasonal or temperature limitations prohibit the contractor from performing the work complete the work within num calendar days after the date the engineer directs .
when the final inspection report is received apart from the comprehensive final inspection report corrective work for striping seeding and other erosion control items tree planting and landscaping shall be completed within num calendar days of receiving the engineers inspection report .
when the following occur substitute the deferral date for the date of the engineers comprehensive final inspection report when determining the above time limits for completion of uncompleted work and corrective work num the contract specifies deferral of payment num the project is complete before the date the department can make payment deferral date and num the deferral date is later than the date of the engineers comprehensive final inspection report .
when applicable submit required asbuilt drawings project documentation and required information on materials incorporated into the project .
consider them as uncompleted work or required corrective work .
if there is a dispute regarding any of the items listed as uncompleted work or required corrective work on any of the final inspection reports submit in writing a letter of dispute to the engineer within num days of receipt of the report .
the department will respond back in writing to the letter of dispute within num days .
if there is still a dispute proceed num according to subsection num .
when the dispute does not apply to all items of work in the report complete the items not in dispute as specified herein .
the department will assess liquidated damages according to subsection num for failure to complete the required work items within the specified time period .
after num days of liquidated damages the department may proceed according to subsections num and num .
when all uncompleted work and required corrective work is finished the department will make formal acceptance of the project and take responsibility for the project subject to section num .
formal acceptance is effective as of the date all corrective work was completed .
if there are no uncompleted work items or required corrective work listed on any of the final inspection reports the department will make formal acceptance as of the project completion date .
num claims resolution process .
the engineer and contractor should attempt to resolve project disputes as they arise .
when project issues remain unresolved contract parties may take the following course of action .
the kentucky administrative regulations kar num num sections num num and kentucky revised statutes krs numb.num mandate the process for resolving project claims .
the contractor must notify the engineer of the intent to file a claim by submitting form tc num notice of changed conditiondisagreement to initiate the claims process .
form tc num must be submitted to the engineer within num days of the date that the contractor knew of or should have known of the events causing the claim .
if the claim is for extra work as defined by subsection num submit tc num prior to beginning the disputed work .
if the tc num is not received as required or if it is received after the num day deadline the cabinet will not consider a claim .
the engineer will respond to the contractor notifying them of the receipt of notice of the claim by submitting form tcnum acknowledgement of notice of changed conditiondisagreement to the contractor .
the engineer will send this form within num days of receiving form tc num .
once the proper forms are submitted for the particular work involved in the claim the contractor must complete the work as the contract documents and engineer direct .
both parties should carefully track this work and associated costs according to subsection num .
the contractors compliance with this provision and the engineers accounting of the costs does not validate the claim .
when the engineer determines a claim is justified the department will pay for it as extra work as provided in subsection num .
this provision does not establish a claim contrary to the terms of subsection num .
submission of the claim will proceed in one of the following methods num .
when the claim involves extra work submit a report detailing the dollar amount of the claim the basis of the claim and any supporting documentation to the engineer no later than num days after the receipt of form tc num final inspection and formal acceptance report of completed construction .
num .
when the claim involves final quantities and payments submit a report detailing the dollar amount of the claim the basis of the claim and any supporting documentation to the engineer no later than num days after receipt of form tc num num final release as sent by the department .
num .
when the claim involves a delay submit a report detailing the dollar and time amount of the claim the basis of the claim an asbuilt schedule compared with the asbid schedule indicating the delay or delays a description detailing the responsible party and actions causing the delay and any supporting documentation to the engineer no later than num days after the receipt of form tc num final inspection and formal acceptance report of completed construction .
if the contractor did not submit an asbid schedule at the pre num construction meeting or a written narrative in accordance with subsection num the cabinet will not consider the claim for delay .
upon the submission of the claim materials by the contractor the engineer and district t.e.b.m .
will have num days to attempt to settle the claim with the contractor .
if the claim is not settled the district will submit it to the director of the division of construction who will have num days to make a final determination .
prior to making the final determination director will hold an informal conference with the contractor for the purpose of reaching a resolution to the claim or identifying issues needing resolution .
if the conference is unsuccessful the director will notify the contractor of the cabinets decision the final determination and the contractors right to a hearing according to the kar num num section num .
should the engineer or director fail to meet the previously mentioned deadlines their inaction indicates a denial of the claim .
should the director fail to submit a final decision within the deadline stipulated previously the cabinet will bear the costs associated with the hearing officer should such an event occur .
upon a written agreement of both parties the claim could be mediated through a formal nonbinding mediation with a mutually agreed upon mediator .
the parties will equally share the costs associated with this action .
if either party terminates the mediation the contractor may still request a hearing according to krs chapter numb and has num days from the notice of termination of the mediation to make such a request .
if the contractor wishes to request a hearing they must do so within num days of the notification of the cabinets final decision and should be in accordance with krs chapter numb .
the previous administrative claims process must be exhausted prior the contractor requesting an administrative hearing .
the contractor may choose to forego the krs chapter numb administrative hearing and may at any time file a lawsuit with the franklin county circuit court in frankfort kentucky .
num section num control of materials num source of supply and materials requirements .
provide materials that conform to all requirements of the contract .
at the departments option the engineer may approve the materials at the source of supply before delivery is started .
when requested by the engineer submit representative samples of the materials intended for use in the work for the engineer to examine and test according to subsection num .
the department may inspect or test all materials at any time during their preparation storage and use .
if the department determines that previously approved materials from any source are not uniform and satisfactory or that the product from any source proves unacceptable cease operations .
provide acceptable material and resume operations .
do not use material which after approval has in any way become unfit for use .
use only new materials .
num samples tests and cited specifications .
the department will bear the cost of conducting tests except as otherwise provided .
the engineer will collect samples at the site of work and will retain custody of the samples until delivered to the laboratory to a common carrier or to the us postal service .
the contractor may deliver to the laboratory samples that a department employee placed in containers and sealed with a department seal .
the department will not accept for testing any samples submitted in any other manner .
when requested give the engineer assistance in obtaining samples .
perform or ensure that the material producer performs all testing necessary for quality control and process control .
the department will sample and test to ensure the acceptability of the materials incorporated into the work .
the department will sample test and approve all materials in conformance with the departments kentucky methods and the manual of field sampling and testing practices but the department reserves the right to sample at any point and to perform any additional or special tests necessary to ensure the suitability of the material for its intended use .
the department may charge the supplier or contractor for the cost of any additional test or inspection of unacceptable material .
the department will bear only the costs of normal acceptance testing of materials actually used in the work .
show good faith and request sampling of only those sources from which material will be furnished for the project .
do not use department sampling and testing to investigate various potential materials sources for informational purposes .
when the contractor submits samples from or requests sampling of materials sources that are not used the department may charge the contractor for the cost of sampling and testing the source .
bear the cost of special investigations or tests beyond the normal acceptance testing which are required to determine the degree of acceptability of finished work that incorporates materials not conforming to the contract .
this provision applies to materials on which testing is not normally completed until after their incorporation into the work .
this provision is not a means to use materials that are previously tested and rejected prior to use .
the department or a department approved commercial testing laboratory will perform these tests and investigations .
whenever reference is made to the standards of aashto astm federal specifications or standards promulgated by other recognized societies or organizations the current specification at the date of the bid letting is applicable .
when a sieve number is designated in these specifications use sieves that conform to aashto m num .
fabricate purchase or otherwise furnish any special equipment necessary to obtain samples when the contract requires .
num plant inspection .
num general .
the engineer may undertake the inspection of materials at the source .
for plant inspections conform to the following conditions num num cooperate with and assist the engineer and ensure that the producer cooperates with and assists the engineer .
num provide the engineer full entry at all times to such parts of the plant as may concern the manufacture or production of the materials being furnished .
num for tests performed at the source of supply or other locations for the convenience of the contractor the engineer may require the contractor to furnish a suitable laboratory and the necessary testing equipment .
num provide and maintain adequate safety measures according to subsection num .
the department reserves the right to retest all materials that are tested at the source of supply after delivery and prior to their incorporation into the work .
the department reserves the right to reject all retested materials that fail to conform to the requirements of the contract .
num field laboratory .
provide a field laboratory at the site of asphalt plants and the site of mixing or batching concrete .
locate the field laboratory conveniently near the plant and conform to the applicable requirements of subsection num a .
include a supply of water when it is required to perform the necessary testing .
provide this field laboratory for the exclusive use of the engineer the technicians employed by the contractor or the material producer to perform testing for quality control and process control .
at material or product sources other than those listed above the engineer will determine if the field laboratory will be required for proper testing and inspection of the material or product .
num buy america requirement .
follow the buy america provisions as required by title num code of federal regulations num .
except as expressly provided herein all manufacturing processes of steel or iron materials including but not limited to structural steel guardrail materials corrugated steel culvert pipe structural plate prestressing strands and steel reinforcing bars shall occur in the united states of america including the application of coating galvanizing painting and other coating that protects or enhances the value of steel or iron products .
the following are exempt unless processed or refined to include substantial amounts of steel or iron material and may be used regardless of source in the domestic manufacturing process for steel or iron material pig iron processed pelletized and reduced iron ore material or processed alloys .
the contractor shall submit a certification stating that all manufacturing processes involved with the production of steel or iron materials occurred in the united states .
produce mill fabricate and manufacture in the united states of america all aluminum components of bridges tunnels and large sign support systems for which either shop fabrication shop inspection or certified mill test reports are required as the basis of acceptance by the department .
use foreign materials only under the following conditions num num when the materials are not permanently incorporated into the project or num when the delivered cost of such materials used does not exceed num percent of the total contract amount or num whichever is greater .
the contractor shall submit to the engineer the origin and value of any foreign material used .
num certification of compliance .
the engineer may allow use prior to sampling and testing of certain materials accompanied by certificates of compliance stating that such materials fully comply with the requirements of the contract .
deliver each lot of such materials to the work site with a certificate of compliance that is signed by an authorized agent of the testing agency and that clearly identifies the lot .
the engineer may sample and test materials used on the basis of certificates of compliance at any time and when such materials fail to conform to the contract the engineer will reject them whether in place or not .
the engineer will determine the form and distribution of certificates of compliance .
the engineer reserves the right to refuse permission to use materials on the basis of certificates of compliance .
num defective material .
remove materials delivered to the work site that fail to conform to the requirements of the contract and dispose of them so as to prohibit their return to the site or incorporation into the work .
if the contractor declines or neglects to remove unsatisfactory material from the work site within the time that the engineer directs such removal the department may retain all monies due or which may become due the contractor on pay estimates until the contractor removes the unsatisfactory material .
as an alternative the commissioner may elect to employ the necessary labor to remove and dispose of the unsatisfactory materials and deduct the cost of same from any money due or that may become due the contractor .
num departmentfurnished material .
furnish all materials required to complete the work except those specified as departmentfurnished .
the department will deliver or make available departmentfurnished materials at locations specified in the contract .
include the cost of handling and placing all departmentfurnished materials after they are turned over to the contractor in the contract price for the item incorporating the departmentfurnished materials .
the department will hold the contractor responsible for all departmentfurnished material that is turned over to the contractor .
the department will deduct from any monies due the contractor to make good on any material shortages and deficiencies from any cause whatsoever and for any damage that may occur after such turnover and for any demurrage charges .
the department will apply the requirements of this section to departmentfurnished items that the contractor is required to return to the department such as but not limited to traffic signals and structural steel members .
num storage of materials .
store materials to ensure preservation of their quality and fitness for the work .
locate stored materials to facilitate prompt inspection .
the contractor may use that portion of the rightofway not required for construction of the roadway for storing materials plant and equipment .
provide any additional space required at no expense to the department .
if the department provides partial payment for material prior to the contractor incorporating them into the work store these materials according to subsection num .
num list of approved materials .
due to the special or lengthy tests required for approval of certain materials the department maintains a list of approved num materials .
use only materials included on the list of approved materials at the time of use on the project .
the department will sample and test materials on the list after delivery to the project as specified or when deemed necessary and will reject any material found not to conform to the contract regardless of any prior approval .
num field welder certification requirements .
all field welding must be performed by a certified welder unless otherwise noted .
welders or welding operators qualifications to perform field welding shall remain effective for num years from the date of test unless num the welder or welding operator is not engaged in the welding process for which the welder or welding operator is qualified for a period exceeding num months or num in the judgment of the engineer there is reason to question the welders or welding operators ability .
keep records of the types of welds and dates engaged in welding within the numyear period to maintain the welders or welding operators qualification .
if the contractor fails to maintain such records for review and use in each projects records the department will require the welder or welding operator to be retested at any time .
num section num legal relations and responsibility to public num laws to be observed .
in all operations connected with the work the department will require strict compliance with all state federal and local ordinances regulations laws and bylaws controlling or limiting in any way the actions of those engaged on the work in such manner to save the commonwealth its agents and employees harmless .
num safety health and sanitation .
comply with all applicable state federal and local laws governing safety health and sanitation .
provide all safeguards safety devices and protective equipment and take all other actions that are reasonably necessary to protect the life and health of all employees and personnel on the project provide for the safety of the public and protect all property affected by the performance of the work covered by the contract and as the engineer directs .
as provided in krs chapter num in the kentucky occupational safety and health act and in subsequent regulations and standards promulgated by the kentucky occupational safety and health standards board do not require any personnel employed in performance of the contract including employees of subcontractors to work in surroundings or under working conditions that are unsanitary hazardous or dangerous to the employees health and safety .
ensure that all workers exposed to construction equipment or highway traffic wear high visibility safety apparel that conforms to and is labeled as meeting performance class num or num of the ansiisea num publication .
additionally for nighttime work the department will require flaggers to wear ansi performance class num apparel .
provide fall protection according to num cfr part num as adopted by kentucky administrative regulations .
include but do not limit to the following protection safety nets safety belts lifelines lanyards life vests hand rails temporary bridge flooring or equivalent protection .
for work over a navigable stream unless working exclusively on a bridge deck provide a manned power boat .
position the boat under personnel for rescue whenever work is in progress .
num motor vehicle laws .
obey all motor vehicle laws on all state federal and county roads and city streets including roads and streets used as detours and roads and streets under construction beyond the limits of the proposed improvement specified in the contract .
obey the specific provisions of such laws within the limits of construction when stated in the contract for that particular type of construction .
num water pollution .
conform to the departments requirements for abating and minimizing water pollution as specified in section num .
num air pollution .
perform construction activities in a manner that prevents air pollution from occurring as the result of burning where allowed drilling blasting production of materials hauling or any other necessary construction operations of any kind .
conform to the applicable provisions of krs chapter num and regulations issued by the responsible state and federal agencies and conform to regulations established by local governmental agencies pursuant to krs chapter num .
apply water or other approved materials when where and as directed or approved by the engineer in order to effectively prevent and control dust from becoming an air pollutant safety hazard or other type nuisance during the construction of a project .
for failure to perform this item of work satisfactorily the department will defer the processing of any pay estimates due the contractor for the project until the work is in compliance .
when dust results entirely from the performance of the work include all costs for providing dust control in the pay items for the work being performed .
num when dust is caused either partially or entirely by the traveling public the department will pay for the water at the contract unit price per num gallons .
the contractor may use materials other than water to prevent and control dust caused partially or entirely by the traveling public provided the engineer approves the use of such materials and the contractor furnishes and applies the materials at no expense to the department .
when the contract designates blast cleaning concrete and steel surfaces perform the blast cleaning as specified in the contract .
choose a method allowed by the contract that conforms to the air and water pollution regulations applicable to the county or city where the site of work is located and to the applicable safety and health regulations .
discontinue any method that does not consistently provide satisfactory work and conform to the above requirements and replace it with an acceptable method .
while blast cleaning confine all debris of every type including dirty water resulting from the blast cleaning operation .
immediately and thoroughly clean debris from the blastcleaned surfaces and all other areas where any escaped debris may have accumulated .
perform all drilling grinding and sawing of rock shale concrete and other similar dustproducing materials with equipment provided with water sprays fabricfiltered collection systems or other suitable devices to prevent excessive dust from becoming airborne .
perform all burning according to regulation num kar num .
num highways through national forests and national parks .
when the construction of all or a portion of a project is through a national forest national park or other type of governmentally controlled property perform the work according to the clearing and fire plans stated herein as applicable .
the contract will indicate the portion of a project that is within a national forest national park or other governmentally controlled property .
the contractor is responsible for determining the extent to which this subsection is applicable to a specific project .
a clearing plans .
perform the clearing operation according to the following num plainly mark the boundaries of the clearing limits specified in the plans or established by the engineer prior to clearing .
num do not cut or damage any residual stand of trees shrubs or ground cover outside the boundaries of the clearing limits .
num contrary to subsection num yard or stockpile merchantable timber within the clearing limits for disposition by the governmental agency in charge of the forest or other type property .
num dispose of logs brush limbs stumps and all other undesirable materials by burning chipping or hauling to approved dumps or waste areas .
perform burning as prescribed in the fire plan .
b fire plan .
the term forest officerincharge means the officer or employee of the u.s. forest service designated by the forest supervisor to supervise burning and fire precautions on the project .
the forest officerincharge will be the district ranger or his designated representative .
comply with all kentucky state fire laws and the following num do not perform burning without written permission from the forest officerincharge .
the forest officerincharge will stipulate the hours for burning and the time to extinguish all fires .
num prior to beginning any burning submit to the forest officerincharge a burning plan stating the intended burning times and dates .
prior to beginning any burning notify the forest officerincharge .
num maintain an onsite representative authorized to receive and carry out all instructions issued by the forest officerincharge with regard to the burning and fire precautions .
num num at all times when burning is in progress maintain a sufficient number of personnel to control the fires .
attend to all fires at all times .
num maintain adequate fire tools on the project at all times when burning is in progress and store the tools in sealed tool boxes clearly marked for fire only .
the us forest service will provide these boxes and the forest officerincharge will specify the location to place each box .
keep each box as near the burning as practical and never more than num mile from the burning .
move the fire tools along the job as the burning operation progresses .
maintain the fire tools ready for firefighting at all times and return the tools to the u.s. forest service in serviceable condition after completing the burning operations .
num provide a satisfactory water pump with num feet of oneinch or num numinch hose and a minimum of num gallons of available water .
num provide adequate spark arresters acceptable to the forest officerincharge for all steam and internal combustion engines including tractors trucks power rollers power shovels and chain saws .
confine the use of welding equipment cutting torches and similar equipment to an area cleared of all vegetation leaves and debris .
do not refuel power saws while hot .
refuel power saws only on a roadway or other cleared area .
num remove all flammable material for a distance of no less than num feet from brush or debris to be burned .
num prohibit smoking at such times as the forest officerincharge deems necessary as a precautionary measure .
at such times allow smoking only in designated places cleared of debris leaves or other flammable material and approved by the forest officerincharge .
num the contractor shall bear full responsibility monetary or otherwise for all fires resulting from his operations .
num notify the forest officerincharge immediately in the event of escape of any fire and act immediately to control the fire .
the forest officerincharge may at his discretion take charge of the fire control operations .
provide the forest officerincharge with sufficient personnel tools and equipment as the forest officerincharge deems necessary to control any fire caused by the project activities .
the contractors actions in this regard shall not minimize the liability of the contractor for damages and for the cost of controlling the fire .
c measurement and payment .
the department will not measure or pay for any work required by this subsection .
the department considers this work as incidental to other items in the contract .
num rightofway and utilities .
the department will make every effort to provide all necessary rightofway and to clear all utility facilities on each project but when the right of entry is lawfully withdrawn or invalidated or when because of some other unforeseen reason either the rightofway or the right of entry is obstructed resulting in delays the engineer may extend the contract because of these delays according to subsection num .
num labor requirements .
comply with all state and federal labor laws and with the wage requirements specified in the contract .
the department will set forth these requirements in the contract .
do not discriminate against any worker because of race creed color sex sexual orientation national origin age or handicap .
num permits licenses taxes .
procure all permits licenses inspections and memberships pay all charges fees and taxes and give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work .
when any portion of the project is located in an enterprise zone as defined in krs num subchapter num the department will not seek an exemption from sales and use tax provided for in krs chapter num .
num accordingly the department will not execute any certificates of exemption for the purchase of building materials or any other tangible personal property to be incorporated into the project .
num patented devices materials and processes .
when using any design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright provide for such use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner .
the contractor and the surety shall indemnify and save harmless the commonwealth any affected third party or political subdivision from any and all claims for infringement by reason of the use of any such patented design device material or process or any trademark or copyright and shall indemnify the commonwealth for any costs expenses and damages which it may be obliged to pay by reason of an infringement at any time during the prosecution or after the completion of the work .
the use of such designs devices materials or processes on federal aid projects must also be in compliance with fhwas proprietary item policy .
num restoration of surfaces opened by permit .
do not allow any openings to be made in any surface or pavement except with the written permission of the department .
if the department grants an encroachment permit to any person or corporation resulting in the need for an opening in the surface or pavement perform necessary repair work at the opening as the engineer directs and at the expense of the party to whom the permit was granted .
num federal aid participation .
when the federal government participates in the cost of the work covered by the contract proceed with the work under the supervision of the commonwealth but subject to the inspection and approval of the proper officials of the federal government and according to the applicable federal statutes rules and regulations .
the federal governments inspection will not make the federal government a party to this contract and will not interfere with the rights of either party under this contract .
num public convenience and safety .
store materials and conduct work to cause the minimum necessary obstruction to the traveling public .
for roads under construction that are used by the traveling public maintain the roadbed subgrade or newly laid surface in a condition that the public can travel over in comfort and safety .
whenever the alignment of the new roadway and the grade line specified in the plans or as established by the engineer require any excavation or the construction of an embankment on any part of the existing traveled road perform the work through completion with continuous successive operations as quickly as practical and maintain the completed work in a smooth and acceptable condition .
maintain open passable sections where the old road and the new road coincide with as little inconvenience to the traveling public as possible .
do not close any sections of the road without first obtaining the engineers written permission .
the contractor is responsible for accidents that may have been caused by poor design improper signing poor maintenance or other deficiencies associated with temporary crossings .
num railwayhighway provisions .
when the plans require hauling materials across the tracks of any railway the department will arrange with the railway company for permission for the contractor to cross the railway rightofway and tracks provided that the contractor executes a license agreement satisfactory to the railway company and agrees to reimburse the railway company for all costs associated with providing and removing temporary grade crossings and for all costs of other work or items the railway company deems necessary for protection of its property and operations .
when the contractor desires railway crossings for his convenience the contractor shall make his own arrangements for the use of such crossings .
perform all work on the railway rightofway at times and in a manner to not num unnecessarily interfere with the movement of trains or traffic upon the track of the railway company and according to all other requirements of the contract .
take all precautions to avoid accidents damage delays or interference with the railway companys trains or other property .
when work includes construction maintenance or demolition of a railroad bridge conform to the personnel safety rules for bridge workers .
these rules are consistent with existing osha regulations but the fra will be the enforcement agency .
the rules are published in the june num num federal register .
num construction over or adjacent to navigable waters .
conduct all work over on or adjacent to navigable waters in a manner that does not interfere with the free navigation of the waterway and does not impair the existing navigable depths except as allowed by permit issued by either the us coast guard or the us army corps of engineers .
num use of explosives .
comply with federal state and local regulations on the purchase transportation storage and use of explosive material .
regulations include but are not limited to the following num krs num through num .
num num kar num through num num applicable rules and regulations issued by the office of mine safety and licensing .
num safety and health .
osha num cfr part num subpart u .
num storage security and accountability .
bureau of alcohol tobacco and firearms batf num cfr part num .
num shipment .
dot num cfr parts num num .
num national park service regulations .
for projects in national parks also comply with nps directors order num explosives use and blasting safety .
submit a general blasting plan for acceptance at least num days before drilling operations begin .
include as a minimum the working procedures and safety precautions for storing transporting handling detonating explosives and addressing misfires on the project .
specifically address how traffic will be impacted and what procedures and plans are in place to limit and address accident occurrence .
notify each property owner and public utility company having structures or facilities in proximity to the site of the work of the intent to use explosives .
give such notice sufficiently in advance to enable those being notified to take the necessary steps to protect their property from injury .
preserve the original bearing value of rock located under proposed structure foundations from damage by blasting by concussion from blasting or by excessive breakage .
the contractor shall bear any increases in structure costs caused by blasting damage to rock under proposed foundations .
num protection and restoration of property .
num general .
do not enter upon private property for any purpose without obtaining permission from the property owner .
the contractor is responsible for preserving all public and private property and shall use every precaution necessary to prevent such damage or injury .
exercise the necessary precautions to prevent damage to pipes conduits and other underground structures .
carefully protect from disturbance or damage all land monuments and property marks until the engineer has witnessed or otherwise referenced their location and do not remove them until directed .
the contractor is responsible for all damage or injury to property resulting from any act omission neglect or misconduct in the contractors manner or method of executing num the work or due to the contractors nonexecution of the work or due to defective work or materials .
when or where any direct or indirect damage or injury occurs to public or private property by or on account of any act omission neglect or misconduct in the contractors execution or lack of execution of the work the contractor shall restore at no expense to the department such property to a condition similar or equal to that existing before such damage or injury was done .
if the contractor fails to restore such property or repair such damage or injury within a reasonable time then the department may upon num hours notice proceed to repair rebuild or otherwise restore such property and the department will deduct the cost thereof from any monies due or that may become due to the contractor under the contract .
num preservation of mailboxes .
the contractor is responsible for preserving mailboxes within the rightofway and easements for the project .
remove and relocate mailboxes as necessary during construction of the project and reinstall at their permanent location as soon as is practical .
during construction of the project provide access to mailboxes for us postal service vehicles at all times .
install mailboxes at both their temporary and final locations according to the requirements of the department and the us postal service .
when a new post is necessary for the final installation furnish a numinch by numinch by numfoot treated wood post conforming to section num .
install other types of posts conforming to the requirements of the department and the us postal service when the post is furnished by the owner of the mailbox .
except for surfacing materials perform all work necessary to preserve remove relocate and reinstall mailboxes and maintain access for us postal service vehicles at no expense to the department .
num responsibility for damage claims .
the contractor shall indemnify and save harmless the commonwealth the department and all its officers agents and employees from all suits actions or claims of any character brought on account of any of the following num injuries or damages sustained by any person or property resulting from the contractors acts num neglecting safeguarding the work num acts omissions neglect or misconduct num claims or amounts recovered from any infringement of patent trademark or copyright and num claims or amounts arising or recovered under the workers compensation act or any other law ordinance order or decree .
the department will retain money due the contractor in amounts sufficient to cover the cost of such suits actions or claims for the use of the commonwealth .
by executing this contract the parties do not intend to create for the public or any of its members a third party beneficiary or to authorize anyone not a party to the contract a suit for personal injuries or property damage .
num contractors responsibility for work .
until the department makes final written acceptance of the work protect against injury or damage to any part of the work by the action of the elements or from any other cause whether arising from the execution or from the nonexecution of the work .
rebuild repair and restore any portion of the work damaged by any of the above causes .
the contractor shall bear the expense of such repairs except for damages to the work due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of and without fault or negligence of the contractor including but not restricted to acts of god or of the public enemy acts of the government slides that the engineer finds to have been unavoidable and ordinary wear and tear on any section of the road that the engineer orders opened to traffic .
the department may issue written encroachment permits to make openings in along num or across the road but in such cases the individuals or organizations obtaining the permit shall perform the work .
num contractors responsibility for utility property and services .
at points where the work is adjacent to the properties of utility companies or others to which damage from performing the work might result in considerable expense loss or inconvenience do not start the work without first making all arrangements necessary to protect the adjacent property .
cooperate with the owners of any underground or overhead utility lines while they remove or relocate such utilities so that their operations progress in a reasonable manner with minimal duplication and so that the services rendered by those parties is not unnecessarily interrupted .
use all possible care in excavating on the project to avoid damaging existing utilities whether the utilities are or are not specified in the plans .
elevations and locations of existing utilities specified in the plans are approximate only .
as specified in subsection num the contractor is responsible for protecting and restoring existing utility property specified in the plans .
in the event that water and utility services are interrupted as a result of accidental breakage or as a result of being exposed or unsupported promptly notify the proper authority and cooperate with that authority to restore services .
when water service is interrupted perform the repair work continuously until the service is restored .
do not perform work around fire hydrants until the local fire authority approves the plan for restoring service .
prior to any excavation activities comply with the requirements for excavators in the underground facility damage prevention act of num which is contained in krs num sections num through num .
num personal liability of public officials .
in carrying out any of the provisions of the contract or in exercising any power or authority granted to them by or within the scope of the contract the commissioner engineer or their authorized representatives have no liability either personally or as officials of the commonwealth in all such matters they act solely as agents and representatives of the commonwealth .
num no waiver of legal rights .
the department is not precluded or estopped by any measurement estimate or certificate made either before or after the completion and acceptance of the work and payment for the work from showing the true quantity and character of the contractors work and materials furnished by the contractor or from showing that any such measurement estimate or certificate is untrue or incorrectly made or that the contractors work or materials that the contractor furnishes do not conform to the contract .
the department is not precluded or estopped notwithstanding any such measurement estimate or certificate and payment according thereto from recovering from the contractor and his surety such damages as it may sustain by reason of the contractors failure to comply with the terms of the contract .
neither the departments acceptance or the acceptance of any representatives of the department nor any payment for or acceptance of the whole or any part of the work nor any extension of time nor any department possession of the work operate as a waiver of any portion of the contract or of any power herein reserved or any right to damages herein provided .
a waiver of any breach of the contract does not operate as a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
the contractor without prejudice to the terms of the contract is liable to the department for latent defects fraud or such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud and the departments rights under any warranty or guaranty .
num required liability insurance .
in addition to any other forms of insurance or bonds required under the terms of the contract carry insurance of the following kinds and amounts a public liability insurance .
furnish proof of insurance to the department with num respect to all construction operations for regular contractors public liability insurance providing for a limit of no less than amount shown in the bid proposal dollars for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of one person and subject to that limit for each person a total limit of amount shown in the bid proposal dollars for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of num or more persons in any one accident .
b property damage liability insurance .
furnish proof of insurance to the department with respect to all construction operations for regular contractors property damage liability insurance providing for a limit of no less than amount shown in the bid proposal dollars for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property in any one accident and subject to that limit per accident a total or aggregate limit of amount shown in the bid proposal dollars for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property during the policy period .
c protective public liability insurance .
furnish proof of insurance carried in the contractors own behalf to the department with respect to all subcontractor construction operations for regular contractors protective public liability insurance providing for a limit of no less than amount shown in the bid proposal dollars for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of one person and subject to that limit for each person a total limit of amount shown in the bid proposal dollars for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of num or more persons in any one accident .
d protective property damage liability .
furnish proof of insurance carried in the contractors own behalf to the department with respect to subcontractor construction operations for regular contractors protective property damage liability insurance providing for a limit of no less than amount shown in the bid proposal dollars for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property in any one accident and subject to that limit per accident a total or aggregate limit of amount shown in the bid proposal dollars for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property during the policy period .
e liability insurance for highway and railroad separation .
furnish proof of insurance carried in the behalf of the railroad company shown in the bid proposal to the department with respect to all construction operations and subcontractor construction operations for railroad company regular protective public liability insurance providing for a limit of no less than amount shown in the bid proposal dollars for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of one person and subject to that limit for each person a total limit of amount shown in the bid proposal dollars for all damages arising out of bodily injuries to or death of num or more persons in any one accident and regular protective property damage liability insurance providing for a limit of no less than amount shown in the bid proposal dollars for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property in any accident and subject to that limit per accident a total or aggregate limit of amount shown in the bid proposal dollars for all damages arising out of injury to or destruction of property during the policy period .
f general .
carry the insurance herein before specified until all work required to be performed under the terms of the contract is satisfactorily completed as evidenced by the formal acceptance by the commonwealth .
when the contract is a joint venture each party to such undertaking shall furnish proof of endorsement on any insurance required indicating the extension of coverage to that contract undertaking or the joint venture shall provide the coverage required for the undertaking by a contract of insurance for that purpose .
provide insurance at no expense to the department .
when subletting any part of the work provide on behalf of the subcontractors or ensure that when subletting the subcontractors provide similar insurance to cover their operations .
num section num prosecution and progress num subcontracting of contract .
do not subcontract sell transfer assign or otherwise dispose of the contract or contracts or any portion of the contract or contracts or of the right title or interest therein without the engineers written consent .
when the engineer gives such consent the engineer will allow the contractor to subcontract a portion but the contractor must perform with his own organization work amounting to no less than num percent of the total contract cost .
the department will not allow any subcontractor to exceed the percentage to be performed by the contractor and will require the contractor to maintain a supervisory role over the entire project .
do not allow any subcontractor to further subcontract any portion of the work without obtaining written consent from the engineer .
when the engineer gives such consent the first tier subcontractor may further subcontract a portion of his work not to exceed num percent of the work originally subcontracted to him by the contractor .
do not allow any second tier subcontractor to subcontract any portion of the work .
the engineers written consent to subcontract assign or otherwise dispose of any portion of the contract does not under any circumstances relieve the contractor of his liabilities and obligations under the contract .
the engineer will make transactions only with the contractor .
the engineer will recognize subcontractors only in the similar capacity of employees or workers of the contractor who are subject to the same requirements as to character and competence as specified in subsection num .
num progress schedule .
specification num applies to all cabinet projects except the following project types right of way mowing andor litter removal waterborne paint striping projects that contain special provision num projects that contain the special note for cpm scheduling the scheduling documents are considered the contractors plan of action .
the contractor may change their plan of action as needed .
however the contractor must inform the cabinet of deviations from the schedule giving the cabinet a numhour notice prior to working on items deviating from the schedule .
the numhour notice can be reduced if approved by the engineer .
the contractor should attempt to follow their schedule if possible and any deviations must be reflected in the next schedule update .
working without the submittal of a written narrative is violation of this specification and additionally voids the contractors right to delay claims .
if the engineer deems a preconstruction conference necessary submit a written narrative as described below at least two working days prior to the preconstruction conference .
during the preconstruction conference the contractor shall make a verbal presentation of their progress schedule detailing their proposed progression of work including the items discussed in the written narrative .
if the engineer does not deem a preconstruction conference necessary the contractor will submit a written narrative to the engineer at least two working days prior to the start of work .
any submission of scheduling documents must be in triplicate and be accompanied by a signed statement of approval by the contractors project superintendentmanager .
the written narrative submitted prior to work or the preconstruction conference is assumed to be the contractors asbid plan and may need to be revised as these conditions allow .
these initial project schedule documents should reflect the contractors schedule as the project was bid .
any questions that the contractor may have that would lead to changes in this schedule should be discussed at the preconstruction conference and the initial schedule can be adjusted based on those discussions .
the department will review the schedule in general for the purpose of managing its employees and resources and for conformance to the specifications and flow of logic .
the department accepts no liability for determining the contractors ability to meet their num schedule as it is contractors sole responsibility to provide an accurate and feasible schedule .
all schedule risk rests with the contractor .
when the written narrative is not received for review two working days prior to the preconstruction conference or if they are not in conformance with the specifications the preconstruction conference will be postponed until two working days after submission of an acceptable written narrative .
when at the preconstruction conference or anytime during the project the engineer determines that the project warrants the submittal of an activity bar chart the contractor will have numdays to submit the baseline progress schedule documents consisting of a written narrative and activity bar chart .
these documents should describe the schedule in level num detail for the upcoming num days and at least level num detail for the remainder of the project the levels of detail are described in part d of this section .
these baseline documents should be updated monthly or as agreed upon by the contractor and engineer to reflect project progress .
the submittal of bar chart or critical path method schedule does not relieve the contractors requirement to submit a written narrative schedule .
when there is no preconstruction conference or when the engineer determines that a written narrative alone will suffice for the progress scheduling documents updates will occur through biweekly progress schedule meetings between the contractor and engineer .
the format and frequency of these meetings may be adjusted only when mutually agreed upon by the engineer and contractor .
when baseline scheduling or update scheduling documents are not submitted within their time limitations or when any of the provisions within this section of the project specifications are not satisfied the progress pay estimates will be held until the scheduling documents are presented or the outstanding provisions are satisfied .
when the provisions of this section have not been satisfied such that two consecutive progress payments have been held the department will continue to withhold progress payments and will charge the contractor a daily penalty equal to one half the projects liquidated damages rate starting from the date the scheduling documents were due and continuing until the provisions of this section are met .
any costs associated with these scheduling requirements and updates are incidental to the project .
a written narrative .
submit the written narrative schedule using form tc num num available at the division of constructions website httpwww.transportation.ky.govconstructionrescenterrescenter.htm .
the initial written narrative shall include but may not be limited to the following num .
provide a description that includes how the contractor will sequence and stage the work how the contractor plans to maintain and control traffic being specific and detailed and what equipment and crew sizes are planned to execute the work .
num .
provide a list of project milestones including if applicable winter shut downs holidays or special events .
the contractor shall describe how these milestones and other dates effect the prosecution of the work .
also include start date and completion date milestones for the contract each project if the contract entails multiple projects each phase of work site of work or segment of work as divided in the project plans proposal or as subdivided by the contractor .
num .
provide a list of owner responsibilities and associated timelines including any submittals shop drawings or any other items that are to be reviewed by the department .
num .
discuss any known problems that the contractor foresees including any utilities or railway related issues .
b activity bar chart .
the initial activity bar chart shall include but is not limited to the following num num .
display the calendar timeline on the xaxis where the minor time divisions will be no greater than one day .
num .
display asbid start dates and activity durations of items including but not limited to the activities .
the project items material fabrications document approvals or other timesensitive items that will occur within the first num calendar days of the project must be listed in level num detail .
c updates .
num all scheduling documentation should be updated to show progress from a date not more than one week prior to the submission date .
the updated schedule documents should describe the upcoming num days of activities in level num detail and the remainder of the project in at least level num detail as described below in section d. num the updated completion date based on current progress should be evident .
in the event the progress schedule shows the project to be completed past the contracts completion date the narrative shall address how the contractor plans to prosecute the work to get the project back to within the contract time allowed .
any float or any time remaining between the last item of work and the contract completion date will not be held against the contractor .
the cabinet will not reduce the contract time because of float without just compensation to the contractor .
num when it is necessary to provide a project schedule update the updated narrative must contain but may not be limited to the following items provide updates on the items of work to include any delays or gains to the previously submitted scheduled items such as rain events unforeseen utility delays discrepancies in geologic data agreements or change orders approved by the cabinet or other issues that affect the items of the previous submittal .
list any changes to the maintenance of traffic as previously submitted and explain why the change will need to be made .
discuss any other issues that the contractor foresees that may affect the schedule that were not listed in the previous submittal .
num the updated bar chart shall include but is not limited to the following .
update the start dates and activity durations of items on the previously submitted bar chart .
the project items material fabrications document approvals or other timesensitive items that will occur within the next num calendar days of the update submission must be listed in level num detail .
d levels of detail .
num level num .
this level of detail presents a logically flowing schedule of the daily activities required to complete the project .
the maximum activity length should be numdays unless approved by the engineer .
locations andor stations numbers should be used to further describe activities .
num level num .
this level of detail presents the logical progression of activities required to complete the controlling items of work in the time limits allotted in the contract documents to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num preconstruction conference .
after contract award the engineer may schedule a preconstruction conference .
if the project type requires a final inspection by central office division of construction the engineer will consult the division of construction prior waiving the right to request a preconstruction conference .
the purpose num of the preconstruction conference is to bring the contractor and department together as a team for the project in question .
communication lines should be established and open discussions of project issues should be held .
at the close of this conference the contractual parties of the project should have a similar understanding of the project schedule project issues party responsibilities and project goals .
the discussions and agreements occurring at this conference should be audio recorded as well as kept in written format .
the engineer will keep this documentation in the project file .
the written or audio documentation of this conference will be provided to the contractor and to other parties in attendance upon request in a timely manner .
the preconstruction conference is comprised of num separate meetings that may be held concurrently or at separate times and places .
these meetings include a preconstruction meeting a rightofway and utilities meeting and an eeo and dbewbe meeting .
the rightofway and utilities meeting and the eeo and dbewbe meeting are specialty meetings and are selfexplanatory .
the preconstruction meeting should involve discussions of but not be limited to the following num project information num project plans proposal num designating key personnel of all parties names of the project superintendent the safety officer the project and company eeo officers project traffic coordinator and the names and telephone numbers of persons responsible for traffic control num hours per day num days a week num materials suppliers equipment ownedrented subcontractors and personnel resources num dbewbe work the contractor should present a letter from each dbewbe subcontractor designating the superintendent and stating that this individual is not affiliated with the prime contractor num contract time and project progress schedule specifically key dates local events project milestones department responsible activities work dayhour restrictions maintenance of traffic and work methods num permits num staking designating the professional engineerlicensed surveyor num environmental issues designating inspector and presenting bmp seeding and spill prevention plans num blasting num wasteborrow sites and hauling limitations num public and worker safety plans num traffic control plans traffic signing diagrams should be presented num requirements for future meetings the contractor should hold prepave prepour and any other preliminary meeting the engineer requests it is critical that the preconstruction meeting involve the contractors presentation of their proposed work plan to the department staff in attendance .
if the contractor does not provide the required submissions the engineer may order the preconstruction conference suspended until such time as the contractor furnishes them .
do not begin work until the preconstruction conference has been concluded .
the engineer will not allow additional compensation or an extension of contract time as a result from any delays due to such as suspension .
num prosecution of the work .
do not begin the work until receiving the commissioners official notice to begin work .
after receiving notice begin work within the following schedule num when the contract stipulates contract time in working days begin work within num calendar days of the date specified in the notice to begin work and prosecute the work efficiently and continuously with adequate force and equipment to completion within the number of days allowed num num when the contract stipulates contract time in calendar days begin work after receipt of the notice to begin work and prosecute the work efficiently and continuously with adequate force and equipment to completion within the number of days allowed and num when the contract specifies a fixed completion date begin work after receipt of the notice to begin work at such time as will enable completion of the work by the specified completion date .
when awarded multiple projects schedule the work to meet the completion requirements of all projects .
neither excessive workload nor coordinating multiple projects will be consideration for time extensions .
once work on a project has started progress the work actively to completion .
num limitations of operations .
limit operations so that there is not an unnecessarily large section of the roadway under construction at any time causing undue inconvenience to the traveling public .
in the prosecution of the work start operations at such points as the engineer may direct .
when operations have temperature or seasonal limitations schedule the work to comply with any specification manufacturer or supplier requirements .
when ordered by the commissioner open any or all sections to travel whether the whole length of road is completed or not .
num character of workers methods and equipment .
a general .
employ at all times sufficient labor and equipment for prosecuting the work to full completion in the manner and time required by the contract .
employ workers that have sufficient skill and experience to properly perform the work assigned to them .
employ workers engaged in special work or skilled work that have sufficient experience in such work and in the operation of the equipment required to perform all work properly and satisfactorily .
if the engineer judges that any person employed by the contractor does not perform the work in a proper and skillful manner or is intemperate or disorderly at the written request of the engineer the contractor shall remove such person from the project and shall not employ such person again in any portion of the work without the approval of the engineer .
should the contractor fail to remove such person or persons as directed or fail to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper prosecution of the work the engineer may suspend the work by written notice until the contractor complies with such orders .
use only equipment of sufficient size and in such mechanical condition as to conform to the requirements of the work and to produce a satisfactory quality of work .
use equipment that does not harm the roadway adjacent property or other highways .
when a weight or weight range is specified for compaction equipment use equipment that has a plate or sign attached showing its weight or minimum and maximum weights when applicable .
in lieu of the plate or signs the contractor may weigh the equipment on scales certified by the division of weights and measures before using the equipment on each project .
when the methods and equipment that are used to accomplish the construction are not prescribed in the contract use any methods or equipment that will to the satisfaction of the engineer accomplish the contract work in a manner conforming to the contract .
b alternate methods and equipment .
when the contract specifies certain methods and equipment use such methods and equipment unless the engineer authorizes others .
request approval from the engineer to use a method or type of equipment other than those specified in the contract .
make the request in writing and include a full description of the methods and equipment proposed and an explanation of the reasons for desiring to make the change .
if the engineers approval is granted the contractor is fully responsible for producing construction work according to the contract .
if after trial use of the substituted methods or equipment the engineer num determines that the work produced does not conform to the contract discontinue the use of the substitute method or equipment and complete the remaining construction with the specified methods and equipment .
remove the deficient work and replace it with work of specified quality or take such other corrective action as the engineer may direct at no expense to the department .
the engineer will not change the basis of payment or the contract time for the construction items involved as a result of authorizing a change in methods or equipment .
num determination and extension of contract time .
num general .
when the engineer suspends or delays the performance of work in writing for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the contractor believes that additional compensation or contract time is due because of the suspension or delay the contractor shall submit to the engineer in writing a request for an adjustment within num calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume work .
include the reasons and support for the adjustment in the request .
if the engineer agrees that the cost or time required for the performance of the contract has increased because of the suspension and the cause of the suspension was beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor its suppliers or subcontractors at any approved tier and not caused by weather the engineer will make an adjustment excluding profit and modify the contract in writing accordingly .
the engineer will notify the contractor whether or not conditions warrant an adjustment .
the department will not allow any contract adjustment if num the contractor does not provide the required written notice or num the performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause or num an adjustment is provided for or excluded under any other term or condition of the contract .
num working days .
when the contract time is specified in working days the engineer will charge all working days that occur beginning with the numst calendar day following the date of the notice to begin work to the contract even when the contractor is not performing work except that during december january february and march the engineer will not charge working days to the contract regardless of whether or not the contractor is performing work .
during the months when the engineer is charging working days the engineer will furnish the contractor biweekly statements showing the number of days charged for the period the total number of days charged to the contract through that date and the number of days remaining for completion of the contract .
the contractor acknowledges acceptance of and agreement with all biweekly statements unless the contractor submits a written protest containing supporting evidence for a change within num calendar days of receiving the biweekly statement .
the department bases the specified contract time on the original quantities of work as defined in subsection num .
the engineer will not shorten the contract time when the final contract cost is less than the original contract cost because of net decreases in the quantities or the elimination of items .
when the final contract cost is greater than the original contract cost because of net increases in the original quantities or the addition of items the engineer will grant an extension of the contract time .
the engineer will determine the number of additional working days due for the additional work by dividing the value of the additional work by the value of the original contract work and multiplying this ratio by the number of original contract working days .
when however the engineer determines that the additional work is of such character or occurs so near the time of completion of the project that the contractor requires more time to complete the additional work than is indicated by the working daycontract amount ratio the engineer may extend the contract time by as much as the anticipated number of working days necessary to complete the additional work .
in these instances the engineer will establish num the number of allowable working days at the time the contractor agrees to perform the additional work .
the contract may require that before the contractor orders or uses specific materials or products the contractor submit to the department shop drawings manufacturers brochures or specifications material certifications or mill test reports and other similar requirements describing each of the specific materials or products identified .
when any such requirements are applicable the department considers obtaining preparing or producing that which is required gaining the necessary review or approval by the department and obtaining delivery to the project of these materials or products as an essential part of the contract .
when the engineer deems that the contract item or jobsite operation associated with these requirements is the controlling item or operation the engineer will charge working days without regard to conditions on the project site until the contractor delivers sufficient materials or products or other conditions arise which causes a jobsite operation to become the controlling operation .
when the contract specifies that the contractor wait for a period of time after embankment construction to achieve anticipated settlement the engineer will not consider the embankment where settlement is anticipated as the controlling item during the waiting period .
if the engineer determines that the controlling item or operation is delayed by the settlement period the engineer will not charge working days until the specified waiting period and settlement is complete .
the engineer will charge working days when work can begin or resume on the controlling item or operation .
num calendar days .
when contract time is specified in calendar days the engineer will charge every calendar day beginning with the calendar day following the date of the notice to begin work including all saturdays sundays holidays and nonworking days to the contract .
the engineer bases the contract time on the original quantities of work as defined in subsection num .
the engineer will not shorten the contract time when the final contract cost is less than the original contract cost because of net decreases in the quantities or the elimination of items .
when the final contract cost is greater than the original contract cost because of net increases in the original quantities or the addition of items the engineer will grant an extension of the contract time .
the engineer will determine the number of additional calendar days due for the additional work by dividing the value of the additional work by the value of the original contract work and multiply this ratio by the number of original contract calendar days .
when however the engineer determines that the additional work is of such character or occurs so near the time of completion of the project that the contractor requires more time to complete the additional work than is indicated by the calendar daycontract amount ratio the engineer may extend the contract time by as much as the anticipated number of calendar days necessary to complete the additional work .
in these instances the engineer will establish the number of allowable calendar days at the time the contractor agrees to perform the additional work .
the engineer will not allow any extension of time for weather or resulting conditions except for delays caused by earthquakes tornadoes or other similar catastrophic forces .
num fixed completion date .
when contract time is specified as a fixed completion date complete all work on the project by that date regardless of the length of time between the notice to begin work and the specified completion date .
the engineer bases the contract time on the original quantities of work as defined in subsection num .
the engineer will not shorten the contract time when the final contract cost is less than the original contract cost because of net decreases in the quantities or the elimination of items .
when the final contract cost is greater than the original contract cost because of net increases in the original quantities or the addition of items the engineer will grant an extension of the contract time .
the engineer will determine the length of the extension of time in calendar days due for the additional work by dividing the value of this additional work by the value of the original contract work and multiply this ratio by the number of calendar days from notice to begin work to the original fixed completion date .
when the engineer determines that the additional work is num of such character or occurs so near the time of completion of the project that the contractor requires more time to complete the additional work than is indicated by the contract timecontract amount ratio the engineer may extend the contract time by as much as the anticipated number of calendar days necessary to complete the additional work .
in these instances the engineer will establish the number of allowable calendar days at the time the contractor agrees to perform the additional work .
when the period between the execution of the contract and the issuance of the notice to begin work exceeds num calendar days as provided in subsection num the department may extend the fixed completion date by the number of calendar days the notice to begin work was withheld in excess of the num calendar days .
the engineer will not allow any extension of time for weather or resulting conditions except for delays caused by earthquakes tornadoes or other similar catastrophic forces .
num suspension of work .
the engineer may order the contractor in writing to suspend delay or interrupt all or part of the work for such period of time as the engineer may determine to be appropriate for the convenience of the commonwealth .
if the engineer suspends or delays the performance of all or any portion of the work for an unreasonable period of time not originally anticipated customary or inherent to the construction industry and the contractor believes that additional compensation or contract time is due as a result of such suspension or delay the contractor shall submit to the engineer in writing a request for adjustment within seven calendar days of receipt of the notice to resume work .
the request shall set forth the reasons and support for such adjustment .
upon receipt the engineer will evaluate the contractors request .
if the engineer agrees that the cost andor time requested for the performance of the contract has increased as a result of such suspension and the suspension was caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of the contractor subcontractors at any tier its suppliers or weather the engineer will make an adjustment excluding profit and modify the contract in writing accordingly .
the engineer will notify the contractor whether or not the adjustment is warranted .
the engineer will not allow any contract adjustment unless the contractor has submitted the request for adjustment within the prescribed time .
the engineer will not allow a contract adjustment under this clause to the extent that the performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause or for which an adjustment is provided or excluded under any other term or condition of this contract .
num failure to complete on time .
for each calendar day that the contractor fails to complete the work after the final contract time allowed according to subsection num for the completion of the contract the department will deduct the applicable daily charge specified in this subsection from any money due the contractor not as a penalty but as agreed liquidated damages .
the department will deduct daily charges as agreed liquidated damages for each calendar day without regard to inclement weather or the temperature limitations in the contract except that the department will not deduct liquidated damages when the specified seasonal or temperature limitations prohibit the contractor from performing work on the controlling item or operation .
the department will charge the agreed liquidated damages on a calendar day basis regardless of whether the contract time is measured in calendar days working days or is established as a specified completion date contract .
because the prosecution of work in connection with the construction of road and bridge projects will inconvenience the public obstruct traffic and interfere with business complete the work as quickly as practical .
also the departments costs for the administration of the contract including inspection engineering supervision and maintaining detours increases with the time that the contractor takes to execute the work .
when the department allows the contractor to continue and to finish the project beyond the contract time such permission does not operate as a waiver by the department of any of its rights under the contract .
num the engineer may require the contractor to perform work to fulfill the requirements of subsections num d num f num and num after the contract time has elapsed and after the engineer has declared the project otherwise complete .
the department will not assess liquidated damages for this work provided that the contractor completes the work within the following periods num complete topdressing work specified in subsection num d within num calendar days after the engineers direction to begin this work and num complete corrective work to fulfill the seeding acceptance requirements of subsection num g within num days after the engineers direction to correct the seeding or at a later date that the engineer directs at the time of inspection .
num complete corrective work to fulfill the striping acceptance requirements of subsection num and num within num days after the engineers direction to correct the striping or at a later date that the engineer directs at the time of inspection .
when the contractor has not completed this work within the time period allowed above as applicable the department will assess liquidated damages at num percent of the original contract daily charge from the expiration of the time allowed above until the contractor completes the specified work except that the department will not deduct liquidated damages when the specified seasonal or temperature limitations prohibit the contractor from performing work on the controlling item or operation ..
the department will apply the following schedule of agreed liquidated damages original contract amount from to and including daily charge num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num or more num num default and termination of contract .
the commissioner after giving due notice to the contractor and his surety has the authority to take the prosecution of the work out of the hands of the contractor or surety or both for any breach of the contract that the contractor commits as follows num failure to begin the work under the contract within the time specified num failure to prosecute the work with sufficient forces equipment or materials to complete the work within the time specified num failure to perform the work satisfactorily num discontinuing the work before completion without the engineers permission num neglecting or refusing to remove such materials or to perform anew such work that the engineer rejects as defective or unsuitable num bankruptcy or insolvency or committing any acts of bankruptcy or insolvency num allowing any final judgment against him to remain unsatisfied for a period of num calendar days num making an assignment for the benefit of his creditors num for any other reason failing to carry on the work according to the contract the commissioner will give the contractor and his surety written notice specifying the delay neglect or default and the action required .
when the contractor or his surety within a period of num calendar days after such notice fails to proceed satisfactorily in compliance therewith the commissioner then has full power and authority to take the work out of the hands of the contractor or surety or both to use any or all suitable num materials and equipment on the project or to enter into contract or use such other methods as required to complete the work .
any contractor employed by the surety to perform work on the project shall comply with the prequalification requirements of subsection num .
when the commissioner takes over the incomplete work under any of the provisions of this section the department will deduct all additional costs and damages and the costs and charges of completing the same from monies due or to become due the contractor and when the total of such damages costs and charges exceeds the balance of the contract price that would be payable to the contractor had he completed the work then the contractor and surety shall on demand pay to the department the amount of such excess .
num emergency deferment or termination of contract .
when a national emergency exists by reason of war conditions involving the us by reason of orders of the us government or its duly authorized agencies or by executive order with respect to the prosecution of war or to national defense and such emergency upon a finding by the department creates a shortage of materials labor or equipment that prevents the contractor from proceeding with his contract the department and the contractor may defer such construction in whole or in part or the department may terminate such contract or any part thereof .
num deferment .
in all cases where the department defers construction the department and the contractor will execute a written agreement stating the terms and conditions of such deferment .
num termination .
when the department terminates the contract or any portion of the contract and the contractor is released before completing all items of work included in the contract the department will pay for the actual items of work completed .
the department will pay on the basis of agreed prices for the following num items that have no unit prices included in the contract .
num contracts that the department has decreased in excess of num percent and the contract unit prices are not sufficient to equitably reimburse the contractor for overhead .
num major items where the department has decreased the total cost of the major item in excess of num percent .
a major item is defined in subsection num .
the department will not pay for any claim for anticipated profits .
the department may at the engineers option purchase unused materials that the contractor has obtained and that the department has inspected tested and accepted at such points of delivery as the department designates and at a cost shown by receipted bills or other proper evidence .
num termination of contract in the public interest .
when unexpected state federal or local conditions of extraordinary significance occur which are beyond the control of both the contractor and the department causing the department to determine that termination of a contract will be in the public interest the department will terminate all or selected portions of the work in the contract that remain incomplete .
the engineer will then determine equitable payment procedures to adequately compensate the contractor for this unusual and unexpected termination of the contract .
the department will compensate the contractor for a terminated contract in an amount not exceeding the original total contract amount unless the engineer approved change orders for increases prior to the occurrence of the unexpected conditions or the engineer makes subsequent field measurements of authorized excavation and other such variable items that verify that the contractor completed quantities in excess of the contract quantities .
num num termination of contractors responsibility .
the department will consider the contract complete when the contractor has completed all work the commissioner has accepted the project and the contractor has complied with all obligations relative to the contract and the bonds except as provided in subsection num .
num section num measurement and payment num measurement of quantities .
num general .
the engineer will measure all work completed under the contract according to the english system .
a station when used as a definition or term of measurement will be num linear feet measured horizontally .
the engineer will determine quantities of material the contractor furnishes and work the contractor performs under the contract using measurement methods and computations generally recognized as conforming to good engineering practice .
the engineer will take longitudinal measurements for area computations of pavement surfaces horizontally and make no deductions for individual fixtures having an area of one square meter or less .
the engineer will determine transverse measurements for area computations of pavement surfaces using the neat dimensions specified in the plans or ordered in writing except the department will measure jpc pavement according to subsection num .
the engineer will measure structures according to neat lines specified in the plans or as altered by the engineer to fit field conditions .
for all items measured by the linear foot such as pipe culverts guardrail underdrains etc .
the engineer will measure parallel to the base or foundation of the structures unless otherwise specified in the plans .
in computing volumes of excavation and embankments the engineer will use the average end area method or other acceptable methods .
for the purpose of ascertaining the quantities the engineer will use the planimeter .
the engineer will specify and measure the thickness of plates and galvanized sheet used in the manufacture of corrugated metal pipe metal plate pipe culverts and arches and metal cribbing .
when the contract uses the term ton it means the short ton consisting of num pounds .
a metric ton consists of num num kilograms .
the engineer will measure asphalt materials by the gallon or ton .
the engineer will measure volumes at num f or will make corrections to determine the volume at num f using astm d num for asphalts or astm d num for tars .
when the contractor ships bituminous materials by truck or transport the engineer may use net certified weights subject to correction for loss for computing quantities .
certify weights according to the departments current procedures .
the engineer will measure cement by the ton .
when the contract uses the term lump sum as an item of payment it means the complete payment amount for the work described .
when the contract specifies a complete structure or structural unit in effect lump sum work as the unit of measurement the structure or structural unit will include all necessary fittings and accessories .
when the contract specifies standard manufactured items such as fence wire plates rolled shapes pipe or conduit and these items are identified by thickness or diameter unit weight section dimensions or other dimensions such identification refers to nominal weights or dimensions .
unless the department specifies more stringent tolerances the engineer will accept manufacturing tolerances established by the industries involved .
when the contract designates design quantities for a specific portion of the work as the pay quantities the engineer will use these as the final pay quantities for that specific portion of the work unless the engineer revises the dimensions of said portions of the work from those specified in the plans .
when the engineers revised dimensions result in an increase or decrease in the quantities of such work the engineer will revise the final pay quantities accordingly .
the engineer will perform final measurement of only those quantities that are delivered inplace and accepted .
when weights include rejected material the engineer will deduct the quantity of such rejected material from the final measurement .
for the measurement of concrete or stone masonry the engineer will include only num that volume within the neat lines as specified in the plans or as the engineer has staked .
the engineer will use the prismoidal formula in computing the volumes of structures or portions of structures having end sections of unequal areas .
the engineer will measure quantities of work or materials not included herein according to the applicable sections in these standard specifications .
when not so specified the engineer will measure other quantities according to well recognized practices and will not consider local rules or customs .
num weighing general .
except as otherwise provided furnish all scales .
provide scales that are suitable for the purposes intended and conform to the tolerances and specifications of the division of weights and measures .
have all scales inspected to ascertain their accuracy whether operating at a commercial plant or operating on the project .
ensure that all scales are inspected by a representative of a commercial scale company registered with the division of weights and measures within num months before the beginning of production every num months during production and any other time the engineer deems necessary .
the engineer will accept inspection by the division of weights and measures as a substitute for a commercial scale company inspection .
keep a copy or ensure that the material supplier keeps a copy of the latest report of inspection by the division of weights and measures or commercial scale company on file at the scale location .
furnish or ensure that the material supplier furnishes all personnel necessary to perform weighing including tare weighing and to prepare all required records .
use properly housed truck pitscales of an approved type that are tested or automatic printing scales as specified in subsection num .
use scales that are accurate to within num percent throughout their entire weighing range .
certify or ensure that the material supplier certifies the quantities furnished each day for all materials which the department will pay for in tons .
complete or ensure that the material supplier completes a weight ticket for each load of material delivered to the project and that the weigher or plant manager signs each weight ticket unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
ensure redistribution yards provide the producing source of the material on the ticket .
a weight tickets .
ensure that the weigher or plant manager prepares or signs each weight ticket unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
b daily summary .
prepare or ensure that the material supplier prepares the daily summary and ensure that the plant manager signs the summary certifying that the days total net weight is correct .
c tare sheet .
prepare or ensure that the material supplier prepares the daily tare sheet when used and ensure that the plant manager signs the tare sheet certifying that the tare data is correct .
provide the completed and signed daily summary and daily tare sheet to the engineer on the project within num working days .
when hauling material over a route passing a permanent scale installation operated by the department of vehicle regulation dvr the dvr will weigh each load .
ensure that the driver advises the state weigher that his load is going to a transportation cabinet project and that the driver requests a ticket .
provide this to the department representative receiving the material along with the suppliers ticket .
at temporary locations utilizing portable scales ensure that the trucks stop for check weighing when the dvr officer or the engineer directs .
the engineer will select trucks on a random basis for check weighing on other approved scales .
the engineer may have these check weights performed on loaded trucks to check gross weight or empty trucks to check tare weight or both .
each time the engineer directs a truck away from the project haul route to another scale and when the check weighing indicates the accuracy of the contractors or material suppliers scales is acceptable the department will pay the agreed unit price of num per mile or num or each truck checked whichever is larger for scale check num reimbursement .
the engineer will measure the distance for scale check reimbursement as the total additional distance haul vehicles travel for acceptable scale checks based on the vehicle odometer to the nearest num mile .
the department will pay the agreed unit price per mile or per truck checked as full compensation for all costs and delays associated with the check weighing .
if the check weighing or any additional checks performed by or at the engineers direction show that the accuracy of the contractors or material suppliers scales is not acceptable the department will not pay for any scale check reimbursement and the engineer will adjust pay weights as specified below .
the contractors or material suppliers scales are not acceptable if tare check weights are more than num percent plus num pounds greater than the initial weight and gross check weights are more than num percent plus num pounds less than the initial weight when checked at a permanent scale location .
if the engineer deems it appropriate the engineer will modify initial tare weights by the estimated fuel consumption between the initial weight and check weight .
if the engineer determines that the check weights are outside these tolerances the engineer will direct the contractor to perform additional checks to determine if net pay weights are within specified tolerances .
if the engineer determines that pay weights are outside these tolerances the engineer will reduce by the difference greater than the specified tolerance for check weighing the net weights of all loads previously weighed that day and all previous days back to the latest acceptable check weight or the latest scale certification or for the previous num working days whichever is least .
for check weights that are determined on scales with short platforms requiring split weights the department will accept check weights that are within num percent of the initial weight if not the department will require check weights determined on a larger scale and apply the tolerance for check weights and adjustments specified for permanent scales .
for check weights that are determined by dvr portable scales the department will accept check weights that are within num percent of the initial weight if not the department will require check weights determined on a permanent scale and apply the tolerance for check weights and adjustments specified for permanent scales .
when check weights that are determined on permanent scales are outside the specified num percent tolerance the department will require that the certifying firm immediately order the contractor to have an approved scale company check the contractors or material suppliers scales .
the engineer may either suspend weighing operations or may allow weighing to continue with the engineer making appropriate adjustments until an approved scale company has checked the scales .
the department will not make separate measurement or payment for work required by this section other than scale check reimbursement .
the department considers all work necessary to determine the weight of materials as incidental to the contract unit prices for the various items that include such materials .
obtain actual truck weights for all deliveries except as otherwise provided the department will accept railroad weights on aggregate deliveries of less than num tons .
include in the contract unit prices for the various pay items of the project all other costs in connection with furnishing installing certifying or testing and maintaining scales for furnishing check weights and scale house and all other items specified in this section for weighing highway and bridge construction materials for proportioning or payment .
on a daily basis weigh empty trucks used to haul material that the department pays for by weight when the engineer directs and identify each truck with a plainly legible mark .
when the department measures a material in units of weight and the contractor delivers the material in standard containers of uniform size the engineer may measure the material by counting the containers and converting the count to weights provided that the material supplier prints the net weight of the materials on the container and the contractor provides certification to the engineer that the net weights are accurate within the tolerances allowed .
dispose of or remove from the work all empty containers when and num as the engineer directs .
as an alternative to the specified units of measure the contractor may request the following num for material specified to be measured by volume the contractor may request that the engineer measure the material by weight and convert the weight to volume for payment .
num for material specified to be measured by weight the contractor may request that the engineer measure the material by volume and convert the volume to weight for payment .
obtain the engineers approval in writing prior to implementing either of these alternatives .
if approved the engineer will determine the conversion factors between the volume and weight measurements .
num automatic printing scales .
use the following types of scales num truck scales with an automatic printer num scales used for automatic batching and recording in batch plants producing asphalt mixtures when surge or storage bins are not used num a weigh box or hopper located under a surge or storage bin do not use belt scales for determining pay weights .
use only automatic printers that are an integral part of the scale equipment or the scale and directly connected so that gross weights can not be manually entered .
the department will allow the manual entry of truck tare weights truck numbers or other data .
equip all aggregate sources and hotmix asphalt plants furnishing materials that the department pays for directly by weight with automatic printing scales for determining pay weights .
the engineer may grant exceptions to this requirement for installations that normally supply a total of less than num tons of material per year to department projects .
a truck tare weights .
determine truck tare weights by weighing each truck once daily at random times on an approved scale .
submit a tare sheet showing all tare weights at the end of each working day .
the only exceptions to this requirement are num when using truck scales and the capability exists determine each truck tare just prior to loading each load and print it on the weight ticket .
in this case the department will not require the daily tare sheet .
num when the automatic printing scales are so designed and operated that tare weight is not used to calculate net weight determine the tare weight of each truck before that truck begins hauling .
in this case the department will not require further tare weighing or the daily tare sheet .
num when all hauling is within the project limits or on the contractors haul roads and the automatic printing scales are designed and operated so that tare weight is not used to calculate net weight determine tare weights only as the engineer deems necessary to conform to subsection num .
b printing .
use an automatic printer that produces a weight ticket for each load in the required number of copies and that contains all information that is shown on the departments conventional weight ticket in digital form .
ensure that the weight tickets for each project indicate a sequential load number for each load .
when using the weights that are printed in conjunction with automatic batching at asphalt batch plants use a system that prints the weight of each individual batch component the total weight of each batch and the total weight of all num batches in each truck load .
submit weight tickets that show truck tare and gross weight on each ticket .
the contractor may show weights in tons in lieu of pounds provided that the contractor shows the weight to at least num ton .
provide a ticket that includes the certification stating the material is to be used on a department project only and space for the signature of the department representative receiving the material on the project .
c certification of quantities .
certify or ensure that the material supplier certifies the daily quantities and conform with the following requirements num use automatic printing scales and perform accuracy checks of both the scales and the printing system that conform to the contract .
num ensure that the weigher or plant manager signs each ticket unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num determine the pay quantity for each day as the certified quantity less any material not actually delivered to the project and less any deductions .
num prepare or ensure that the material supplier prepares the daily tare sheet when used and ensure that the plant manager signs the document certifying that the tare data is correct .
num submit the completed and signed daily summary and daily tare sheet to the engineer within num working days .
num the department reserves the right to inspect the contractors or material suppliers weighing equipment and procedures at any time and to occasionally checkweigh a truck on other approved scales .
d scale and printer accuracy .
use scales with a degree of accuracy that conforms to the contract .
use an automatic printing system with a degree of accuracy that conforms to the requirements of the division of weights and measures .
note that the requirements listed in subsection num are related to the accuracy of the batching process in automatic batch plants and are not related to weighing for determining pay quantities .
when observed during production ensure that the printed weight is within num pounds of the weight shown on the scale display .
e printer or scale malfunction .
if the automatic printer becomes inoperative or is recording weights that are outside the specified accuracy tolerance continue production only if weights can be read directly and produce weight tickets manually .
however continue manual weighing and preparing tickets manually only until the end of the workday in which the printer malfunction occurs .
if the scales malfunction or are operating outside the specified accuracy tolerance continue production by weighing the material on other scales that conform to the contract .
notify the engineer immediately of any scale or printer malfunction .
when manually weighing or preparing tickets due to equipment malfunction proceed as follows num truck tare weights .
determine truck tare weights by weighing each truck once daily at random times on an approved scale .
submit a tare sheet showing all tare weights at the end of each working day .
prepare or ensure that the material supplier prepares the daily tare sheet and ensure that the plant manager signs the document certifying that the tare data is correct .
num weight tickets .
manually weigh each load of material and issue a hand written ticket for each load and certify by signing each ticket .
num daily summary sheet .
prepare or ensure that a summary sheet is prepared as follows a list all loads shipped that day b truck number and load number for each load num c net weight of each load d total net weight shipped that day supported by an adding machine tape the department will accept a computer printout in lieu of the standard form provided it includes a certification similar to the standard form space for the signature of the plant manager space for the checkers signature and space for the engineers signature of approval .
if the contractor uses equipment that is capable of calculating a cumulative total of net weights for each material and printing the cumulative total for the project on each ticket as the day progresses with the final ticket showing the daily total for the project then the department will accept a daily summary without the listing of individual loads .
num certification of quantities .
certify the quantity according to subsection num .
num weighing small quantities .
after obtaining the engineers approval the contractor may certify the quantities of certain materials in lieu of the engineer weighing them .
the materials maximum daily quantities and maximum quantities per project covered by this subsection are as follows .
maximum maximum quantity item daily quantity aggregates num tons num tons per product plantmixed aggregate bases num tons num tons cementtreated bases num tons num tons asphalt prime or tack num tons num tons asphalt millings num tons num tons asphalt mixtures num tons num tons num overloads .
the department will not pay for that portion of any load that exceeds the legal or authorized load limit .
weigh all material on approved scales .
accompany each shipment with a certified weight ticket .
the engineer may direct the contractor to reweigh any shipment if the engineer determines that the stated weight appears to be incorrect .
the engineer may direct the contractor to discontinue weighing by any method and require weighing by other approved means at any time the engineer discovers unsatisfactory results .
num scope of payment .
receive and accept the compensation provided for in the contract as full payment for furnishing all materials and for performing all work under the contract including changes in work materials or plans as provided herein in a complete and acceptable manner for all risk loss damage or expense of whatever character arising out of the nature of the work or the prosecution thereof and for all expenses incurred in consequence of the suspension or discontinuance of the work as specified under the contract .
the departments payment of any estimate does not relieve the contractor of any obligation to make good any defective work or material .
accept the departments payment of the contract unit prices for the various bid items of the contract as full compensation for all labor materials supplies equipment tools and all things of whatever nature required for the complete incorporation of the item into the work the same as though the items were to be read in place .
num compensation for altered quantities .
should the engineer require any alterations in the plans as described in subsections num and num that result in an increase or decrease in the quantities of the work the contractor shall accept the contract unit prices for the actual quantities of work performed as payment in full except as provided for by supplemental agreement and except that should any alteration num directly cause the loss of any work or material that the contractor has already furnished under the terms of the original contract the department will reimburse the contractor for the actual cost of such work or of salvaging such material .
num extra work .
the department will pay for extra work performed according to subsection num at a lump sum price or at unit prices stipulated in a supplemental agreement or in lieu of such agreement the department may require the contractor to perform such work on a force account basis .
num supplemental agreement .
the department may enter into a supplemental agreement with the contractor to perform work which is not included in the original contract or as provided in subsection num .
both the department and the contractor will execute the supplemental agreement .
an executed supplemental agreement immediately becomes a part of the original contract and is subject to all general and special provisions of the original contract .
num force account work .
when the contractor and the department can not agree to either a lump sum price or unit price for extra work the department may direct the contractor to perform such work on a force account basis .
the department will pay for extra work on a force account basis as outlined hereinafter only when all items of work are agreed to in writing before the contractor begins the work .
a labor .
for all labor and for foremen in direct charge of the specific operations the department will pay the contractor num the actual cost of wages paid but at rates not to exceed those for comparable labor currently employed on the project as the engineer determines num an amount equal to the sum of the products of established labor burden percentages and the actual cost of wages .
the amounts determined by the established labor burden percentages constitute full compensation for the cost of workers compensation insurance social security taxes unemployment compensation insurance public liability insurance and any other taxes or insurance which are added to labor costs and num an amount equal to num percent of the actual cost of wages and the other costs identified above .
this amount is full compensation for office overhead and general superintendence .
b materials .
for all materials that the contractor incorporates into the work and the engineer accepts the department will pay the actual cost of such material including transportation charges and sales taxes to which the department will add a sum equal to num percent .
c equipment and tools .
for any machinery or special equipment that the engineer has authorized for use and the contractor has used the department will pay the rental rate stated on the rental company invoice for the actual agreed time and rate that such equipment is required on the work and will add an amount equal to num percent of the rental sum as full compensation for fuel lubricants and filters .
the department will pay for equipment that the contractor is already using on the project and which is not obtained specifically for the force account work based on an hourly rate .
the department will determine the hourly rate by taking the blue book monthly rental rate adjusted for age and geographic region dividing it by num and adding the blue book estimated operational cost .
the department will pay rental rates for equipment required to be on standby at one half the normal rate excluding operational cost and pay for standby time for a maximum of num hours per day and num hours per week .
the engineer will measure the rental of equipment by time in hours of actual working time and the necessary traveling time of the equipment within the limits of the project unless the engineer has ordered special num equipment in connection with force account work in which case the engineer will also include travel time and transportation to the project .
the department will not pay rental rates or percentages for the use of small tools and manual equipment .
d bonds .
the department will pay an amount equal to the product of an established percentage and the summation of the total cost of the foregoing items .
this amount constitutes full compensation for the contractors bond costs .
e records and statements .
compare all records of force account work with the engineer at the end of each day .
prepare all force account records on suitable forms that the engineer will provide for this purpose .
sign and obtain the engineers signature on each form .
retain one copy and provide the original to the engineer at the end of each day .
certify and submit all requests for payment of force account work with signed records of the costs to the engineer no later than one week before the closing date of the current pay estimate period or other designated periods as directed .
furnish satisfactory evidence of the actual rates paid for workers compensation insurance social security tax unemployment insurance public liability insurance and bonds .
furnish statements accompanied and supported by original receipted invoices for all materials used including transportation charges .
when the contractor does not specifically purchase materials for the force account work and uses materials from his stock the contractor shall include in lieu of the original invoices an affidavit certifying that the contractor took such materials from stock that the contractor actually used that quantity in the force account work and that the cost for which the contractor is requesting payment represents his actual cost .
f overhead .
the department will pay for overhead cost associated with administering the work not to exceed num percent when a subcontractor performs the work .
num partial payments .
the department will make partial payments bi weekly as the work progresses .
the department will base the partial payments on estimates that the engineer prepares of the value of the work performed materials placed and for materials delivered for which the department allows payment .
for each partial payment the department will pay num percent of the value computed from the biweekly estimate as due less any previous partial payments .
the engineer will furnish to the contractor a copy of each pay estimate which will show in detail the amount of all quantities that the department will pay .
num materials on hand .
a general .
the department will make partial payments only after the materials are delivered to a site that the department owns or controls and stored in a manner that protects them from theft or damage .
the engineer may require the contractor to submit certified statements showing the actual cost of each material for which the contractor requests partial payment and the quantity of material delivered .
a storage site owned or controlled by the department is a site on land owned by the department or on land for which the department has been granted a temporary easement .
when a temporary easement is necessary for the storage site obtain a lease for the site and grant the department a temporary easement at no charge .
in such cases obtain a lease for the duration of the contract and grant a temporary easement that gives the department full control of the site .
the departments partial payments for materials on hand do not constitute final acceptance of those materials and do not relieve the contractor of any responsibility for the loss or deterioration of the materials due to any cause .
num replace at no expense to the department any materials lost or rejected for noncompliance with the contract as a result of segregation mixing with foreign materials deterioration or other causes .
the department will have full control of the disposition or use of all materials for which the department makes partial payments .
the department will make payments only for such materials which conform to the contract .
the engineer will base payments upon the quantity of materials stored on the closing date of the pay estimate .
the department will not pay for any stored material in excess of that required for the project the maximum quantity the department will pay for will be the design quantity as increased or decreased by approved changes .
the department will not compensate the contractor for additional haul or extra handling charges .
b payments .
the department may make partial payments for nonflammable and nonperishable materials that the contractor will be incorporating into contract items for the project which conform to the contract for which the contractor has documented and certified the delivered quantities and which the contractor has stockpiled and protected as required herein and as required by the engineer .
upon written request from the contractor the department will make partial payments for up to num percent of the contractors documented cost of each stockpiled material when the total documented cost of all the units of the material is more than num or num percent of the projects total bid price .
support the documented costs by copies of receipts showing the contractors payment for the stockpiled material .
provide the receipts to the engineer no later than num days after the department makes payment .
however the department will not allow the total amount for partial payments for the materials for a contract item to be more than num percent of the contract unit cost of the item that the contractor is constructing with the materials .
when the contractor has completely erected and connected all structural steel as specified in the plans the department will make an additional partial payment .
the department will make partial payments for structural steel only after the contractor completes and the engineer approves both the fabrication and shop painting and after the engineer approves the manner of storing the steel .
the department will make this payment in an amount such that the total partial payments through the erection stage are num percent of the contract price for structural steel .
the department will pay for the remaining num percent when the contractor has satisfactorily completed the painting of the structural steel .
num acceptance and final payment .
within num days after the engineer has completed final inspection and acceptance of the work the engineer will compile a final estimate for the contract showing the final quantities of all work performed all retained percentages and all deductions from the final amount for liquidated damages and any other deductions provided for in the contract .
the engineer will submit the final estimate to the contractor for his review .
within num calendar days after receiving the final estimate submit to the engineer a written statement of agreement with the final estimate or a written statement of disagreement with the final estimate .
upon the contractors agreement with the final estimate or when the contractor makes no acceptable statement of disagreement within the num calendar days provided herein the engineer will process the final estimate for payment .
the department will consider the contractors written statement of disagreement with the final estimate acceptable only if it contains an itembyitem list of the items that the contractor does not agree with and the reasons for disagreeing with each listed item .
when the contractor submits an acceptable statement of disagreement with the final estimate the engineer will withhold payment of the final estimate to determine the validity of the contractors disagreements .
after consideration of the contractors statement the engineer may revise the final estimate according to the judgment of the validity of the contractors disagreements .
after the department deducts the total amount of all previous payments liquidated damages and any other appropriate deductions the department will certify the amount of num money due the contractor for payment to the commonwealth as required by law .
the contractors acceptance of payment for the final quantities constitutes as a release to the commonwealth and the department .
when the final release is sent to the contractor shows that he has been overpaid then he has num days to refund the overpayment or submit a written statement of disagreement with the estimate .
failure to make this restitution will subject the contractor to the provisions of subsection num .
the department does not waive any rights to recover the overpayment .
num price adjustments .
due to the fluctuating costs of petroleum products the department will adjust the compensation of specified liquid asphalt items and diesel fuel in contracts when contract quantity thresholds are met .
num liquid asphalt .
the department will compare the kentucky average price index kapi for the month that the contract is let to the index for the month that the contractor places the material on the project to determine the percent change .
when the original contract quantity for asphalt items is equal to or greater than num tons and when the average price of the liquid asphalt products increases or decreases more than num percent the department will adjust the contractors compensation .
the kapi is calculated monthly using the average price per ton at the terminal from the active suppliers of liquid asphalt .
adjustable contract items asphalt curing seal asphalt prime coat asphalt mixture for base all classes asphalt mixture for binder all classes asphalt mixture for surface all classes sand asphalt surface asphalt opengraded surface asphalt seal coat asphalt mixture for leveling and wedging asphalt mixture for scratch course drainage blanket type ii asphalt stone matrix asphalt base stone matrix asphalt surface the department will determine the price adjustment using the following formulas asphalt price adjustment q x anum x pc pl where q tons of material or mixture placed each month .
a percent of material or mixture that is asphalt .
pl kapi for the month that the contract is let .
pc kapi for the month that the contractor places the material or mixture .
the jobmix formula for asphalt base binder and surface mixtures determines a which is the percent of asphalt .
for recycled mixtures the department will determine the adjustment for the new asphalt cement only .
the department will consider materials for prime and seal as num percent asphalt .
num num fuel .
the department will adjust the contractors compensation when the average price of diesel fuel increases or decreases more than num percent and the original contract quantity for the item on which the fuel is consumed is equal to or greater than the threshold quantities listed in the following table .
item threshold quantity roadway excavation num cubic yards num fuelwork embankmentinplace num cubic yards num borrow excavation num cubic yards num lime or cement stabilized roadbed num square yards num dga base or crushed stone base num tons num crushed aggregate num tons num used for embankment stabilization drainage blanket cement treated or untreated num tons num drainage blanket asphalt treated num tons num crushed sandstone base cement treated num tons num asphalt mixtures for pavements or shoulders num tons num num pcc pavement base or shoulders num square yards num num structural category concrete class a aa aaa a modified num cubic yards num num numtotal of all asphalt mixture contract items .
numtotal of all jpc pavement jpc shoulder and pcc base contract items .
numtotal of all concrete items of the classes listed within the structural concrete category .
the department will determine the price adjustment using the following formulas fuel price adjustment q x f x pc pl where q quantity for applicable item placed or performed that month .
f the fuel to work unit ratio for each applicable item .
pl average reseller price of diesel fuel excluding taxes discounts and superfund line items in the kentucky region for the month that the contract is let .
pc average reseller price of diesel fuel excluding taxes discounts and superfund line items in the kentucky region for the month that the contractor uses the fuel on the project .
num payments and deductions .
when thresholds are met the department will adjust the contractors compensation for each eligible pay item paid or deducted monthly .
if later price decreases indicate that the department made an overpayment the department will withhold the overpayment from succeeding pay estimates on the project or the contractor shall immediately refund the over payment to the department .
when the contractor places materials during any month after the month that the contract time including all approved time extensions expires the department will use the average price for the month that the contractor places the material or the average price num for the last month of the contract time whichever is least .
the department will not grant a time extension for any overrun in the contract amount due to payments made according to this section .
the department will not make any additional compensation due to adjustments made according to this section .
the department will adjust the contractors compensation on the following months pay estimate and on the final pay estimate .
the department will make the final adjustment of the contractors compensation on the final estimate for the project .
num section num mobilization and demobilization num mobilization .
this subsection describes the requirements for mobilization when mobilization is included in the bid proposal as a separate bid item .
perform all preparatory work and operations necessary to move personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the project site to establish offices buildings and other facilities that are necessary for performing the work and to accomplish all other work or operations that must be performed including costs that must be incurred to begin work on the project .
do not bid an amount for mobilization that exceeds num percent of the sum of the total amounts bid for all items in the bid proposal excluding mobilization demobilization and contingent amounts established for adjustments and incentives .
the department will automatically adjust any bid proposals that are in excess of this amount down to num percent to compare bid proposals and award the contract .
the department will award a contract for the actual amount bid when the amount bid for mobilization is less than num percent or the department will award the contract for the adjusted bid amount of num percent when the amount bid for mobilization is greater than num percent .
if any errors in unit bid prices for other contract items in a contractors bid proposal are discovered after bid opening and such errors reduce the total amount bid for all other items excluding mobilization demobilization and contingent amounts established for adjustments and incentives so that the percent bid for mobilization is larger than num percent the department will adjust the amount bid for mobilization to num percent of the sum of the corrected total bid amounts .
num demobilization .
this subsection describes the requirements for demobilization when demobilization is included in the bid proposal as a separate bid item .
perform all work and operations necessary to accomplish final cleaningup as specified in subsection num to move personnel equipment supplies and incidentals from the project site to remove all offices buildings and other facilities that were necessary for performing the work and to accomplish all other work that must be performed including costs that must be incurred after acceptable completion of construction operations on the project .
bid an amount for demobilization that is a minimum of num or num percent of the sum of the total amounts bid for all other items in the bid proposal excluding mobilization demobilization and contingent amounts established for adjustments and incentives .
the department will automatically adjust any bid proposal that is less than this amount up to num or num percent to compare bid proposals and award the contract .
the department will award a contract for the actual amount bid when the amount bid for demobilization exceeds num percent or the department will award the contract for the adjusted bid amount when the amount bid for demobilization is less than the minimum of num or less than num percent of the sum of the total amounts bid for all other items in the bid proposal excluding mobilization demobilization and contingent amounts established for adjustments and incentives .
num measurement .
the department will measure all work performed as part of mobilization as a lump sum when mobilization is included in the bid proposal as a separate bid item .
the department will measure all work performed as part of demobilization as a lump sum when demobilization is included in the bid proposal as a separate bid item .
num payment .
the department will pay for the quantities at the contract unit price as follows .
when mobilization is included in the bid proposal as a separate bid item the department will make partial payments for mobilization in num equal or approximately equal payments .
the department will make the first payment on the first pay estimate on which num the contractors total earned value on contract items other than mobilization exceeds num .
the department will make the second payment on the first pay estimate on which the contractor has earned num percent or more of the total contract amount for contract items other than mobilization .
the department will make both payments simultaneously when these requirements are met at the same time .
when mobilization is not included in the bid proposal as a separate bid item then the department will consider all costs associated with mobilization incidental to the contract and will make no separate payment for mobilization .
when demobilization is included in the bid proposal as a separate bid item the department will pay for demobilization according to the following schedule num num percent upon formal acceptance of the project num num percent when the final estimate is submitted to the district office num num percent when the final estimate is paid the department will withhold an amount equal to num for demobilization regardless of the schedule listed above .
the num withheld for demobilization will be paid when the final estimate is paid .
upon request num percent of demobilization will be paid num calendar days after formal acceptance of the project except for num withheld to be paid with the final estimate .
when demobilization is not included in the bid proposal as a separate bid item then the department will consider all costs associated with demobilization incidental to the contract and will make no separate payment for demobilization .
when mobilization and demobilization are included in the bid proposal as separate bid items the department will make payment under code pay item num mobilization lump sum pay unit num demobilization lump sum num section num value engineering change proposal num description .
a value engineering change proposal vecp is a cost reduction plan that is initiated developed and submitted by the contractor to the department for modifying the plans specifications or other contract requirements .
these provisions do not apply to a proposal unless it is identified as a vecp when it is submitted .
a vecp requires changes in the contract that result in savings to the department without impairing essential functions and characteristics of the facility while maintaining and meeting all design and cabinet policies environmental requirements and project commitments .
essential functions and characteristics include but are not limited to service life reliability economy of operation ease of maintenance standardized features safety satisfaction of customer needs desired ability and special design requirements .
vecps proposing a total savings of less than num twentyfive thousand dollars will normally not be considered unless there are additional nonmonetary savings to the department .
the department reserves the right not to consider any vecp .
num conceptual value engineering change proposal cvecp .
the contractor may submit for review a cvecp provided that it contains enough information to clearly define the work involved and the benefits to be realized .
written notification by the department that the review has been completed and that the cvecp appears favorable merely indicates that the engineering and plan development may continue for submittal of the formal vecp and is not authorization for any construction work to begin .
should the contractor continue with the development of the formal vecp the department may reject the vecp if the expected benefits are not realized once the formal proposal is complete .
the approval of the cvecp and the departments decision to reject the formal vecp that is submitted shall be final and will not be subject to the provisions of subsection num .
num value engineering change proposal vecp num documentation .
vecps will be processed in the same manner as prescribed for any other alteration of the contract requiring a supplemental agreement .
as a minimum the following information shall be submitted by the contractor with each vecp num a detailed description of the difference between the existing contract requirements and the proposed changes and the comparative advantages and disadvantages of each .
num a complete set of plans and construction details when necessary showing proposed revisions to the original contract .
num a detailed cost estimate for performing the work under the existing contract and under the proposed change .
include pay items pay units quantities and unit prices .
include in the unit prices all costs for labor materials supplies equipment tools and all incidentals required for the complete incorporation of the option into the work .
present the net savings as the difference between the costs of performing the work according to the existing contract and the costs of performing the work according to the proposed changes .
num a statement of the deadline for adopting the vecp in order to obtain the maximum cost reduction during the remainder of the contract noting any effect on the completion date or any specified milestone dates and any other schedule impacts .
num a prediction of any effects the proposed changes would have on department costs other than construction such as maintenance and operating costs and life cycle costs .
num num a statement of the effect the proposal would have on the time for completion of the contract .
num submission and review .
vecps submitted by the contractor will be processed as expeditiously as possible however the department will not be liable for any delay in acting upon proposals submitted .
the contractor may withdraw wholly or in part any vecp not accepted by the department within the time specified in subsection num num .
the department will determine the acceptability of a vecp and the estimated net cost savings to be realized from adoption of all or any part of the proposal .
within num calendar days after receipt of the required minimum information as specified in subsection num the department will review and provide notification of whether the vecp is accepted or rejected .
the department may reject a vecp for the following criteria inconsistent with established department policies inconsistent with project design policies or criteria corrects a contract omission or plan error the project is a designbuild project .
the contractor must understand the following the contractor has no claim to additional costs or delays including development costs loss of anticipated profits or increased material or labor costs if the vecp is rejected .
the department has sole authority in determining the acceptance of any vecp .
the department reserves the right to reject all unacceptable work resulting from an approved vecp and can require that rejected work be removed and reconstructed under the original contract .
the proposal will be disqualified if requests for additional information are not immediately met .
num acceptance .
the decision of the department to accept or reject a vecp shall be final and will not be subject to the provisions of subsection num .
the department reserves the right not to consider any vecp .
the director of construction will make the decision on the acceptance of the vecp .
an informal meeting with the director of construction may be requested .
num notification .
the contractor will be notified in writing of the departments decision to accept or reject each vecp submitted under these provisions .
if a proposal is accepted in whole or in part such acceptance will be by letter from the director of construction .
if the approval is conditional the letter will note those conditions .
if a vecp is accepted the department will execute a supplemental agreement that incorporates the necessary contract modifications .
the department reserves the right to include in the supplemental agreement any conditions it deems appropriate for consideration approval and implementation of the vecp .
perform all work according to the terms of the existing contract until the department executes a supplemental agreement .
the departments approval of a vecp voids any restrictions that the contractor had imposed on the use or disclosure of the information that the contractor included in the vecp and the department then has the right to use duplicate and disclose in whole or in part any data necessary to implement any portion of the proposal on this project and all other department projects .
num contract time .
the department will adjust the contract completion time for any time savings realized by implementing a vecp .
the department may not provide any incentive pay for early completion days resulting from time savings related to an approved vecp .
the department will grant additional contract time when specified in the supplemental agreement .
num num measurement .
the department will measure the quantities for all revised work specified in the supplemental agreement according to section num .
the department will measure the net savings in cost by subtracting the estimated construction costs of the proposed and accepted option from the estimated construction costs in the original contract .
third party engineering and development costs incurred by the contractor and third party review costs incurred by the department when substantiated by invoice shall be subtracted from the computed net savings of the vecp .
num payment .
the department will make payment directly for all completed and accepted revised work specified in the change order or supplemental agreement according to subsection num .
the department will make payment for num percent of the net savings in cost for the approved vecp .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
numnx value engineering dollar item code description unit num section num maintenance and control of traffic during construction num description .
maintain control and protect vehicular bicycle and pedestrian traffic adjacent to and within the construction area .
num materials and equipment .
provide certification that all work zone category i ii and iii devices are compliant with nchrp num or mash num .
num channelization devices .
a traffic cones drums barricades tubular markers vertical panels and object markers .
conform to the standard drawings and the mutcd .
regardless of the roadway type and time of day use only num inch or larger cones and tubular markers .
b temporary concrete barrier .
conform to subsection num .
num retroreflective material .
conform to section num .
num lighting devices .
conform to the mutcd .
num signs .
a warning signs .
conform to section num the standard drawings and the mutcd .
use fluorescent orange work zone sign sheeting from the departments list of approved materials .
b low shoulder signs .
conform to section num the standard drawings and the mutcd .
use fluorescent orange work zone sign sheeting from the departments list of approved materials .
c guide signs .
conform to section num the standard drawings and the mutcd .
use type iii or type iv sheeting from the departments list of approved materials .
d portable changeable message signs .
conform to the requirements the contract specifies .
e arrow panels .
conform to the standard drawings and the mutcd .
mount on trafficworthy carriages that meet all applicable safety standards .
use either diesel powered electric or solar powered .
num temporary pavement markings .
a delineators .
conform to section num type a or b .
b delineator posts .
conform to section num .
c temporary striping .
num paint application equipment .
conform to subsection num .
num paint .
conform to section num .
num drop on glass beads .
conform to section num .
num tape .
conform to section num using only new tape .
d temporary raised pavement markers type iva .
select from the departments list of approved materials .
num asphalt surfacing materials .
conform to materials requirements in division num for the mixture the contract specifies .
num asphalt base materials .
conform to materials requirements in divisions num and num for the bases the contract specifies .
num num water for dust control .
conform to section num .
num crash cushions .
conform to the requirements the contract specifies .
num temporary traffic signals .
conform to the mutcd .
furnish signals with lenses having a diameter of num inches .
furnish controllers having timing intervals and cycle lengths that are changeable without special tools and the following a two phase .
num an adjustable cycle length from num seconds to num seconds in maximum num second increments .
num adjustable signal split intervals for two phases .
num adjustable yellow clearance intervals for two phases to include the range from num seconds to num seconds .
num adjustable allred clearance intervals for two phases to include the range from num seconds to num seconds .
num capability of adjusting the above interval functions by changing keys or pins or by keyboard entry of the desired timing .
num capability of adjusting the cycle length by changing a gear or by keyboard entry of the desired cycle length .
b multiple phase .
num capability of handling vehicular and pedestrian traffic .
num an adjustable cycle length from num to num seconds in one second increments .
num an adjustable signal split interval for num phases in a standard dualring configuration .
num an adjustable yellow clearance interval for all phases in the range of num to num seconds .
num an adjustable allred clearance interval in the range of num to num seconds .
num capability of implementing a minimum of three separate timing plans .
num capability of actuated operation .
num truck mounted attenuator tma .
use only nchrp num tlnum or mash num compliant devices .
num construction .
num general traffic control .
maintain the portion of the project used by public traffic and adequately accommodate through and local traffic .
the departments intent is for the traffic control plan and devices to provide the public a safe and manageable roadway .
in the event the contractor feels additional measures are necessary to protect the work these shall be at the contractors expense unless they are determined to be an omission of the contract and added by supplemental agreement .
the department will be responsible for normal routine maintenance according to subsection num .
furnish erect and maintain all traffic control devices including signs signals channelization devices temporary pavement markings pilot cars and other items necessary to maintain traffic according to the standard drawings mutcd plans tcp and the atssa quality standard for work zone traffic control devices manual throughout the duration of the project .
all flaggers shall be trained in current mutcd flagging procedures .
proof of training must be available for review at the departments request .
flagging credentials must be current within the last num years .
the department will specify in the contract either to close all or a portion of the section of highway under construction to through traffic or to maintain traffic through the num project .
the department will outline specific requirements to properly maintain and control traffic in a traffic control plan tcp .
the tcp will include the traffic control scheme and phasing .
the department will consider a deviation from the tcp .
submit the proposed changes in the tcp to the engineer in writing .
if the department approves the alternate tcp the engineer will remit approval to the contractor in writing .
make provisions for the timely passage of an emergency vehicle through the work zone .
when maintaining traffic over a section of highway or a bridge provide facilities for the safe movement of traffic at all times .
notify the engineer before erecting traffic control devices changing the location of devices in place or beginning a traffic operation of any kind except in case of an emergency .
in the case of an emergency the engineer may direct immediate procurement of safety and warning devices as necessary to safeguard traffic .
notify the engineer in writing a minimum of one week in advance when it is necessary for the department to do work such as detour signing outside the limits of the project .
place all traffic control devices starting and proceeding in the direction of the flow of traffic .
remove traffic control devices starting and proceeding in the direction opposite to the flow of traffic .
take responsibility for all damage caused by the failure of any traffic control device or person protecting it .
whenever evidence of damage is found before the job is called complete the engineer may order immediate removal and replacement of the damaged portion of the work .
remove all traffic control devices when they are not needed for the project .
take ownership of the devices unless the contract specifies otherwise .
do not mix traffic control devices cones barrels grabber cones etc .
within the same project unless approved by the engineer .
use barrels or type ii barricades for operations lasting more than three num days and for nighttime operations .
a approach roads and intersections .
furnish install and maintain traffic control devices required on approach roads and all intersecting roadways .
install these devices a minimum of num feet from the construction limits of the project .
ensure the condition of all traffic control devices conform to the atssa quality standard for work zone traffic control devices manual throughout the duration of the project .
traffic control devices include channelization devices signs and detour signs temporary pavement markings and other items necessary to maintain and control traffic in the construction zone .
b lighting devices .
ensure lighting devices are visible every night between sunset and sunrise .
c route markers .
maintain department owned route markers and signs that will remain within the limits of construction .
d pavement openings .
barricade all pavement openings and other hazards .
provide them with warning signs that are visible at night .
e low shoulder signing .
provide these signs where the shoulders are low or where traffic diverts through channels other than the normal lanes .
provide signs for all surfacing resurfacing or widening projects that require maintenance of traffic adjacent to shoulder construction .
f signs .
completely cover existing permanent and temporary signs which do not properly apply to the current traffic phasing and maintain the covering until the signs are applicable or are removed .
use only porous cloth or geotextile fabric for sign covers .
the department will not consider tipping over portable signs or turning sign faces num degrees as acceptable methods .
with the engineer review all signing before traffic uses any lane closures crossovers diversions or detours .
do not begin work until the engineer has approved all signing .
maintain all signs in good condition including cleaning or renewing the surfaces as necessary to provide clear visibility and high retroreflectivity at all times .
num place temporary signing in locations that do not obstruct the visibility of existing signs .
all signs are to be single layered .
overlay placards will not be permitted .
unless the engineer directs otherwise post mount all signs intended to remain in place for more than num days .
g arrow panels .
have available one portable flashing arrow in reserve .
place the reserve arrow in operation if one is damaged or if there is mechanical or electrical failure .
h temporary traffic signals .
construct temporary traffic signals according to the mutcd chapter numd and as the contract specifies .
submit proposed layouts for temporary signal head placement in writing to the engineer for written approval .
use a central controller using a hard wire or radio connection to coordinate the signal indications at all approaches of the intersection .
mount the signal indications according to one of the following num one signal indication on each side of the highway on each approach num two signal indications suspended on a span wire over the highway on each approach or num one signal indication mounted on a mast arm or span wire above the highway with a second signal indication mounted on the right side of each approach .
i tmas .
mount the attenuator on a support vehicle that is in close conformity to the one it was tested with for nchrp compliance .
prevent shifting during impact .
furnish installation details to the engineer before installing the tma on the project .
num long term lane closure .
a long term lane closure is defined as a lane closure that remains for more than num days and is not taken down at the end of each days work .
num equipment and traffic control devices not in use .
when construction equipment andor traffic control devices are not in use place them outside the clear zone beyond the ditch line behind guardrail or off existing rightofway .
the engineer will approve these locations if they are within the existing rightofway .
the engineer will designate specific areas within the rightofway where personal vehicles may park .
move vehicles and construction equipment with the flow of traffic not against the normal traffic flow .
when entering and leaving the work zone do not interfere with or cause hazard to traffic flow .
num temporary facilities or crossings .
provide and maintain temporary facilities including approaches and crossings in a safe condition .
provide and maintain intersections with roads streets trails and entrances to businesses parking lots residences and farms .
construct temporary approaches and bridges according to the contract including all grading and necessary drainage .
construct or reconstruct diversions bypass detours detours and median crossovers including associated earthwork for the handling of traffic across new pavements as specified in the standard drawings in the plans in the tcp or elsewhere in the contract .
the department will be responsible for snow removal on these facilities .
obtain the engineers approval for temporary facilities constructed solely to accommodate construction operations .
when approved construct and maintain such temporary facilities including furnishing and applying surfacing and dust control materials .
when temporary facilities are no longer needed remove facilities and restore the area .
pave all temporary roadways intended for public traffic with asphaltic materials as the contract specifies or as the engineer directs .
num num roadways closed to through traffic .
obtain the departments permission before closing a roadway or limiting public traffic on the roadway .
when a section of highway closes to through traffic provide and maintain satisfactory temporary facilities for the maintenance of local traffic .
provide and maintain satisfactory crossings for all cross roads and cross streets kept open to traffic .
when the department closes the road under construction to through traffic the department will relieve the contractor of the responsibility for maintaining the road and marking suitable detours for through traffic .
num shoulder edge dropoffs .
conform to the requirements the contract specifies .
num temporary barrier walls .
construct temporary barrier walls according to subsection num .
num temporary crash cushions .
construct temporary crash cushions as the contract specifies .
num blasting .
during blasting operations halt traffic no more than the time the contract specifies to allow the execution of the shot and for removal of rock fragments and debris .
the contract will also specify hours when blasting is not allowed .
when using explosive charges halt all traffic on either side of the impending explosion .
have suitable equipment at the site for removing blasted material debris and for cleaning the existing pavement and shoulder area .
after all blasts inspect the pavement for debris and damage that may be a hazard to traffic .
clear debris before allowing traffic to proceed on the affected section .
num removal of permanent pavement markings .
remove all permanent markings and raised pavement markers that do not conform to the traffic operation in use .
remove striping according to section num .
remove raised pavement markers according to subsection num .
when the markers casting will conform to the final marking scheme but does not conform to the current traffic operation the department may allow lens removal in place of removing the entire marker .
additionally when weather would prohibit patching for marker removal within num hours the department may allow lens removal until such time weather permits patching .
num temporary pavement markings .
a placement and removal of temporary raised pavement markers .
place and remove temporary raised pavement markers when the contract specifies .
install temporary pavement markers according to the manufacturers recommendations .
replace missing or damaged temporary markers within num calendar days .
after completion of the work remove the markers from the job site including the primer and adhesive .
take ownership of the temporary markers at the end of the project .
b placement and removal of temporary striping .
place temporary striping on new construction resurfacing pavement restoration pavement rehabilitation and other projects that have existing pavement markings as the contract specifies .
on interstates and parkways and other roadways approved by the state highway engineer install pavement striping that is num inches in width .
on other routes install pavement striping that is num inches in width .
ensure that all lines have clean edges with a width tolerance of plus num inch .
num except on new construction or where markings do not exist prepare and keep a written record of the existing pavement markings locations and furnish a copy to the engineer before removing or obliterating the markings .
apply temporary striping when any course of a new pavement is to be driven over by the public including patching milling leveling and wedging courses except when existing centerline markings are plainly visible and not obscured .
install the pavement marking material for centerlines and lane lines every day before sunset that day .
the department will defer installation of edgeline markings until all shoulder paving is complete except on interstate and parkway roads or when the contract specifies otherwise .
when rain or other unavoidable occurrences prevent marking before sunset mark the pavement as soon as conditions permit .
locate no passing zones as the engineer directs .
num removable striping .
use removable striping tape when different phases of construction will require the relocation of striping to different positions on the same pavement .
relocate lane lines edgelines and other pavement markings as the standard drawings and the contract specify .
do not use removable material as a permanent marking unless the engineer directs .
num nonremovable striping material .
use either tape or paint where the striping is to be covered by subsequent paving courses and for temporary paved facilities which will be removed before completing the project .
apply paint according to section num .
maintain the following minimum retroreflectivity requirements at all times white num mcdluxsquare meter yellow num mcdluxsquare meter additionally when temporary striping that is to remain in use for more than num days provide striping with the following minimum initial retroreflectivity readings white num mcdluxsquare meter yellow num mcdluxsquare meter the engineer may visually accept the markings intended for less than num days use but may obtain retroreflectivity readings at any time conformance to the minimum retroreflectivity readings are in doubt .
when striping that is to remain in use for more than num days the department will obtain retroreflectivity readings within five days of application of temporary striping using an approved num meter geometry handheld or mobile retroreflectometer .
the department will determine acceptance of the temporary striping in accordance with kmnum or kmnum as applicable .
when the department determines the striping is not acceptable complete corrective work within num hours .
maintain all markings throughout the duration of the project .
replace missing or damaged stripes or tape within num days .
remove all markings placed in error or markings that do not conform to the traffic scheme in use .
num project traffic coordinator ptc .
designate an employee to be the project ptc .
ensure that the ptc inspects the project traffic control scheme at a minimum of once per shift reports all incidents within the work zone to the engineer and performs all other traffic control duties the contract specifies .
furnish the name and telephone number of the ptc where he can be reached at all times .
furnish this information to the engineer .
the required qualifications of the ptc are dependent on the classification of the project .
consider the project unclassified unless it is designated as significant in the proposal .
num a for significant projects .
designate a qualified work zone traffic control supervisor wztcs as the ptc .
ensure the ptc is present on site when setting up taking down or affecting the traffic control scheme or phasing and as required by the traffic control plan .
the department may allow a work zone traffic control technician wztct to conduct traffic control reviews for maintenance purposes when under the supervision of the wztcs .
b for unclassified projects .
designate a qualified wztcs or wztct as the ptc .
when a wztct serves at the ptc the contractor must designate the wztcs who will act as their supervisor and be available upon request when needed .
the ptc is required to be present on site when setting up taking down or affecting the traffic control scheme or phasing and as required by the traffic control plan .
after october num num the department will require the ptc to have successfully completed the applicable qualification courses .
personnel that have not successfully completed the applicable courses by that date will not be considered qualified .
prior to october num num conform to subsection num a and ensure the designated ptc has sufficient skill and experience to properly perform the task .
num existing signalized intersections .
use traffic signals for the control of traffic through presently signalized intersections .
use flaggers to expedite the flow of traffic if directed by the engineer or as specified in the contract .
cover turn or take down all signal heads that are not in use .
clearly indicate the signals are not in operation .
install new signal conductors with sufficient slack in the cable to allow for a lateral movement of the signal indication of at least num feet in either direction from the specified location .
during construction the department will allow the traffic signal controller to operate in the pretimed mode using the recall ability of the signal controller .
the department will provide assistance in adjusting signal controller timing when requested .
submit a request for assistance in writing to the engineer .
cover and leave in place left turn signals when left turn lanes are used for through and left turning traffic .
shift through traffic signals to the left to a position that will provide visible signal indications for through and left turning traffic .
when the signals are relocated locate them within or on the projected lane lines for each lane of traffic as directed by the engineer .
submit proposed layouts for temporary signal head placement in writing to the engineer for written approval .
after roadway work within the intersection is completed adjust traffic signal indications back to their permanent locations as specified in the contract .
remove excess lengths of signal conductors and permanently connect the signals .
num department ordered opening before completion .
when any section of roadway is in an acceptable condition and the commissioner determines that the public convenience demands it the engineer shall direct the roadway to open to public traffic .
correct construction deficiencies found during interim project inspections and final inspection .
after the opened section of roadway is inspected and accepted the department will take responsibility for further expenditures for that accepted section .
num noncompliance of maintain and control of traffic .
it is the contractors responsibility to conform to the traffic control requirements in the tcp proposal plan sheets specifications and the manual on uniform traffic control devices .
unless specified elsewhere in the contract a penalty will be assessed in the event of noncompliance with maintain and control of traffic requirements .
these penalties will be assessed when the contractor fails to correct a situation or condition of noncompliance with the contract traffic control requirements after being notified by the engineer .
the calculation of accrued penalties for noncompliance will be based upon the datetime of notification by the engineer .
the amount of the penalty assessed for noncompliance will be determined based num upon the work zone duration as defined by the mutcd and will be the greatest of the different calculation methods indicated below a longterm stationary work that occupies a location more than num days .
correct the noncompliant issue within num hours from initial notification by the engineer .
if the issue is not corrected within num hours from the initial notification a penalty for noncompliance will be assessed on a daily basis beginning from the initial notification of noncompliance .
the contractor will be assessed a num daily penalty or the amount equal to the contract liquidated damages in section num whichever of the num is greater .
the penalty for non compliance will escalate as follows for continued noncompliance after the initial notification .
num days after notification num daily penalty or num times the contract liquidated damages daily charge rate in section num whichever is greater .
num days after notification num daily penalty or double the contract liquidated damages daily charge rate in section num whichever is greater .
b intermediateterm stationary work that occupies a location more than one daylight period up to num days or nighttime work lasting more than num hour .
correct the noncompliant issue within num hours from initial notification by the engineer .
if the issue is not corrected within num hours from notification a penalty for noncompliance will be assessed on an hourly basis beginning from the initial notification of noncompliance .
the penalty for noncompliance will be assessed at num per hour .
c shortterm stationary is daytime work that occupies a location for more than num hour within a single daylight period .
correct the noncompliant issue within num hour from initial notification by the engineer .
if the issue is not corrected within num hour from notification a penalty for noncompliance will be assessed on an hourly basis beginning from the initial notification of noncompliance .
the penalty for noncompliance will be assessed at num per hour .
if the contractor remains in violation of the maintain and control of traffic requirements or if the department determines it to be in the publics interest work will be suspended in accordance with section num until the deficiencies are corrected .
the department reserves the right to correct deficiencies by any means available and charge the contractor for labor equipment and material costs incurred in emergency situations .
num roadway condition .
any dirt debris dust or other material which may inhibit the driving conditions of the traveling public must be addressed and cleaned at the contractors expense .
num measurement .
num maintain and control traffic .
the department will measure the quantity by the lump sum .
the department will not measure traffic control devices such num as drums traffic cones barricades used for channelization purposes delineators object markers lane closures not left in place more than num days and nights temporary facilities constructed solely for construction traffic and vertical panels and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure the flaggers traffic control coordinator removal of pavement striping or removal of pavement markings and will consider these items incidental to this item of work .
num temporary signs .
the department will measure the quantity in square feet .
the department will measure each installation and reinstallation of post mounted signs .
signs posted by methods other than post mounting will be measured only at their first installation .
the department will not measure sign maintenance or subsequent relocation of nonpost mounted signs and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will measure signs for payment when they are required by the mutcd standard drawings tcp the contract or the engineer .
additional signs will be considered incidental to this item of work .
the department will measure replacement units for payment only when the engineer determines replacement is required resulting from normal deterioration of the signs due to environmental conditions .
num tubular markers .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit including replacement unit .
the department will not measure installation or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num barricades .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit not used for channelization purposes and not specified in the standard drawings .
the department will not measure installation maintenance or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num arrow panels .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
the department will not measure the reserved flashing arrows for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure installation maintenance or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num portable changeable message sign .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
the department will not measure installation maintenance or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num temporary pavement striping .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
the department will measure the quantity for payment only once per course .
the department will not measure corrective work maintenance of markings or the removal of striping tape for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure striping for payment when it fails to meet retroreflectivity requirements and is not corrected prior to its end of use .
num temporary pavement marker type iva .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit including replacement unit .
the department will not measure installation maintenance or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num temporary relocation of signal heads .
the department will measure the quantity of temporary relocation of existing signal heads by each individual unit .
the department will not measure temporary relocation of new signal heads for payment and will consider it incidental to the traffic signal bid items .
num temporary traffic signalstwo phase .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit not including signals that are to become permanent .
num the department considers a unit to include all components necessary to signalize the intersection .
the department will not measure installation maintenance timing adjustment electrical service or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num temporary traffic signalsmultiphase the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit not including signals that are to become permanent .
the department considers a unit to include all components necessary to signalize the intersection .
the department will not measure installation maintenance timing adjustment electrical service or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num temporary crash cushions .
the department will measure the quantity according to the contract .
the department will not measure installation maintenance or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num truck mounted attenuator tma .
when listed as a bid item the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num pavement striping removal .
the department will measure the quantity of department authorized pavement striping and marking removal by the unit listed in the contract .
the department will not measure the unauthorized removal of pavement striping or markings for payment .
when not listed as a bid item the department will consider removing pavement striping and markings incidental to maintain and control traffic .
the department will not measure any corrective work required due to the removal process for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num temporary concrete barrier .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
the department will not measure installation maintenance or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num water for dust control .
when listed as a bid item the department will measure the quantity in gallons .
num lane closures .
the department will measure the quantity of long term lane closures by each individual unit installed and accepted .
the department will not measure maintenance or removal of each lane closure and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure traffic control devices such as cones barrels and barricades used for delineation in conjunction with the lane closure and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will measure signs striping barrier wall and other traffic control devices listed as bid items in the contract separately for payment .
the department will not measure lane closures other than long term lane closures for payment and will consider them incidental to maintain and control traffic .
num diversions bypass detours .
the department will measure the quantity by lump sum completed accepted and then removed .
the department will not measure grade and drain work for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
the department will measure base course and surface course items for payment according the applicable sections of divisions num and num .
the department will not measure installation maintenance or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num temporary median crossovers .
the department will measure the quantity by lump sum completed accepted and then removed .
the department will not measure grade and drain work for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of num work .
the department will measure base course and surface course items for payment according the applicable sections of divisions num and num .
the department will not measure installation maintenance or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num temporary approaches .
the department will measure the quantity under the appropriate sections for grade drain and surface .
the department will not measure installation maintenance or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
if a temporary approach is requested which would break interstate access control or rightofway fence then fhwa approval is required .
interstate access breaks or breaks in rightofway fence for contractor construction convenience is strongly discouraged .
in the event that a request is made a professionally engineered break and approach are required .
submit a request to the engineer for coordination with the fhwa at least two weeks prior to anticipated use .
num temporary bridges .
when listed as a bid item the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit completed accepted and then removed .
otherwise the department will consider temporary bridges incidental to diversions temporary median crossovers or to grade and drain work for temporary approaches .
the department will not measure installation maintenance or removal for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num law enforcement officer .
when stipulated by contract provide off duty law enforcement to include at least one officer properly trained in work zone traffic control and having the authority to enforce regulations within the work zone per vehicle with each vehicle having law enforcement markings and a top mounted light bar .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num maintain and control trafficnum lump sum pay unit num temporary signs square foot num tubular markers each num num num barricades type each num arrow panel each num portable changeable message sign each num pavement striping temporary removable num tape size and color linear foot num pavement striping temporary paint size linear foot num pavement striping permanent paint size linear foot num temporary pavement marker type iva direction color temporary each num temporary relocation of signal heads each num temporary signal two phase each num temporary signal multiphase each temporary crash cushions see subsection num num pavement striping removal size linear foot temporary concrete barrier see subsection num num water m gallon num lane closures each num diversions bypass detours lump sum num crossovers lump sum temporary approaches see applicable sections temporary bridges each num truck mounted attenuator each numed law enforcement officer hour num num the department will make partial payments for maintain and control traffic according to subsection num .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num quality assurance num general .
take responsibility for the quality of construction and materials incorporated into the work .
perform all quality control inspection sampling and testing .
the department may use the results of the contractors inspection sampling and testing as a part of its acceptance procedures provided the contractor maintains a department approved quality control plan qcp and the results are verified by the departments tests .
num coordination meeting .
meet with the engineer either as part of the preconstruction conference or as a separate meeting before the start of construction and discuss the qcp .
during the meeting a mutual agreement of the plan details will be developed including the forms for recording the operations control activities testing administration and the interrelationship of the qcp .
minutes of the coordination meeting shall be prepared by the qcp manager signed by the contractor and the engineer and filed separately as part of the qcp .
subsequent conferences may be called by the contractor or the engineer to reconfirm mutual agreement and address deficiencies in the qcp or procedures which may require corrective action by the contractor .
nothing in this section shall be construed to override the preconstruction conference or the preconstruction conference minutes .
do not start work without an approved qcp .
num quality control qc .
provide and maintain a quality control system that will assure all materials and products submitted to the department for acceptance will conform to the contract requirements whether manufactured or processed by the contractor or procured from producers subcontractors or vendors .
perform the inspections and tests required to substantiate product conformance to the contract .
document all quality control inspections and tests and provide a copy to the engineer .
maintain adequate records of all inspections and tests .
include in the records the nature number and type of deficiencies found the quantities rejected and the nature of corrective action taken .
perform equipment calibrations and maintain qualified personnel as the contract requires to ensure conformance to contract requirements .
procedures will be subject to department approval .
develop furnish execute and maintain a qcp including but not limited to inspecting testing and ensuring conformance to the contract in order to establish an effective level of quality control .
prosecuting the qcp shall include all onsite materials testing and monitoring of the producers testing such as hotmix asphalt plant testing aggregate plant testing and concrete plant testing .
include the following a qcp submittal .
submit the qcp to the engineer before beginning work .
after beginning work under the approved qcp continuously prosecute the work in accordance with this qcp .
obtain approval from the engineer before implementing any changes to the qcp .
b documentation .
maintain all records that provide factual evidence that quality control activities and test have been performed .
include in these records the work of subcontractors and suppliers .
forms for these records shall be as approved by the department .
c personnel .
after approval of the qcp by the engineer maintain the qcp staff at approved plan levels at all times until the demobilization of the contractor forces upon project completion .
the primary duty of the qcp personnel on the project is implementing the qcp .
provide a qcp organization consisting of a qcp manager and sufficient number of qualified personnel to ensure contract compliance .
num num quality acceptance qa .
the department will be responsible for determining the acceptability of the material produced .
the quality acceptance team qat will check the validity of the qcp through an appropriate review of documentation and random quality acceptance testing .
the qat will conduct random qa inspections for the duration of the contract inspect the full spectrum of ongoing construction activities review documentation compare inspections and testing results with the qcp results and prepare a written report of the results .
testing by the qat will be performed at num percent of the rate specified in the field sampling manual .
testing may be increased at the discretion of the engineer .
testing will be performed at randomly selected locations without prior notification of the contractor .
when the qat testing results show work to be outside of specification requirements or not in agreement with the qcp results the department may shut down that portion of the work or the entire project until the cause of the failure or discrepancy is determined and procedures are corrected .
num acceptance .
the department will make final acceptance according to subsection num .
num claims .
the department will handle claims according to subsection num .
num dispute resolution procedures .
as part of quality controlquality acceptance qcqa for pay items and materials both the department and the contractor will perform inspections and tests .
the contractor will perform the quality control tests and the department will perform verification tests of the contractors quality control test results at a reduced frequency .
the department will base the pay or material acceptance on the contractors quality control test results provided the test results are verified by the department .
for a particular pay item or material the appropriate specification will provide testing frequencies and the departments verification procedures .
a avoidance of disputes .
make every effort to avoid disputes .
use partnering concepts to aid in preventing or resolving any dispute .
monitor as follows to ensure that all data are reliable unbiased and truly representative of the product quality num ensure personnel and laboratory facilities meet the specified certification requirements .
num ensure all samples are obtained according to km num sampling materials by random number sampling .
num ensure communication of test results between parties occurs within the specified time limits .
num discuss all questions regarding the specifications kms or sampling and testing procedures during the preconstruction prepaving or similar type of meeting to clarify any confusion .
num resolve disputes at the lowest appropriate level of authority .
b procedures .
when the contractors quality control test results and the departments verification test results are not within the specified tolerances and a dispute is therefore unavoidable use the following procedures to resolve the dispute num project level dispute resolution .
together with the engineer attempt to determine the reason for the discrepancy at the project level by having testing personnel review previous tests and other possible factors .
num materials central laboratory mcl level .
if the dispute is not resolved at the project level the mcl will conduct further investigation .
in this investigation the mcl will include the following when applicable num num review of all available test data including the following current disputed results prior acceptance testing data contractors process control documentation and departments independent assurance ia sampling and testing results .
num check of contractor and department calculations .
compare conflicting data by statistical means e. g. ftest and ttest .
num evaluation of contractor and department sampling procedures .
num inspection of the equipment setup calibration and maintenance .
num retesting of all retained samples available .
num monitoring of the specified testing procedures .
num evaluation of the history of performance of the contractor and the department personnel and testing equipment involved .
review of test results from previous projects .
review of the results of previous dispute resolutions .
num additional comparative or splitsample testing .
at the conclusion of the investigation mcl personnel will make a recommendation of resolution to the contractor and the engineer .
c third party resolution level .
if the dispute is not resolved at the mcl level the department and contractor will use a mutually agreed upon laboratory .
the results from the mutually agreeable laboratory will be final and binding .
the department will prepare a written report describing the dispute all subsequent actions and the final resolution for inclusion in the project documentation .
num measurement .
num qc .
when listed as a bid item the department will measure the quantity by the lump sum .
the department will not measure the qcp any actions and personnel required to carry out the qcp any testing any testing equipment or any other work necessary to perform the specified qcqa procedures for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num dispute resolution .
if the independent laboratory testing and investigation indicates that the departments tests are correct pay the cost of the investigation .
if the independent laboratory testing and investigation indicates that the departments tests are not correct the department will pay the cost of the investigation .
when the dispute is resolved at any level and the departments verification tests are correct the department will base the contractors pay on the departments verification test results rather than on the contractors quality control test results .
when the departments verification tests are not correct the department will base the contractors pay on the contractors quality control test results as the appropriate section or subsection specifies .
num payment .
code pay item qc type lump sum pay unit division num earthwork num section num staking num description .
when listed as a bid item furnish all personnel equipment stakes and hubs necessary to construct the roadway and appurtenant structures to the grade and alignment specified in the contract .
when no bid item is listed the department will perform staking .
num materials and equipment .
reserved .
num construction .
num contractor staking .
perform all necessary surveying under the general supervision of a professional engineer or licensed land surveyor .
the departments engineer will perform the following num provide adequate control points to allow prompt reestablishment of the survey centerline rightofway temporary easements ramps crossroads frontage roads and all other surveying needs during construction .
num set permanent or temporary bench marks as required .
num take check sections to verify that construction is to grade and alignment as specified in the contract .
the contractor will perform the following num reestablish the centerline and set such additional points as may be necessary for construction of the project .
verify the accuracy of the horizontal and vertical control as established by the departments engineer before beginning construction .
num establish clearing lines so that the project may be cleared without violating the limits of the right of way .
num set slope stakes right and left of the survey centerline at numfoot to numfoot intervals to guide the contractor in constructing the cuts and fills .
these stakes are generally set to shoulder grade for fills and ditch grade for cuts .
the cut or fill information slope and distance from centerline should be on the front face of the stake the station number should be on the back of the stake .
this stake should be guarded with a lath that has the station number written on the side facing the centerline .
num grade stakes bluetops .
fine grade control will be set by the contractor to establish subgrade sections by setting hubs referred to as blue tops every num feet .
these blue tops are set to the hundredth of a foot in elevation and are located left and right of pavement centerline usually at the edge of metal .
bluetops will be set for the top of subgrade and the top of aggregate base andor drainage blanket material .
refer to section num and section num for construction tolerances of subgrade and aggregate base or drainage blanket .
num stake all structures bridges culverts pipe and other appurtenances so that they can be built to the proper line and grade as shown on the plans and to perform the function for which they were designed .
num department staking .
the departments engineer will set all stakes necessary for the construction of the roadway and appurtenant structures to the proper grade and alignment in accordance with the contract .
num electronic surveying .
the department encourages the use of new and advanced technology in the construction of its roads and structures .
however the following restrictions apply num tolerances are unchanged .
refer to section num and section num .
num num subgrade check sections are to be done every num feet in tangent sections and every num feet in curves using conventional survey methods to establish bluetops and to verify the correct operation of the electronic equipment .
define the check section locations by a hub and stake with centerline station offset if any and elevation plainly marked .
num the contractor will submit his electronic data files to the departments engineer as they are developed so that the engineer can reference the data for verification of the field work .
num provide slope stakes and layout references as required in subsection num part num when requested by the engineer .
num provide electronic field book reports that clearly define survey numbers with x y z coordinates horizontal and vertical roadway alignments templates digital terrain models dtms and any other digital background files used .
num measurement .
num contractor staking .
when listed as a bid item the department will measure staking as lump sum .
the department will not measure surveying required to correct any errors or inaccuracies resulting from construction operations for payment .
complete the general layout of the project under the supervision of a licensed professional engineer or land surveyor .
num department staking .
the department will not measure quantities for payment .
when any stakes are disturbed due to unwarranted negligence of the contractor the department will measure the work required to reset the stakes and deduct the cost from monies due the contractor .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num staking lump sum pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num clearing and grubbing num description .
clear grub remove and dispose of all vegetation buildings and foundations not removed by others and debris within designated limits inside the rightofway and easement areas .
do not remove objects designated to remain or to be removed according to other provisions of the contract .
also protect from injury or defacement all vegetation and objects designated to remain .
num materials and equipment .
reserved .
num construction .
notify the natural resources and environmental protection cabinet division of air quality in writing before demolishing any building located within the rightofway .
when unexpected asbestos underground storage tanks or other hazardous materials are encountered cease operations and notify the engineer .
the engineer will designate all trees shrubs plants and other items to remain .
for cut or scarred surfaces of trees or shrubs selected for retention perform tree trimming surgery as the engineer directs .
num clearing and grubbing .
clear the entire area of the rightofway of all weeds brush briers bushes trees stumps and other protruding obstructions except within areas the engineer designates to remain undisturbed .
in addition grub all bushes trees roots and stumps within the line of slope stakes except undisturbed stumps roots and nonperishable solid objects which will be a minimum of num feet below subgrade or slope of embankments .
remove stumps and nonperishable solid objects under embankments more than num inches above the groundline or low water level .
perform all clearing and grubbing operations according to sections num and num .
completely dispose of any materials resulting from clearing and grubbing by approved methods at approved locations .
the department will allow burning of perishable material when performed according to regulation num kar num .
when conditions or num kar num prohibit burning use an alternate approved method .
when disposal is by burying provide a cover of at least one foot and grade and shape as the engineer directs .
obtain written approval from the engineer before placing any organic material within the rightofway .
do not place any material resulting from clearing and grubbing off the rightofway without written permission from the property owner .
furnish a copy of the owners written permission to the engineer .
do not place material resulting from clearing and grubbing on the rightofway within view of any public road without written approval .
the engineer may require the material placed within view of a public road to be covered with soil that will support vegetation .
seed and protect the soil as required by the contract .
take ownership of all merchantable timber in the clearing area that has not been removed from the rightofway before starting construction .
remove low hanging unsound and unsightly branches on trees and shrubs designated to remain as directed .
trim branches of trees extending over the roadbed surface to provide a minimum clear height of num feet .
when specified in the plans or required by the engineer construct brush barriers according to subsection num .
when utility relocation is still being performed or is part of the work schedule the clearing of the utility easements as a priority to expedite their relocation .
num removing trees or stumps .
remove and dispose of the tree stump and roots .
num measurement .
the department will not measure both clearing and grubbing and removing trees or stumps on the same area .
the department will not measure necessary clearing and grubbing or removal of trees or stumps when not listed num as a separate bid item .
num clearing and grubbing .
the department will specify in the plans the quantities of the entire area of rightofway including all easements in acres but will measure by lump sum .
the department will not consider discrepancies in the plan quantity unless they are directly caused by approved plan changes .
num removing trees or stumps .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit when included as a bid item .
the department will include only trees or stumps one foot in diameter or larger measured num feet above the ground or across the top of existing stumps less than num feet in height .
the department will not measure the removal of smaller trees or stumps for payment and will consider their removal incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num clearing and grubbing lump sum pay unit num remove trees or stumps each for changes in payment for clearing and grubbing due to approved plan changes the department will compute these changes at a unit price rate based on the lump sum price bid divided by the total estimated area of clearing and grubbing specified in the original plans .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num removal of structures and obstructions num description .
remove wholly or in part and dispose of fences structures pavements abandoned pipelines and any other obstructions outside the typical section that are not designated or allowed to remain .
also salvage designated materials and backfill the resulting trenches holes and pits .
num materials and equipment .
reserved .
num construction .
raze remove and dispose of all structures fences and other obstructions any portions of which are on the rightofway .
remove all designated salvable material without damage and store within the project limits as the engineer directs .
fill basements or cavities left by structure removal to the level of the surrounding ground and when within embankment limits fill according to section num .
clean all septic tanks within the permanent rightofway according to subsection num and fill them with granular material or remove them as the engineer directs .
except for removing structures or pipe backfilling cavities left by structure removal and removing or filling septic tanks perform all work described in this section only in areas that are outside the typical section .
perform removal work within the typical section according to sections num num num and num .
num existing bridges .
remove all existing structures including foundations conforming to the definition of a bridge .
take ownership of existing structures and dispose of them according to subsection num .
immediately remove any material entering the stream due to removing the existing structure from the waterway .
when specified in the contract remove the members of the superstructure without damage in transportable sections and carefully store them on the rightofway at an accessible location above high water .
before removing the superstructure matchmark the parts with paint .
remove all portions of abutments exposed in the finished work all of the piers above the stream bed and any parts of either abutments or piers that interfere with planned construction of the new work .
excavate existing embankment approaches to structures removed and lying outside the limits of the new construction to a minimum slope of num .
num masonry structures other than bridges .
completely remove existing structures including their foundations as specified in the contract .
dispose of the resulting material and fill any resulting holes or pits .
excavate all slopes that may result such as stream sides that lie outside the limits of new construction to a minimum slope of num .
num partial removal of structures .
when the contract specifies using any parts of an existing structure as permanent parts of a new structure remove only such portions specified in the contract .
repair all damage caused to the portion remaining .
in removing manholes catch basins and inlets connecting live sewers rebuild and properly reconnect them .
maintain satisfactory bypass service during such construction operations .
num removing pipe .
conform to section num .
num removing guardrail .
conform to section num .
num pavement sidewalks curbs and similar items .
completely remove all cement concrete pavement or base sidewalks curbs gutters paved ditches asphalt num pavements granular bases and similar items .
when the contract specifies leaving portions of the existing structures in place remove the old structures to an existing joint or cut them to a true line with a vertical face .
remove structures to provide for proper grades and connections in the new work .
num measurement .
the department will not measure for payment items removed from within the typical section except for structures guardrail and septic tanks .
the department will measure removing pipe according to section num and removing guardrail according to section num .
when only removing a portion of an existing structure the department will measure the various items separately .
num removing existing structure .
unless a bid item is included in the proposal the department will not measure structures other than bridges and concrete box culverts for payment .
when a bid item is included in the proposal the department will measure the quantity as the number of structures of the type specified actually removed .
the department will not measure excavation for removing and shaping slopes for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num removing concrete masonry .
the department will not measure removing concrete masonry but will make final payment at the contract unit price for the design quantity specified in the plans .
when it can be shown actual quantities vary from the design quantity by more than num percent the department will measure the actual quantity in cubic yards .
num removing wet or dry stone masonry .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards .
num septic tank treatment .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit treatment cleaning and filling or removing .
num other items as listed in the contract .
the department will measure these quantities in the units established in the contract .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num remove structure lump sum pay unit num remove concrete masonry cubic yard num remove stone masonry cubic yard num septic tank treatment each other items as listed in the contract as established in the contact the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num roadway and drainage excavation num description .
remove and dispose of all materials taken from within limits of the work contracted meaning the calculated material lying between the original ground line and the excavation limits established or approved by the engineer as shown on the final cross sections .
num materials and equipment .
reserved .
num construction .
excavate for cuts and roadbeds embankment foundation benches embankment subgrades undercutting subgrades in cut sections shoulders slopes ditches waterways intersections approaches balance excavation inlet and outlet ditches and channel changes all as specified in the contract .
remove and dispose of miscellaneous structures from within the limits of the typical section according to section num .
protect and preserve all existing culverts pipelines conduits subdrains or parts there of that may continue to be used without any change .
repair or replace any culvert pipeline conduit or subdrain damaged from operations or negligence during the life of the contract .
during construction ensure that the roadway is well drained at all times .
num classification .
without regard to the materials encountered all roadway and drainage excavation is unclassified and the department will consider it roadway excavation .
any reference to rock earth or any other material on the plans or cross sections whether in numbers words letters or lines is solely for the departments information and is not an indication of classified excavation or the quantity of either rock earth or any other material involved .
the bidder must draw his own conclusions as to the conditions to be encountered .
the department does not give any guarantee as to the accuracy of the data and will not consider any claim for additional compensation when the materials encountered are not in accord with the classification shown .
num slopes .
do not remove or loosen any material outside of the required slopes .
leave all rock cut slopes with a uniform surface and remove all loose or overhanging rock .
do not gouge or dig holes in back slopes or in embankment slopes .
the engineer may vary the slopes in cuts during construction depending upon the material encountered in excavation to secure sufficient material for the formation of embankment and shoulders to prevent landslides to improve sight distance or for any other reasons widening or variations are deemed to be to the best advantage of the work .
when making a cut on any section of the roadway in any material that may slide excavate to the slope lines as specified in the plans or as the engineer directs .
do not form vertical slopes during the process of excavation of such cuts except in stage construction when leaving material in cuts for future shoulder construction .
num serrated slopes .
when the plans designate locations to construct serrated slopes and when soft rock or shale are encountered at the designated locations excavate these materials by bulldozing or ripping without drilling and blasting in a manner that serrates the cut faces to a stepped pattern .
round all soil overburden and talus material above the serrated slopes to blend with the original ground .
construct the top half step tread of a serrated slope just below the surface where the soil overburden contacts the soft rock or shale and continue the steps to the bottom of the cut slope unless hard rock or hard shale formations are encountered which indicate that the lower limits of the rock disintegration zone have been reached .
when hard rock or hard shale formations which must be blasted are encountered within the cuts being serrated end the steps of the serrated slope by blending them into the hard rock or shale .
construct the step risers in the serrated slopes to the height specified in the plans with the approximate width of the step treads being the height of the risers multiplied by the designated cut slope ratio .
make the midpoints of treads of the steps num coincide approximately with the staked slope lines .
blend the first and last steps of a serrated slope into the staked slope line .
construct the first and last steps of a serrated slope to a width of approximately onehalf the normal step tread width .
construct the step treads approximately level rather than parallel to the ditch line grades .
when the steps extend throughout the length of a cut round the ends of the steps and blend them into the adjacent ground .
the engineer will not require thorough final dressing of the serrated slopes .
however remove large pieces of rock or other dangerous material which might fall from the steps and create safety hazards or maintenance problems .
seed and protect the serrated slopes according to the plans and section num .
num presplitting .
presplit all rock and shale formations within the roadway excavation limits that are conducive to excavation by drilling and blasting at the designated slope lines .
perform the presplitting before blasting and excavating the interior portion of the specified cross section at any location .
perform presplitting to obtain smooth faces in the rock and shale formations .
develop presplit faces that are free of all loose or crushed pieces and do not deviate more than num inches inwardly from the designated slope lines or offset drill holes nor more than one foot outwardly except where seams broken formations or earth pockets may cause unavoidable irregularities .
the engineer may stop the presplitting when he determines that materials have become unsuitable for presplitting .
the department will measure for payment material lying outside the typical section that must be removed due to seams broken formations or earth pockets including any earth overburden removed with this material .
num landslides .
when directed remove and dispose of all landslides .
the department will measure landslides in place by the cross section method before removal of material .
num ditches .
ditches include channel changes inlet and outlet ditches side ditches surface ditches wing ditches and such other required ditches .
construct side ditches draining from cuts toward embankments to avoid erosion damage to embankments by directing water coming from cuts away from fills .
do not place material removed in cleaning or opening of ditches on cut slopes .
remove all debris from ditches before requesting formal acceptance .
num use of excavated materials .
use all suitable excavated material in the formation of embankments subgrade or shoulders as backfill for structures or for other purposes specified in the contract .
remove and dispose of all sod and soft or spongy material .
do not use such materials in the construction of the grade except as provided in subsection num .
take ownership and dispose of any coal excavated from the project within the typical section or as directed .
do not use coal in embankments except in small quantities and then only when thoroughly mixed with other materials .
do not dispose of excavated material without approval .
do not assume disposal sites for excess excavation are available within the rightofway .
when approved dispose of excess material adjacent to the embankment or incorporate it in the normal embankment construction within the rightofway limits .
do not perform irregular or partial widening of embankments .
do not place excess material between cut slopes and the rightofway limits except for the purpose of filling depressions gullies and other cavities and when so placed shape the material to conform with the adjacent ground .
a channel lining class iv .
prepare broken stone from formations consisting primarily of limestone or if specified in the plans durable sandstone or durable shale sdi equal to or greater than num according to km num that are encountered in roadway excavation or obtained from borrow excavation .
provide stone so that at least num percent by volume of individual stones num range in size from num to num num cubic foot .
use smaller sized stones for filling voids in the upper surface and dressing to the proper slope .
the engineer will accept the size and gradation of the material based on visual inspection .
the engineer may allow material not conforming to the specified size and gradation when it is acceptable for the intended use .
shape ditches and channels as specified to receive the channel lining .
unless solid rock is encountered begin the channel lining in a trench num feet below the natural ground or num feet below the channel flowline when the flowline is not lined .
where encountering solid rock end the slope protection at the solid rock line .
construct channel lining class iv to the minimum thickness specified in the plans .
place the stone in a manner to produce a surface not varying more than num inches from a true plane .
b spreading stockpiled topsoil .
if the contract includes spreading stockpiled topsoil as a bid item or when otherwise specified in the contract salvage topsoil from within the limits of the slope lines and store it in stockpiles .
before removing the topsoil clear the areas of all weeds brush stumps stones and other debris .
remove the topsoil only from areas and to depths specified in the plans or as the engineer directs .
avoid mixing subsoil or other unsuitable material with the topsoil .
place sod removed from embankment areas according to subsection num in the topsoil stockpiles .
place the stockpiles along the project at approved locations .
neatly dress each stockpile when completed .
perform temporary or permanent seeding on the stockpiles .
when spreading stockpiled topsoil is a bid item the department will allow the topsoil to be spread directly on the areas designated to receive the topsoil without stockpiling provided that seeding and protection operations are ready to begin .
num disposal of excess material .
when excess material is encountered on a project dispose of it according to section num .
num roadbed .
in addition to the limits of the roadbed as defined in subsection num extend the roadway excavation to the ditch lines in cuts .
conduct roadway excavation operations to make available a sufficient quantity of selected materials to complete the roadbed .
remove all rock between ditch lines to a depth below the required grade as specified in the plans or as staked .
unless otherwise specified in the project plans or proposal all solid rock excavation in roadway cuts is to extend at least one num foot below top of subgrade elevation .
leave the final surface of the rock to provide complete drainage .
construct the refill over this surface with select material having no stone or spalls larger than num inches .
place all refill in lifts not exceeding one foot in depth loose measurement and compact according to subsection num .
the engineer will make no allowance for excavation and refill material to a greater depth below the required grade than as specified in the plans or as staked .
when encountering unsuitable material at subgrade elevation remove the material to the depths specified in the plans or as directed .
dry and use material that is unstable due to excessive moisture but otherwise suitable .
dispose of the material or use the material as refill in embankments as the engineer directs .
refill with suitable material .
a rock roadbed .
conduct blasting and excavation operations to make available a sufficient quantity of rock to complete the roadbed .
construct rock roadbed using limestone durable sandstone or durable shale sdi equal to or greater than num according to km num that is encountered in the roadway excavation or obtained from borrow excavation .
do not use rock fragments that exceed one foot .
excavate all cuts to a minimum of num feet below the final subgrade elevation and refill with rock in num lifts each approximately one foot thick .
leave the num excavated surface to provide complete drainage .
if excavation is deeper than num feet below subgrade construct the top num feet in num lifts each approximately one foot thick and the remaining in lifts not exceeding one foot using rock conforming to this section .
construct rock roadbed from ditch line to ditch line in cuts from shoulder to shoulder in fills and throughout the entire project including mainline ramps and approach roads .
perform all handling stockpiling or hauling manipulations including overhauling necessary to provide for the proper distribution of the broken stone .
in all instances dump spread and smooth each onefoot lift and compact each lift by vibratory rollers weighing at least num tons to minimize voids and bridging .
b chemically stabilized roadbed .
construct according to section num .
num construction tolerances .
make every reasonable effort to construct the project uniformly within the following allowable tolerances and in a manner that will minimize the field measurements and computations required to determine if the work is satisfactory .
the department will allow the following tolerances before making payment for any decreases in the quantity or before requiring the rework of the constructed item num do not deviate the distance from centerline to the ditch lines in cuts and the shoulder lines in fills more than one foot from the dimension specified in the plans .
ensure that the total width of the roadbed is not deficient by more than one foot at any location .
num ensure that the sloped surfaces between the ditch lines or shoulder lines and the original ground are not inside the specified slope limits more than num inches or outside the specified slope limits more than one foot both measured horizontally .
num excavate cut benches to within one foot above or below the bench elevation specified in the plans or established by the engineer .
num the department will not make payment for any earthwork performed outside the limits specified by the neat lines of the cross sections on the plans or by the engineer .
do not remove or place any extra material more than one foot outside of these limits without permission except as provided in subsections num and num .
num on grade and drain projects where surfacing is not included complete the subgrade to within num foot of the designated grade at the time of final acceptance except that when rock roadbed is specified complete it to within num foot .
num ensure that all subgrades being prepared for base or surface courses except traffic bound courses are within num inch of the specified crown section except that when rock roadbed is specified complete it to within num inches .
uniformly construct these subgrades so the subsequent base and surface courses can be constructed within their specified tolerances .
num measurement .
num payment for design quantities .
unless the contract provides for payment based on field measurements of material excavated the department will not measure roadway excavation but will make final payment at the contract unit price for the design quantity specified within the neat lines of the cross sections on the plans increased or decreased by authorized adjustments .
the department will determine the final quantity of embankmentinplace as the design quantity increased or decreased by authorized adjustments .
the department will not consider any quantity specified in the plans for contingencies to be part of the design quantity .
the department will include only the num portion of the contingency quantity actually used as determined by the engineers measurements .
num authorized adjustments .
the department will only make adjustments to the design quantities of roadway excavation or embankmentinplace authorized by the engineer for the following reasons num changes in the quantity of work due to benching undercutting changing slopes or grades removing slides and any other required procedures .
num decreases in the quantity because of acceptable work not conforming to established tolerances .
num corrections of major errors on the plans .
major errors are defined as individual mistakes of num percent or more in the quantity of earthwork between num consecutive cross sections for omissions duplications or other errors in the survey or on the plans but not for minor discrepancies in the plotting of cross sections and in the resulting computation of the volume of earthwork .
when errors in the lines or grades specified in the plans cause major errors in earthwork quantities the department will correct the earthwork quantities throughout the entire span of the errors .
the department will not adjust earthwork quantities when errors in the lines or grades do not cause major errors in the earthwork quantities .
num arithmetical mistakes .
num any assumed errors or omissions in the original ground line must be brought to the attention of the engineer before beginning earthwork with copies of the survey elevations .
if the error is found after earthwork activities have began inform the engineer within num hours and allow the engineer to check the elevations and orientation of the ground line .
failure to notify the engineer or failure to allow the engineer to check the ground line for errors absolves the cabinet of any claims based on errors or omissions on the location of the ground line .
num serrated slopes .
the department will not measure this work for payment and will consider it incidental to either roadway excavation or embankmentin place as applicable .
the department will not measure for payment any breakage of the soft rock or other material outside the staked slope line .
num presplitting .
the department will not measure this work for payment and will consider it incidental to either roadway excavation or embankmentinplace as applicable .
however if the engineer directs in writing slope changes then the department will pay for the second presplitting operation as extra work .
the department will not measure for payment any extra material excavated because of the drill holes being offset outside the designated slope lines .
the department will not measure for payment any material including any earth overburden necessary to be removed due to the contractors faulty blasting practices .
num roadbed .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards as roadway excavation borrow excavation or embankmentinplace as applicable .
the department will not measure any special work necessary to perform rock roadbed construction for payment and will consider it incidental to the earthwork bid item .
the department will measure the removal of unsuitable material as roadway excavation .
the department will measure any additional material necessary for refill as roadway excavation or borrow excavation at its origin .
when the material is removed from the roadbed and disposed of without the engineers permission the department will not measure for payment any required refill material .
the department will not measure for payment rock refill exceeding num feet .
num num landslides .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards as roadway excavation or embankmentinplace as applicable .
the department will not measure for payment the removal and disposal of any landslides resulting from faulty operations .
whenever a landslide extends beyond the rightofway in wooded areas and the engineer directs trees and stumps be removed the department will measure for payment clearing of the additional area under clearing and grubbing or removing trees and stumps as provided in the original contract .
num ditches .
when ditching or ditching and shouldering are listed as a bid item the department will measure this according to subsection num .
when ditching or ditching and shouldering are not listed as a bid item the department will not measure this work for payment and will consider it incidental to either roadway excavation or embankmentinplace as applicable .
num roadway excavation .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards based on design quantities with authorized adjustments .
the department will base the measurement of the roadway excavation quantities at locations where serrated slopes are constructed on the areas and volumes defined by the staked slope lines .
the department will not measure for payment any excavated material used for any purpose other than that the plans specify or the engineer approves .
when the contract provides for payment based on field measurements of the material excavated the department will measure the roadway excavation in its original position by taking cross sections before the work starts and after it is entirely completed .
the department will compute the volume by the average endarea method .
the department will include in its measurement all unavoidable slides and authorized excavation of any material below the subgrade .
where material has been excavated beyond the slope line and disposed of without being authorized the department will measure the disposed material and deduct it from the excavated quantities .
in determining the amount of excess material to be deducted as the result of excavation beyond the slope lines set by the engineer and disposed of the department will consider only that portion outside of one foot additional width of embankment on each side widened uniformly .
the department will measure the volume and deduct it from the excavation quantities without regard to swell or shrinkage factors .
where the amount of roadway excavation is not enough to construct the embankments as shown on the plans the department will authorize adjustments to excavation quantities .
the department will consider excavated material used to complete embankments refill or backfill and obtained from beyond the limits of the roadway section but within the rightofway as balance excavation and will make payment for the material as roadway excavation .
when the balance of the material is obtained from outside of the rightofway the department will negotiate a cost for the material prior to the work beginning .
num excess material .
when an excess of material exists and is not due to authorized adjustments the department will consider the acquisition of an excess excavation storage site the disposal of excess material and the provision of erosion control for the site and haul roads incidental to either roadway excavation or embankmentinplace as applicable .
if the excess material is due to authorized adjustments the department will make provisions for an excess material storage site and measure erosion control work for payment according to subsection num .
num overhaul .
the department will measure the quantity only for excavation added due to authorized adjustments .
for all other excavation quantities the department will not measure this work for payment and will consider it incidental to either roadway excavation or embankmentinplace as applicable .
the department will measure material removed from within right of way as num additional roadway excavation or embankment in place and pay for it as an adjustment to plan quantity .
the department will measure the quantity of material excavated from off of right of way by the cubic yard station .
a cubic yard station is the product of the volume of material hauled in cubic yards and the distance that the material is hauled in excess of the num feet of free haul in stations of num feet as determined by the mass diagram method or by analytical methods up to a total distance of num stations .
if haul distance exceeds num stations num feet the cost of disposing of material will be by negotiated price adjustment .
no work is to be performed until the price has been negotiated and approved by both parties .
notify the engineer prior to the commencement of any overhaul work .
the department will pay for overhaul at num percent of the contract unit price for roadway excavation or embankmentinplace for each cubic yard station up to a limit of num stations .
the department will negotiate a price for any overhaul exceeding the num station limit .
overhaul num haul distance feet price determination num free haul num d m s u .num num negotiate price m cubic yards of material excavated s number of num stations between num and num haul distances u unit price of excavation d dollar amount of overhaul num overhaul will not be paid unless the engineer has been notified prior to the commencement of any overhaul work .
negotiated price must be determined prior to any overhaul work commencing .
num channel lining class iv .
channel lining class iv will be measured in cubic yards as roadway excavation borrow excavation or embankmentinplace as applicable .
placing and grading channel lining class iv will be measured in cubic yards .
num water .
the department will not measure for payment water used to provide sufficient moisture for compaction of the roadbed in cut sections .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num roadway excavation cubic yard pay unit numnx overhaul dollars num channel lining class iv cubic yard num spreading stockpiled topsoil cubic yard the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num borrow and excess excavation sites num description .
locate and acquire areas on or off of the right of way to either dispose of excess material or obtain additional material needed to construct the project according to plans .
num disposal of excess material .
obtain approved sites for placing material off the rightofway .
when placing material avoid any unsightly appearance .
place all excess material to avoid the obstruction of drainage .
seed and protect the excess material site and all temporary haul roads .
when encountering unanticipated excess material resulting from landslides or approved slope changes place it within the rightofway at sites designated by the engineer or dispose of it off the rightofway at sites either acquired by or approved by the department .
num borrow sites .
use soil borrow materials with a minimum dry weight equal to or greater than the usable soils within the project limits as determined according to km num and compact the materials to an inplace density according to subsection num .
furnish and place special borrow materials according to the contract .
num historic preservation .
protect cultural resources on borrow sites pursuant to the historical preservation act of num .
before using any site for borrow material certify to the department that a professional archaeologist has performed an archaeological reconnaissance survey on the site and has completed a report confirming the presence on the site of any known cultural resources affected that are eligible for or on the national register of historic places .
additionally certify to the department that the state historic preservation officer has reviewed the professional archaeologists survey report of the site and concurs with his findings .
if any applicable cultural resources are present mitigate according to section num of the historical preservation act of num and certify that the adverse effects upon the resources have been palliated before using the site for borrow material .
for borrow sites designated by the department the department is responsible for assurances relative to cultural resources pursuant to the historical preservation act of num .
if during the course of borrow operations any archaeological materials are encountered cease work in the immediate area and notify the engineer .
provide a professional archaeologist to conduct the necessary investigations to determine the significance of the cultural resources .
avoid the area of discovery until the investigation is complete .
should the resources prove to be significant eligible for the national register of historic places fulfill the requirements of section num of the historic preservation act before proceeding .
when operations on the project are suspended due to the unanticipated finding of archaeological materials in a previously approved borrow site the department will adjust the contract time according to subsection num .
num submittals .
submit for approval drawings of proposed borrow or excess material storage areas showing the configuration of the original ground and the anticipated configuration of the area upon completion of the operations any preparatory work such as benching provisions for drainage of the area after completing borrow operations and any other necessary information .
the department will not allow excavation of borrow pits adjacent to the toe of any embankment .
the department will pay for the geotechnical investigation and analysis of the proposed excess material storage area when one is requested by the engineer .
ensure all work is performed by a pre qualified geotechnical consultant and according to the departments geotechnical manual .
furnish copies of a written agreement with the property owner approval of the owners of utilities of any nature existing within the proposed area and approvals from all applicable regulatory agencies including but not limited to the natural resources and environmental protection cabinet us forest service us coast guard planning and num zoning commissions .
furnish cross sections and hydraulic computations for excess material storage area sites situated in the flood plain of any stream .
for these computations define this flood plain as that area required to pass the num year flood .
indicate with the computations the effect that the excess material site will have on both the design flood and the num year flood .
seed and protect all areas of the area except for noncommercial borrow pits including haul roads except areas of solid rock and areas to be under water in a pond according to section num .
the variety of seed may be altered upon written request from the property owner .
num measurement .
the department will consider excavated material used to complete embankments refill or backfill and obtained from beyond the limits of the roadway section but within the rightofway limits specified in the plans as balance excavation and will pay for it as roadway excavation .
the department will consider obtaining the borrow or excess material sites and the professional archaeologist or any other work required for its historic preservation and conducting erosion control incidental to embankment in place or roadway excavation .
the department will not measure overhaul of borrow material within the right of way .
num section num embankment num description .
form embankments with materials from sources specified in the plans or from other approved sources .
num materials and equipment .
use water conforming to section num .
num construction .
num embankment foundations .
remove sod from all embankment areas to a depth of approximately num inches .
the engineer will not require the removal of sod when constructing embankments over marshy areas .
remove unsuitable material including frozen material encountered in embankment areas before placing any embankment material thereon .
when the height of the embankment at subgrade elevation is to be greater than num feet above existing concrete pavement either break the pavement until no fragments have a dimension greater than num feet or remove the pavement .
when the height of the embankment at subgrade elevation is to be num feet or less above existing concrete pavement remove the pavement .
when placing embankment above existing asphalt pavement break up to destroy all cleavage planes or remove as the engineer directs .
cut benches with horizontal and vertical faces into the original ground of embankment foundations as required .
when practical benches should be into rock .
compact the horizontal face .
provide subsurface drainage as specified in the plans or as the engineer directs .
num embankment .
excavate special ditches and channel changes before constructing adjacent embankment areas .
complete all embankment for any roadway including ramps frontage roads within the tolerances specified in subsection num .
use only acceptable materials from sources permitted in the contract .
do not place frozen material stumps logs roots sod or other perishable materials in any embankment .
do not place any stone or masonry fragment greater than num inches in any dimension within one foot of the finished subgrade elevation unless rock roadbed is specified as provided in subsection num .
the department may allow concrete rubble without protruding reinforcement to be placed in embankment provided that no fragment is larger than one foot in any dimension or is placed within num feet of the subgrade .
when crossing marshy or otherwise unstable areas the department may allow the first lift to exceed onefoot loose depth .
use rock or granular material in the first lift when available and construct by placing material behind the leading edge of the layer and blading into place to avoid unnecessary disturbance to the original ground .
drain clean out and fill ponds lying within the staked construction limits .
construct the upper one foot of the embankment with selected material placed in lifts not exceeding one foot loose thickness and compacted according to subsection num .
when rock roadbed is specified construct the upper num feet of the embankment according to subsection num a .
a embankments of earth friable sandstone weathered rock waste crushed aggregate bank gravel creek gravel or similar materials .
construct in lifts not exceeding one foot in thickness loose depth to the full width of the cross section and compact the material .
shape the upper surface of the embankment to provide complete drainage of surface water at all times .
do not form ruts .
b embankments principally of unweathered limestone durable shale sdi equal to or greater than num according to km num or durable sandstone .
num construct in lifts not exceeding num feet .
ensure that the maximum dimensions of boulders or large rocks placed in the embankment do not exceed num feet vertically and num feet horizontally .
place rocks having any dimension greater than num feet at least num feet below subgrade elevation .
do not dump rock into final position .
distribute the rock to minimize voids pockets and bridging .
the engineer will not require rolling in the construction of rock embankment .
do not construct the rock embankment to an elevation higher than one foot below subgrade elevation .
c embankment of rockshalesoil combination .
construct in lifts not exceeding one foot in thickness however when the thickness of the rock exceeds one foot the department may allow the thickness of the embankment lifts to increase as necessary due to the nature of the material up to num feet .
apply a sufficient amount of water to induce slaking when mixtures contain num percent or more nondurable shale .
do not dump the mixture into final position .
distribute the mixture in a manner that minimizes voids pockets and bridging .
refer to km num for the proper compaction testing for this material .
d embankments principally of nondurable shale sdi less than num according to km num .
remove or break down rock fragments or limestone slabs having thickness greater than num inches or having any dimension greater than num num feet before incorporating them into the lift .
construct in loose lifts not exceeding num inches in thickness .
apply water to accelerate slaking .
uniformly incorporate the water throughout the lift using a multiple gang disk with a minimum disk diameter of num feet or other suitable equipment the engineer approves .
compact with numton static tamping foot rollers in conjunction with vibratory tamping foot rollers that produce a minimum compactive effort of num tons and direct hauling equipment over the full width of the lift to aid in compaction .
when questions arise regarding the durability of shale use km num num to estimate the durability of the material in the field .
num compaction .
compact the embankment foundations and embankment to a density of at least num percent of maximum density as determined according to km num num .
the engineer will check density according to km num .
during compaction maintain the moisture content of embankment or subgrade material within num percent of the optimum moisture content as determined according to km num .
compact each lift as required before depositing material for the next lift .
provide equipment that will satisfy the density requirements at all times .
run the hauling equipment as much as possible along the full width of the cross section .
num embankment adjacent to structures .
construct according to subsection num for backfill .
num embankmentinplace .
when the contract designates original material as unsuitable for the embankment foundation the department will designate areas of special excavation andor treatment and will give instructions about the removal and disposal of unsuitable foundation material in the plans .
when a bid item of special excavation has not been included in the contract and the original ground is specified in the plans as suitable to serve as the embankment foundation but the engineer subsequently determines the material is unsuitable to remain in its original position excavate and dispose of the unsuitable foundation material as directed .
incorporate the excavated material into embankments when manipulations such as spreading thin layers or drying the material make it acceptable for use as embankmentin place .
when excavated material can not be used in embankments dispose of the material .
num measurement .
the department will measure excavation of benches as roadway excavation or embankmentinplace as applicable .
the department will measure the removal of unsuitable materials from embankment areas as roadway excavation or special excavation .
num the department will consider removing sod num inches or less in depth removing andor scarifying of existing pavements in embankment areas and the addition of water to aid compaction incidental to the earthwork bid items .
the department will measure the quantity of unanticipated material resulting from landslides or authorized slope changes in place before excavation .
the department will include the quantity of unanticipated excess material under embankmentinplace .
the department will measure a second presplitting for payment according to subsection num .
num embankmentinplace .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards as the design quantity shown within the neat lines of the cross sections on the plans increased or decreased by authorized adjustments according to subsection num .
regardless of whether the excavated material is used as embankmentinplace or is disposed of the department will measure and pay for the volume of the unsuitable foundation material that is excavated as embankmentinplace .
when the engineer directs that the excavated material be disposed of then the department will measure the material used to replace the excess material as the same as the excavated volume and will pay for the material as embankmentinplace .
when the excavated material is used in embankment the department will make no separate payment for the material necessary to replace the excavated material .
for embankment material obtained outside the rightofway limits conform to the requirements in section num .
the department will not measure excavation included in the original plans that is disposed of for payment and will consider it incidental to embankmentinplace .
the department will not measure overhaul of material for payment and will consider it incidental to embankmentinplace .
when payment is made for embankmentinplace the department will make payment for all embankment constructed on the project including roadway embankment refill in cuts and embankment placed in embankment benches .
the department will not measure materials from authorized roadway and drainage excavation for payment and will consider them incidental to the construction of embankmentinplace .
the department will include under authorized roadway and drainage excavation mainline excavation embankment benches special ditches channel changes tail ditches surface ditches interceptor ditches entrances and undercuts in rock cuts .
the department will not measure borrow excavation used to construct the embankment for payment and will consider it incidental to the construction of embankmentinplace .
the department will make adjustments to embankmentinplace projects when there is actually unanticipated excess material on the project .
excess material generated by the project phasing will not be considered for adjustment .
the department will make an adjustment for the actual costs incurred by the contractor on the following items excavation of material clearing and grubbing erosion control items and fuel adjustments .
num special excavation .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards as the design quantity shown within the neat lines of the cross sections on the plans increased or decreased by authorized adjustments as specified in subsections num and num .
the department will not measure overhaul of material and will consider it incidental to special excavation .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num embankmentinplace cubic yard pay unit num special excavation cubic yard num roadway excavation see section num num the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num subgrade num description .
grade shape and compact the subgrade to the required density .
num materials and equipment .
use water conforming to section num .
num construction .
prepare a smooth subgrade without indentations to the full width of the widest course of the pavement system plus one foot additional width beyond each edge .
shape the subgrade to conform to the lines grades and cross sections specified in the contract or as directed .
remove all high areas of the roadbed and fill all low areas with approved material and compact .
compact the subgrade to a uniform density throughout according to the density and moisture control requirements of section num .
should the subgrade subsequently lose its density due to exposure to severe weather conditions after having been previously compacted to the required density during the construction of the grade recompact it to the required density .
excavate and backfill areas of yielding or unstable material with approved material as the engineer directs .
when excess dust is present on the subgrade either wet the material or completely remove and replace it with suitable material before any aggregate is placed thereon at no additional expense to the department .
prepare all subgrades before the base course or pavement construction to allow the required testing and checking of the subgrade before placing any aggregate .
furnish templates and labor required for checking the subgrade .
num reshaping and compacting .
scarify the existing road surface to a depth not exceeding num inches and uniformly distribute the material so loosened over the surface of the road .
compact the subgrade according to section num .
num construction tolerances .
on grade and drain projects complete the subgrade to the tolerance specified in subsection num .
when reshaping and compacting is not a bid item the engineer may allow minor adjustments in plan grades as he deems necessary .
before placing base or surface courses on rock subgrade constructed with a num foot tolerance level it to meet the specified num inch tolerance for base or surface course preparation with materials from the pavement quantities .
num protection and maintenance .
complete all ditches and drains in order to drain the roadbed .
protect the subgrade .
repair all damage and restore the subgrade to the required template .
when hauling materials over the completed subgrade use equipment with pneumatic tires .
do not operate equipment of such weight as to cause rutting on the subgrade .
do not allow the compaction equipment to cross any bridge deck within the limits of the project without permission of the engineer .
do not store or stockpile materials on a completed subgrade .
num measurement .
the department will not measure preparation of the subgrade when the construction of the grade is a part of the contract .
the department will not measure the repair of yielding or unstable areas for payment when construction of the base course or pavement is included in the same contract as construction of the grade .
when the base and grade are in separate contracts the department will measure the removal and disposal of such material as roadway excavation and measure the backfill material as either roadway excavation or borrow excavation as applicable .
when the earthwork bid item is embankmentinplace the department will measure removal and replacement of yielding or unstable material in cut num areas as special excavation .
the department will not measure protection and repair of the subgrade for payment and will consider it incidental to the earthwork bid items .
the department will not measure water used for maintaining moisture for subgrade compaction and water used for conditioning the subgrade immediately in advance of base or pavement construction and will consider it incidental to the earthwork bid items .
num reshaping and compacting .
when included as a bid item the department will measure the quantity horizontally along the centerline of the roadway in linear feet exclusive of ramps road approaches cross roads and frontage roads .
when the project is a multiplelane divided highway the department will measure the quantity along the centerline of each roadway .
when moisture and density control requirements as provided in subsection num have been waived the department will measure only the portion or portions of the project on which the work is actually done .
where it is necessary to excavate to a depth of more than num inches in reshaping the existing road surface or where it is necessary to pick up the material so loosened and move it longitudinally the department will measure the entire work as roadway excavation .
num roadway excavation .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num borrow excavation .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num embankmentinplace .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num dense grade aggregate and crushed stone base .
the department will measure quantities used to level rock subgrade constructed from a num foot tolerance to a num inch tolerance as pavement quantities according to subsection num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num reshaping and compacting linear foot pay unit num roadway excavation see subsection num num borrow excavation see subsection num num embankmentinplace see subsection num num special excavation see subsection num num dga see subsection num num crushed stone base see subsection num the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num chemically stabilized roadbed num description .
construct roadbed stabilization by uniformly mixing the specified chemical stabilizer cement or lime with the roadbed material and moistening and compacting the resulting mixture .
num materials and equipment .
num cement .
select any type conforming to section num except type iv .
use the same type cement throughout the work .
num lime .
select from the departments list of approved of materials for lime hydrated and quicklime .
num asphalt curing seal .
use ssnum or ssnumh conforming to section num .
num water .
conform to subsection num .
num sand .
use natural crushed or conglomerate conforming to section num .
num construction .
num temperature and weather limitations .
only apply stabilizer when the ambient air temperature is at least num f in the shade and rising .
do not mix stabilizer with frozen soils or with soil containing frost .
num preparation of existing roadway .
before proceeding with other construction operations grade and shape the roadway to num foot below the grades lines and crosssection required for the completed roadway .
remove any organic material such as roots and any rocks larger than num inches from the material to be stabilized .
ensure that the elevation of the subgrade before stabilization is according to subsection num .
when using lime as slurry scarify to the depth required for the stabilization before application .
carefully control the depth of stabilization so the surface of the roadbed below the scarified material remains undisturbed and conforms to the established cross section .
num application of chemical .
apply the quantity of stabilizer and mix to the depth the contract specifies or as the engineer directs .
the department reserves the right to increase or decrease the quantity of stabilizer used and depth of treatment as deemed necessary by the engineer .
the department will not accept any stabilizer that has been exposed to the open air for a period of num hours or more for payment .
replace any quantity lost due to rain or wind .
only allow traffic and equipment required for spreading watering or mixing on the spread stabilizer .
prepare transport and distribute stabilizer on the roadbed and mix it with the soil in a manner that will not cause injury damage discomfort or inconvenience to individuals or property .
do not apply stabilizer when wind conditions as determined by the engineer are such that blowing stabilizer becomes hazardous to traffic workmen adjacent property or results in adverse impact upon the public .
do not apply dry chemicals pneumatically .
a cement .
spread the specified quantity of cement required for the full depth of treatment uniformly over the surface in one application .
only apply cement to an area of such size that all operations dry mixing through cutting final grade are completed within num hours .
perform all operations in a continuous manner and complete all operations during daylight hours .
b lime .
only apply lime to an area of such size that all primary mixing operations num are completed within the same day .
perform all primary mixing operations during daylight hours .
spread the lime by any of the following methods num slurry made with hydrated lime .
mix with water in agitating equipment and apply on the scarified area through distributing equipment .
use a distributor equipped to provide continuous agitation to ensure a uniform mixture from the mixing site until applied to the roadbed .
num slurry made by slaking quicklime at or near the project site .
gain approval of all equipment and procedures before beginning work .
num dry hydrated or quicklime when specified or when approved by the engineer .
do not use in windy conditions .
use only when saturated soil conditions exist and the slurry method would worsen the situation or when weather conditions prohibit the use of slurry .
uniformly spread the lime without excessive loss .
the engineer will not require scarifying of the roadbed before placing dry hydrated or quicklime .
num mixing .
a cement .
num dry mixing .
immediately after distributing mix the cement with the soil for the full depth of treatment .
take care to avoid mixing cement below the specified depth .
continue mixing until the cement has been sufficiently blended with the soil to prevent forming cement balls when applying water .
num moist mixing .
immediately after the soil and cement have been dry mixed uniformly apply and incorporate water into the mixture .
apply the water uniformly using pressuredistributing equipment .
the department will allow application of water during dry mixing when introduced through the mixing machine .
immediately after mixing the engineer will determine the moisture content of the soil cement mixture .
when directed by the engineer uniformly apply additional water .
avoid concentration near the surface when incorporating water into the soil and cement mixture .
after adding the last increment of water continue mixing until num percent of the soil passes a one inch sieve and at least num percent of the soil passes a no .
num sieve exclusive of gravel or stone retained on these sieves .
after completing the water application and mixing ensure that the moisture content of the mixture is not below the specified optimum moisture or more than num percent above the specified optimum moisture and is less than the quantity that causes the roadbed to become unstable during compaction and finishing .
do not allow any mixture of soil and cement that has not been compacted and finished to remain undisturbed for more than num minutes .
when the soilcement mixture is wetted by rain to the extent that the moisture content exceeds the tolerance specified herein reconstruct the entire section .
b lime .
during the period after the application of lime until completion of preliminary curing add water to maintain the moisture content of the material at or above its specified optimum at all times .
because water is needed to sustain chemical reactions occurring after applying the lime a continual application of water during mixing may be necessary even when the material is at optimum moisture when mixing begins .
num primary mixing .
immediately after spreading the specified quantity thoroughly mix the lime into the soil for the full depth of treatment .
complete the primary mixing operation within num hours after applying lime .
at this time the result shall be a homogeneous friable mixture of soil and num lime free from clods or lumps exceeding num inches in size .
after primary mixing shape the lime treated layer to the approximate cross section and lightly compact to minimize evaporation loss .
crown the surface to provide surface drainage .
num preliminary curing mellowing .
following primary mixing allow num hours for the roadbed to cure mellow .
the department will allow remixing after num hours if the gradation requirement is obtained .
the characteristics of the soil temperature and rainfall may influence the mellowing period necessary .
during the mellowing period keep the surface of the material moist to prevent drying and cracking .
num final mixing and pulverizing .
within num hours after the preliminary curing completely mix and pulverize the roadbed to the full depth of stabilization .
continue final mixing until num percent of the soil exclusive of rock particles pass the one inch sieve and at least num percent pass a no .
num sieve .
num compaction and surface finish .
compact the mixture uniformly for its full depth to at least num percent of the maximum density determined according to km num num .
the engineer will determine the density .
compact continuously until completing the final compacted surface .
after curing of the roadbed is completed correct any stabilized roadbed that does not conform to the surface tolerances of subsection num by leveling approved by the engineer .
only remove material to level in small isolated spots .
discard any material removed from the cured roadbed .
num curing and protection .
after finishing the roadbed protect it against drying by applying an asphalt curing seal .
apply the curing seal as soon as possible but no later than num hours after completion of finishing operations .
keep the finished roadbed moist by continuous sprinkling if necessary until applying the curing seal .
only apply the asphalt material to a roadbed surface that is dense free from loose extraneous material and that contains sufficient moisture to prevent penetration of the asphalt material .
provide a curing seal consisting of the asphalt material specified and uniformly apply the curing seal at the rate of approximately num pounds per square yard .
the engineer will determine the actual rate and application temperature of asphalt material .
apply the curing seal in sufficient quantity to provide a continuous membrane over the roadbed .
to avoid excessive runoff apply the seal in num or more applications when directed or allowed making each application as soon as possible after the previous application .
do not allow any traffic or equipment on the finished surface until num days above num f curing is completed or the roadbed cores achieve a minimum strength requirement of num psi .
the department will only require cores when the contractor requests a shortened curing time .
when a shortened curing time is requested furnish cores to the treated depth of the roadbed at num feet intervals for each lane .
the department will test the cores using an unconfined compression test .
if any damage occurs before curing is complete immediately reseal the damaged area .
if the asphalt material is tacky or sticky apply a sand blotter material at a rate of approximately num pounds per square yard when the engineer directs to avoid damage to the seal or to avoid tracking material onto other facilities .
after the curing period protect any finished portion of the roadbed that equipment travels on from being marred or damaged .
repair any damage caused by freezing .
make every reasonable effort to completely cover the stabilized roadbed with the specified pavement courses before suspending work for the winter months .
if the stabilized roadbed is not completely covered by the specified pavement courses determine and perform any further work necessary to protect and maintain the uncompleted work during the winter months .
perform any work necessary to acceptably repair or restore the uncompleted work before the beginning of spring paving operations .
the department num may require cores to be taken to verify that the stabilized roadbed was not unreasonably damaged from unprotected winter cycles .
perform all work necessary to protect maintain or repair the stabilized roadbed subject to the engineers approval .
num maintenance .
maintain the entire roadway within the limits of the contract for the duration of the contract .
keep the roadway continuously intact by immediately repairing any defects that may occur either before or after completing the stabilized roadbed at no expense to the department .
when making repairs completely restore the uniformity of the surface and durability of the repaired portion .
num measurement .
the department will not measure extra materials methods or work for payment when used to protect maintain or repair uncompleted work .
num cement .
the department will measure the quantity in tons .
the department will not measure cement for payment when exposed to the open air for a period of num hours lost due to rain or wind or used for corrective or reconstructive work .
num lime .
the department will measure the quantity in tons .
the department will not measure lime for payment when exposed to the open air for a period of num hours lost due to rain or wind or used for corrective or reconstructive work .
when quicklime is furnished for slurry application the department will measure the quantity in tons at num times the actual quantity .
when hydrated or quicklime is furnished for dry application the department will measure the actual quantity applied to the roadbed .
num cement stabilized roadbed .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
the department will not measure corrective or reconstructed work for payment .
the department will not measure hotmixed asphalt for payment when used for corrective leveling .
the department will not measure water for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num lime stabilized roadbed .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
the department will not measure corrective or reconstructed work for payment .
the department will not measure hotmixed asphalt for payment when used for corrective leveling .
the department will not measure water for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num asphalt curing seal .
the department will measure the quantity in tons .
the department will not measure corrective work for payment .
num concrete sand for blotter .
the department will measure the quantity in tons .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num cement ton pay unit num lime ton num cement stabilized roadbednum square yard num lime stabilized roadbednum square yard num asphalt curing seal ton num sand for blotter ton num when the engineer increases the depth of treatment the department will increase the quantity for that portion of the work as follows num num inches additional multiply by num num inches additional multiply by num the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num ditching and shouldering num description .
for ditching perform all work necessary to provide complete drainage of all side ditches including those on road approaches within the limits of the rightofway and dispose of materials removed .
additionally repair eroded areas on embankment slopes .
for shoulders reshape existing or construct full depth earth shoulders stabilized shoulders or paved shoulders and foundations for stabilized or paved shoulders according to the contract .
num materials and equipment .
construct shoulders or foundations for stabilized or paved shoulders using materials conforming to section num or num as specified in the contract .
when rock roadbed construction is specified conform to subsection num a for shoulders .
num construction requirements .
num ditching .
remove all vegetation including bushes and trees less than one foot in diameter and all debris from within the limits of ditching and shouldering operations .
dispose of the materials removed by clearing in a manner approved by the engineer .
shape the ditches to the approximate dimensions of the typical section specified in the contract or as the engineer directs .
when the width of an existing roadbed exceeds that in the typical section the engineer will not require reduction of that width .
in the absence of a specified typical section use a section typical of the existing roadway .
when no specific typical section is called for use a minimum vertical depth of side ditches of one to num feet below the finished shoulder elevation .
do not excavate below the elevation of the solid rock .
where the roadway width allows shape all ditches to have a slope no steeper than num from the edge of the shoulder to the bottom of the ditch .
do not perform work beyond the ditch lines except where the back slopes are disturbed by the ditching operations .
shape the disturbed areas of the back slopes to conform to the adjoining areas .
where machine operations are limited by obstructions provide all handwork necessary to provide satisfactory drainage .
use or dispose of the material removed from the ditches as approved by the engineer .
submit written permission from the property owner to the engineer before wasting material outside the rightofway on private property .
reshape the ends of metal entrance pipe that may be deformed to original form .
remove deposits of soil and other debris from all existing entrance pipe .
when proper drainage of an entrance pipe can not be accomplished the engineer will consider cleaning complete when all soil and debris have been removed to an elevation at or below the grade of the finished ditch .
when entrance pipe has so deteriorated as to become unsuitable for further service as determined by the engineer remove and replace according to section num with a pipe of similar size material and strength .
a protection .
grade existing floater material on trafficbound surfaces to the center or to the opposite side of the road before beginning ditching operations to prevent mixing floater material with material removed from the ditches unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
do not allow excess material to drift across the surfaced roadbed .
do not loosen or damage any portion of an existing surfaced area .
preserve delineators mailboxes mileposts and similar installations .
when their removal is necessary for the proper execution of the work remove and replace them .
do not disturb private and public entrances except when it is necessary to remove an existing entrance pipe .
repair or replace any entrance pipe damaged during the work .
when ditching and shouldering or ditching is included in a surfacing or resurfacing contract complete ditching operations and as much of the shoulder num operations as is practical before beginning surfacing operations .
preserve mailboxes as specified in subsection num .
b cleaning cross drainage structures .
when the proposal includes either the bid item of ditching and shouldering or ditching clean all drainage structures except box culverts and structures defined as bridges of all sediment drift and other debris .
num shouldering .
on projects constructed as grade and drain only or as grade and drain and traffic bound surface construct the shoulders to the same requirements as specified for the subgrade .
when shoulder material is of earth compact a portion of the adjacent shoulder with each course of granular base .
before compaction of each course of granular base place shoulder material against the base course to a minimum width of num inches and in sufficient quantity so that after compaction the height of the partial shoulder conforms to the height of the compacted base course .
compact earth shoulders and foundations for paved or stabilized shoulders according to subsection num .
construct stabilized aggregate and paved shoulders as specified in the contract .
when reshaping existing shoulders uniformly shape to a slope at least one inch per foot away from the edge of the existing surface .
on projects not subject to the requirements of a typical section shape the shoulder to at least num feet of width or a reduced width when deemed necessary by the engineer .
furnish material from approved sources on or off the rightofway at no additional expense to the department .
a drainage .
before construction of permanent lateral drains provide drainage for the subgrade as directed .
construct permanent lateral drains through the full width of the earth shoulders at the locations as directed for shoulders greater than num feet in width .
on tangents construct the drains on each side of the road at intervals not exceeding num feet and stagger these drains on alternate sides of the roadway to provide a drain at intervals of approximately num feet .
the engineer may require the drains at shorter intervals provided the increase in the number of drains does not exceed num percent .
cut the trenches to a width of num inches and to a depth of num inches below subgrade and slope the trenches away from the subgrade .
in cut sections the engineer will not require lateral drains in areas where the flowline of the ditch is at or above the subgrade elevation .
skew the lateral drains downgrade a maximum of num degrees .
backfill the trenches to a depth of num inches or more with aggregate conforming to subsection num .
when coarse aggregate is used for backfilling lateral drains completely wrap the coarse aggregate in geotextile fabric conforming to the departments current requirements for fabric for subsurface drainage .
do not obstruct drainage through the lateral drains during final dressing or other operations .
do not construct any permanent lateral drains until completing all of the earthwork portion of the shoulder construction .
b mailbox turnouts .
protect the edge of the mainline pavement according to standard drawing rpmnum when quantities are included in the contract .
c shoulder completion .
due to the safety and protection of the traveling public complete the shoulders on the project at the earliest practical time .
when shoulder construction is part of this contract and the pavement is open to public traffic conform to signing requirements for low shoulders according to section num until the shoulders are completed .
num measurement .
num aggregate for shoulders entrances and mailbox turnouts .
when listed as a bid item the department will measure the quantity in tons weighed according to section num .
num num entrance pipe .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num granular base .
when the pavement design includes granular base material the department will measure granular material used in backfilling lateral drains in the same manner as the specified granular base material .
the department will not measure excavation for lateral drains disposal of surplus materials or furnishing and placing geotextile fabric for payment and will consider this work incidental to the granular base .
however when the pavement design does not include granular base material the department will consider furnishing aggregate furnishing geotextile fabric and constructing lateral drains incidental to shoulder construction .
num ditching .
the department will measure the quantity horizontally as the gross length of the ditches cleaned in linear feet along the edge of the shoulder adjacent to the front slope of the ditch .
the department will not measure disposal of the materials removed by clearing and ditching for payment and will consider it incidental to ditching .
the department will not measure cleaning out pipe structures num inches or less in diameter reshaping any deformed ends on metal entrance pipe and disposing of unsuitable entrance pipe for payment and will consider them incidental to ditching .
num shouldering .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet along the centerline of the roadway which measurement will include the shoulder construction on both sides of the roadway .
the department will not measure disposal of the materials removed by clearing and will consider it incidental to shouldering .
num ditching and shouldering .
the department will measure the quantity as the gross length of the project measured in linear feet along the centerline of the roadway .
the department will include in the quantity all work required on the road approaches within the limits of the rightofway .
the department will not measure cleaning pipe structures num inches or less in diameter reshaping any deformed ends on metal entrance pipe and disposing of unsuitable entrance pipe and will consider them incidental to ditching and shouldering .
the department will not measure disposal of the materials removed by clearing and ditching and will consider it incidental to ditching and shouldering .
num shoulder surfacing .
the department will measure according to the applicable surfacing section .
the department will not measure the final roadway surface course for payment until the shoulders are completed .
the department will make partial payments for the final surface course for the portions of the project that the shoulders are substantially completed .
num clean pipe structure .
when cross drains and entrance pipe that exceed num inches in diameter require cleaning the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num ditching linear foot pay unit num shouldering linear foot num ditching and shouldering linear foot num aggregate for shoulders ton num aggregate for entrances ton num aggregate for mailbox turnouts ton num crushed stone base see subsection num num entrance pipe size see subsection num num num clean pipe structure each the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num embankment drainage blankets num description .
construct embankment drainage blankets for embankment stabilization .
num materials .
num coarse aggregate rock drainage blanket .
conform to section num .
num natural sand sand drainage blanket .
conform to section num .
num construction .
construct either a rock drainage blanket or sand drainage blanket according to the plans or as the engineer directs .
when geotextile fabric is required construct the drainage blanket according to subsection num .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards based on the design quantity .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num drainage blanket embankment cubic yard pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num final dressing num description .
perform final dressing class a on all grade and drain projects and grade drain and surface projects .
perform final dressing class b on surfacing projects and resurfacing projects when listed in the proposal as a separate contract item .
num materials and equipment .
reserved .
num construction .
perform final dressing to produce a uniform finish to all parts of the roadway .
do not disturb slopes having satisfactory vegetative covering without the engineers approval .
num final dressing class a .
perform the following num clear the rightofway of all weeds briers bushes and trees except those trees designated by the engineer to remain when clearing and grubbing is a contract item .
num remove all sediment drift and other debris from all entrance structures and cross drainage structures .
num dispose of the materials so removed .
num shape areas designated by the engineer to receive seeding and protection .
num shape and dress shoulders ditches and slopes to the lines grades and cross sections specified in the contract .
num shape the slopes of ditches channels and borrow pits .
num fill with suitable material all holes and depressions resulting from the removal of structures grubbing operations or other construction operations .
num final dressing class b .
perform according to final dressing class a except perform work from ditch line to ditch line .
when solid rock is encountered in ditches the engineer will not require excavation below the elevation of the solid rock .
num measurement .
num final dressing class a .
the department will not measure final dressing class a for payment and will consider it incidental to the earthwork items bid .
num final dressing class b .
the department will measure final dressing class b as the net length of surfacing or resurfacing in linear feet .
when the project is a multilane divided highway and a portion is constructed as separate roadways the department will measure the actual length of the section or sections so constructed as the actual length of the right hand roadway as defined by the direction of the stationing .
the department will measure the quantity in feet along the centerline of the roadway .
the department will include in the quantity all final dressing within the lateral limits defined for final dressing class b as specified in the contract and all necessary final dressing of borrow pits waterways ramps cross roads service roads frontage roads multilevel roadways and approaches and other areas falling outside the limits of the rightofway but being appurtenant to the contract .
when the material removed as directed exceeds num inches in average depth measured perpendicularly to the existing cross section lines the department will measure the additional material as roadway excavation .
num roadway excavation .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num final dressing class b linear foot pay unit num roadway excavation see subsection num the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num erosion control num description .
construct brush barriers prepare the soil for seeding apply materials and mulch areas seeded or sodded .
num materials .
conform to section num .
num construction .
progressively incorporate erosion control measures with the grading operations throughout the duration of the project according to section num .
num brush barriers .
construct barriers that are dense num to num feet in height and num to num feet wide .
do not locate barriers where diverted drainage will create erosion problems .
do not use brush barriers at sites where the adjacent private property has been residentially or commercially developed .
do not construct the barriers at sites easily and routinely seen that will detract from the appearance of either the adjacent property or the completed highway .
num topsoil .
when included in the contract as a bid item either furnish and place topsoil or place stockpiled topsoil .
a furnish and place topsoil .
when the bid item is furnish and place topsoil obtain topsoil conforming to section num from source outside the rightofway limits .
avoid injury to existing planted growths structures and paved surfaces during topsoil operations .
provide equipment and methods of operation that prevent the loading of subsoil or other unsuitable material with the topsoil .
during hauling operations keep pavement surfaces clean .
promptly and completely remove any topsoil or other substances dropped on the surfaces before it is compacted by traffic .
prepare areas designated to receive topsoil .
then place and spread topsoil to a sufficient loose depth so that after natural settlement and rolling the completed work conforms to the required line grades and elevations .
compact the topsoil and prepare the area for seeding according to subsection num .
b spreading stockpiled topsoil .
when the bid item is spreading stockpiled topsoil obtain the material from existing stockpile on or near the project .
do not spread topsoil until grading and shaping of the area to receive the topsoil has been completed and seeding and protection operations are ready to begin .
spread and lightly compact the topsoil to a uniform depth of approximately num inches over areas specified in the plans or as the engineer directs .
do not place topsoil on slopes steeper than num .
prepare the area for seeding according to subsection num .
num permanent seeding and protection .
grade exposed earth and any other erodible areas to a uniform cross section or slope as soon as practical in the judgment of the engineer and then perform permanent seeding and protection at the earliest practical time .
prepare all areas within the construction limits and right of way limits that can be expected to sustain plant growth and are not covered by satisfactory vegetation for permanent seeding .
the engineer will designate areas to be seeded .
a seed mixtures for permanent seeding .
for all projects within urban areas the seed mix will be modified to only include fescue and ryegrass .
seed mix type i num kentucky num tall fescue festuca arundinacea num num creeping red fescue festuca rubra num hard fescue festuca festuca longifolia num ryegrass perennial lolium perenne num white dutch clover trifolium repens seed mix type ii num kentucky num tall fescue festuca arundinacea num ryegrass perennial lolium perenne num based on pure live seed pls little bluestem schizachyrium scoparium num partridge pea cassia fasciculate seed mix type iii num kentucky num tall fescue festuca arundinacea num perennial ryegrass lolium perenne num sericea lespedeza lespedeza cuneata num partridge pea cassia fasciculate num based on pure live seed pls little bluestem schizachyrium scoparium num permanent seeding on slopes num or less .
apply seed mix type i at a minimum application rate of num pounds per acre .
num permanent seeding on slopes greater than num in highway districts num num num and num .
apply seed mix type ii at a minimum application rate of num pounds per acre plus a nurse crop of either cereal rye or german foxtail millet based on the time of year .
during the months of june through august apply num pounds of german foxtailmillet setaria italica .
during the months of september through may apply num pounds of cereal rye secale cereale .
if adjacent to golf courses replace the crown vetch with kentucky num tall fescue .
num permanent seeding on slopes greater than num in highway districts num num num num num num num and num .
apply seed mix type iii at a minimum application rate of num pounds per acre plus a nurse crop of either cereal rye or german foxtailmillet based on the time of year .
during the months of june through august apply num pounds of german foxtailmillet setaria italica .
during the months of september through may apply num pounds of cereal rye secale cereale .
if adjacent to crop land or golf course replace the sericea lespedeza with kentucky num tall fescue .
b procedures for permanent seeding .
include a seeding plan in the best management practices plan bmp according to section num .
prepare a seedbed and incorporate a minimum of num pounds of nitrogen num pounds of phosphate num pounds of potash and num tons of agricultural limestone per acre .
add additional fertilizer and agricultural limestone as needed .
do not apply dry agricultural limestone when it may generate a traffic hazard .
remove all rock and dirt clods over num inches in diameter from the surface of the seedbed .
unless the engineer directs otherwise track all slopes num or greater .
ensure that tracking is performed up and down and not across .
native grass seed should be calculated figuring seed on a pure live seed basis pls using the least amount of inert matter available .
seed and mulch to produce a uniform vegetation cover using the seeding rates as indicated to each application .
mulch with clean weed free straw .
place straw to an approximate numinch loose depth num tons per acre and anchor it into the soil by mechanically crimping it into the soil surface or applying tackifier to provide a protective cover .
for the periods of march num through may num and from september num through november num the department num may allow the option of using hydromulch at minimum rate of num pounds per acre in place of straw with tackifier .
regardless of materials used ensure the protective cover holds until seeding is acceptably established according to part g of this subsection .
c crown vetch .
when seed mix type ii is specified sow crown vetch seed on all areas having a slope num or steeper and consisting of soil or mixtures of broken rock and soil .
also sow crown vetch on soil seams and crevices within or adjacent to rock cuts and flat areas of benched slopes .
sow crown vetch seed uniformly at a rate that will provide num live seedlings per square yard and at a rate of no less than num pounds per acre .
d top dressing .
when quantities for num fertilizer are included in the contract apply a top dressing of num fertilizer to all seeding and sodded areas on the project at a rate of num pounds per num square feet .
use dry fertilizer delivered to the project in bags or bulk .
apply top dressing to all areas within the right of way limits where satisfactory vegetation has been established or preserved .
apply top dressing at the time the contract or engineer designates however do not apply top dressing during the months of december and january .
do not apply top dressing until a satisfactory stand of vegetation exists .
the engineer will not require incorporation of these materials into the soil .
reapply fertilizer to any top dressed areas that later exhibit streaked or missed areas .
re establish any vegetation severely damaged or destroyed because of an excessive application of fertilizer .
when seeding performed during the latter part of the project has not had time to attain significant growth before completing all other contract items the engineer will declare the project complete without regard to top dressing work .
perform top dressing at a later time approved by the engineer .
the engineer will not include the time necessary to complete top dressing work in the contract item and will assess no liquidated damages provided the work is completed within the time limits according to subsection num .
e erosion control blanket .
install erosion control blankets in ditches except those to be paved or rock lined to a flow depth of num feet .
install erosion control blankets on final soillike slopes as designated on the erosion control plan and as the engineer directs .
prepare the bed by loosening the soil to a depth of num to num inches .
apply fertilizer limestone and seed at the permanent seeding rate .
cover with the erosion control blanket .
roll out the blanket in the direction of the anticipated runoff flow .
anchor the blanket at the top and toe of slopes and at the top toe and edges of channels and ditches as the anchoring edges and ends figure shows including burying the blanket .
secure the blanket by stapling as the stapling pattern figure shows .
at seams overlap the blanket as the seam overlaps figure shows .
rework areas that become unstable or do not establish vegetation .
num f maintenance of seeded areas .
from the time seeding and protection work begins until the date the project is declared complete keep all seeded areas in good condition at all times .
promptly repair any damage to seeded areas or to mulch materials as directed .
mow when the engineer directs .
g acceptance of seeding .
the engineer will make an inspection to determine the acceptability of the seeding between num and num months after completion of the project .
the engineer may delay the inspection when conditions are such that the acceptability of the seeding can not be determined at the end of the nummonth num period .
ensure the seeded areas have a soil ph level of num or greater .
ensure that at least num percent of each seeded area has a minimum of num live seedlings per square yard at the time of inspection representative of the specified seed mixture with no vacant areas larger than num square yards .
also ensure that all applicable areas have a minimum of num live area seedlings per square yard of crown vetch .
conform to this requirement for all permanent seeding performed in conjunction with the project regardless of the type of protection used or the season in which the seeding is performed .
when seeding does not conform to the live seedling requirements at the time of inspection submit a corrective work plan to the engineer for approval and perform the additional work necessary to conform to the original requirements .
the department reserves the right to specify application rates for agricultural lime fertilizer seed and mulch for corrective seeding .
num sodding .
at locations specified in the contract or by the engineer prepare the sod bed incorporate fertilizer and agricultural limestone as needed and place sod flush with any adjacent seeded or turfed area pavement curb or other structures .
the engineer will make an inspection to determine the acceptability of the sod between num and num months after completion of the project .
ensure that at least num percent is alive with no area of dead sod larger than one square yard .
num measurement .
num brush barriers .
the department will not measure the quantity of brush barriers for payment and will consider construction of brush barriers incidental to clearing and grubbing .
num topsoil furnished and placed .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards in the vehicle at the point of delivery .
num spreading stockpiled topsoil .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards by taking cross sections of stockpiles immediately before spreading operations and taking final cross sections of the stockpile area after spreading has been completed and the area neatly dressed .
when electing to place the topsoil directly without stockpiling according to subsection num b then the engineer will not separately measure the topsoil not stockpiled .
num agricultural limestone .
the department will not measure the quantity of agricultural limestone for payment and will consider it incidental to seeding and protection and sodding .
num fertilizer .
the department will not measure the fertilizer used in the seeding or sodding operations for payment and will consider it incidental to these items of work .
the engineer will measure the fertilizer used for top dressing in tons .
the engineer will weigh top dressing according to section num .
num seeding and protection .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards as the design quantity specified in the plans increased or decreased by authorized adjustments .
when it can be shown actual quantities vary from the design quantity by more than num percent the department will measure the actual quantity in square yards .
the department will include in the authorized adjustments any seeding and protection necessary due to catastrophic events that are beyond the control of the contractor .
the department will not measure any corrective work required to conform to num subsection num f. the department will not measure seeding and protection of areas unnecessarily disturbed or disturbed areas outside the limits of construction .
num erosion control blanket .
the department will measure the quantity of erosion control blanket by the square yard of surface covered .
the department will not measure seeding for payment and will consider it incidental to the erosion control blanket .
the department will not measure any reworking of slopes channels or ditches for payment as it is considered corrective work and incidental to the erosion control blanket .
num sodding .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
the department will not measure any additional sod necessary to restore areas that fail to conform to the original requirements .
num crown vetch .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
num mowing .
when mowing is required the department will measure and pay for the quantities under a supplemental agreement .
num payment .
the department will pay for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num topsoil furnished and placed cubic yard pay unit num spreading stockpiled topsoil cubic yard num topdressing fertilizer ton num seeding and protection square yard num erosion control blanket square yard num special seeding crown vetch square yard num sodding square yard the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num water pollution control num description .
control water pollution through use of berms dikes dams sediment basins fiber mats netting gravel mulches grasses slope drains and other erosion control devices or methods .
coordinate these measures with the permanent erosion control features specified in section num and the contract to the extent practical to ensure effective and continuous erosion control throughout the construction and post construction period .
num materials and personnel .
num materials .
conform to section num .
num personnel .
provide a qualified erosion and sediment control inspector .
the department will require the erosion and sediment control inspector to have successfully completed the kepscri qualification training and testing course .
personnel that have not successfully completed the course will not be considered qualified .
num construction .
conform to the applicable provisions of krs chapters num and num of the state water pollution control laws and other applicable statutes relating to the prevention or abatement of water pollution .
conform to the requirements of all federal and state agencies having jurisdictional control over the land the project is constructed through .
secure all permits and clearance letters from the appropriate agencies for impacts to streams and for borrow and excess material sites when these areas have not been assessed or permitted by the department .
exercise every reasonable precaution to prevent the pollution of streams lakes and reservoirs .
construct all permanent drainage structures ditch checks and paved ditches as soon as practical .
conduct and schedule operations to avoid the muddying or siltation of streams lakes and reservoirs and to avoid damage to fish habitats .
while work on an item is suspended do not leave the partially completed item in a manner that will contribute to erosion .
construct water pollution controls in stream channels only in areas where channel changes or channel clearings are specified in the plans or where necessary for temporary or permanent structures .
do not divert water through channel changes until the specified channel lining has been constructed or placed unless there is no alternative in the judgment of the engineer .
do not place material removed from the roadway or channel changes in streams stream channels other areas subject to flooding or other locations where it may be washed away by high stream flows or fast runoff .
do not place harmful materials where they may be carried into a stream or into underground water at any time .
provide temporary bridges or structures for hauling materials across streams .
do not operate mechanized equipment in streams except as required for the construction of structures and channel changes or for clearing channels .
keep clearing of stream side trees to the absolute minimum necessary for the construction of the project .
when materials known to produce pollutants are encountered excavate place cover or otherwise deter the material as a potential pollutant according to the contract and as the engineer directs .
do not disturb lands and waters outside the limits of the construction .
before final acceptance of the work reshape all such disturbed areas including abandoned haul roads storage areas and plant sites to conform to the adjacent ground .
num best management practices bmp .
before any disturbance is made sign the bmp plan from the proposal perform an initial site inspection with the engineer record what areas are to be disturbed to begin the project designate on this report what bmps will be used design bmps according to good engineering practices and install the num designated bmps .
before opening or affecting any new areas repeat this process and ensure all bmps are installed before starting .
the department will apply a penalty equal to the liquidated damages when any disturbance is made without adequate bmps in place .
the penalty will be assessed each day until adequate bmps are installed .
include erosion control for all off right of way work performed under a department acquired permit .
ensure that the bmp is available for public inspection throughout the life of the project .
num progress requirements .
coordinate the progress of both permanent and temporary erosion control measures with the clearing grubbing and grading operations throughout the duration of the project and according to the bmp .
the engineer will limit the area of excavation borrow and embankment operations commensurate with the contractors capability of maintaining the finish grading seeding and other such permanent pollution control measures according to the accepted schedule .
for areas greater than num square feet submit a written request for approval to the engineer .
keep the duration of the exposure of the uncompleted construction as short as practical .
after exposing areas of erodible material make every effort to stabilize and protect the areas as quickly as possible .
seed and mulch areas at final grade within num days .
temporary mulch areas not at final grade within num days of the last construction activity if work is to be stopped for longer than num days .
temporary mulch soil stock piles within num days of the last construction activity in that area .
upon failure to coordinate the erosion control measures with the grading operations in a manner to effectively control erosion and to prevent water pollution the engineer will suspend the grading operations and withhold monies due on current estimates until all aspects of the work are coordinated in an acceptable manner .
additionally the department will apply a penalty equal to the liquidated damages when all aspects of the work are not coordinated in an acceptable manner within num days after written notification .
in case of repeated failures to control erosion pollution or siltation the engineer reserves the right to employ outside assistance or use department forces to provide the necessary corrective measures .
the department will charge such incurred direct costs plus project engineering costs to the contractor and make appropriate deductions from the pay estimate .
num inspection and maintenance .
ensure a qualified erosion and sediment control inspector inspects all erosion control devices weekly and after each numinch rainfall event .
remove all accumulated silt when the devices are onethird full .
the engineer will monitor the inplace erosion control for the project once every num calendar days and within num hours following a numinch or greater rainfall .
the engineer will furnish the documentation of this monitoring and any proposed changes due to this monitoring to the contractor .
this documentation and any proposed changes are to be included with the bmp plan .
initiate corrective action within num hours of any noted deficiency and complete the work within num calendar days of receipt of the report .
the contractor shall make a concentrated effort to complete any corrective action required prior to the next predicted rainfall event .
when the contractor is required to obtain the kpdes permit it is their responsibility to ensure compliance with the inspection and maintenance requirements of the permit .
the engineer will perform verification inspections a minimum of once per month and within num days of a  inch or greater rainfall event .
the engineer will document these inspections using form tc num a .
the engineer will provide copies of the inspection only when improvements to the bmps are required .
verification inspections performed by the engineer do not relieve the contractor of any responsibility for compliance with the kpdes permit .
initiate corrective action within num hours of any noted deficiency and complete the work within numcalendar days of receipt of the report .
the contractor shall make a concentrated effort to complete any corrective action required prior to the next predicted rainfall event .
num num construction activities affecting streams .
when instream work is unavoidable perform it in a manner and duration to minimize resuspension of sediments and disturbance to substrates and bank or riparian vegetation .
to the maximum extent practical perform all work during low flow conditions .
take appropriate measures to maintain normal downstream flows and minimize flooding to the maximum extent practicable .
investigate for water intakes or other activities immediately downstream affected by increased turbidity resulting from the work .
before beginning any work in the stream give sufficient notice to allow the downstream water users to prepare for any temporary change in water quality .
use nonerodible fill or riprap that will not adversely affect the biological chemical or physical properties of the receiving waters or cause violations of water quality standards .
when riprap or channel lining is installed use a weight and size that will not create bank stress or slump conditions .
on channel slopes not riprapped or otherwise stabilized revegetate stream banks and riparian zones concurrently with project progression to restore beneficial wildlife habitat .
when specified in the contract randomly place in offset rows trees and shrubs as specified in the plans on either one side or both sides of the channel bank and upstream and downstream of a proposed bridge within the disturbed area as specified in the plans .
limit each species to num percent of the total .
the contract will specify the seeds shrubs and trees and include a quantity to be selected from each category .
the plans will include the rate of seeding .
the department may allow an adjustment in the plant species and quantities based on field conditions .
do not dump spoil materials from the watercourse or onshore operations including sludge deposits into the watercourse according to section num guidelines of the clean water act .
provide areas of deposit of dredged materials with temporary dikes or bulkheads for separation and retention of settleable solids .
when specified in the plans place soil excavated from an existing channel at designated locations along the new channel .
this and any stockpiling or double handling necessary is considered incidental to the earthwork bid items on the project .
carry out the fill created by the discharge and any disposition of dredged or excavated materials onshore and all earthwork operations to control and minimize sediment run off and soil erosion to the watercourse .
place all permanent structures in the stream to allow fish movement through the site .
when specified in the plans construct artificial riffle structures flow deflectors boulders or other types of structures to replace in stream aquatic habitat .
num temporary control measures .
provide and maintain immediate permanent or temporary pollution control measures to prevent contamination of adjacent property watercourses lakes ponds or other areas of water impoundment .
incorporate all permanent erosion control features into the project at the earliest practical time as outlined in the accepted schedule .
provide inlet and outlet protection at existing drainage structures .
install temporary controls as needed through the duration of the project .
coordinate the temporary pollution control measures with the permanent erosion control features to the extent deemed practical by the engineer to ensure effective and continuous erosion control throughout the construction and postconstruction periods .
temporary pollution controls may include construction work outside the rightofway where such work is necessary as a result of roadway construction such as borrow pit operations haul roads and equipment storage sites .
a sedimentation basins .
as the first grading operation in the drainage area construct an earth or rock and earth dam with designated spillways according to the plans .
when a sedimentation basin is to be used and plans are not included in the contract submit plans designed according to chapter num of the departments drainage guidance manual to the engineer for approval before construction .
either clean out and dress or remove the sedimentation basin as the engineer directs upon completion of the project .
num b silt traps .
use one of the following types num type a. construct silt traps by excavating basins in natural or excavated channels .
traps may consist of a pit a berm or both .
excavate pits from num to num feet deep num to num feet in length and num to num feet in width .
do not construct berms greater than num feet in height without the engineers approval .
num type b construct silt traps in roadway ditches or excavated channels .
use type ii geotextile fabric clean no .
num aggregate or shot rock of similar size quality and gradation approved by the engineer and crushed aggregate .
construct according to the plans and standard drawings .
num type c place interlocking layers of bagged aggregate around curb inlets drop box inlets and culvert inlets according to the standard drawings .
remove sediment deposited in silt traps when they are greater than half full .
when no longer needed remove the silt traps and dispose of surplus materials according to subsection num .
seed and protect or sod the entire area disturbed as the engineer directs .
do not leave silt traps in place after completion of the project unless allowed by the engineer or specified in the plans .
c temporary silt fence .
furnish install according to the standard drawings maintain and remove temporary silt fence .
the temporary silt fence works as a water permeable filter to remove suspended particles from the water passing through it .
construct as shown in the contract continuous and transverse to the flow .
limit the equivalent runoff area to num square feet per num feet of temporary silt fence .
leave gaps and install type a silt traps in low areas or drainways .
maintain the temporary silt fence after installation .
remove silt accumulations by tapping the dry fabric from the downstream side and dispose of it as excavated materials .
replace the geotextile fabric when clogging damage or deterioration prevents it from functioning properly .
when no longer needed remove and dispose of the fence off the rightof way .
dispose of the accumulated silt or dress in place and seed and protect the area .
d temporary ditch .
as erodible areas are exposed construct temporary ditches where needed to divert runoff from erosive soil areas to the silt traps or checks or silt ditches .
construct interceptor ditches or silt fences at the top of cut slopes when beginning excavation .
construct ditches adjacent and parallel to the right ofway in relatively rolling areas where in the judgment of the engineer adjacent property may be damaged from sheettype soil erosion .
construct silt checks within the ditch or at the outlet .
construct surface ditches roadside ditches and flumes to carry runoff from the roadway at the earliest possible time during the grading work .
construct the ditches according to the plans and standard drawings at the locations designated by the engineer .
when needed use pipe as liners for these temporary ditches .
the engineer will approve the type and location of the ditches as well as the need for a liner .
install the pipe liner according to the plans and standard drawings .
use pipe of any substantial type or material for overflow pipe in the construction of temporary silt basins and for flumes .
when fill slopes have been constructed to such a stage that protection of the face of the slope from roadway runoff is necessary construct a temporary earth mound ditch or silt fence at the outer edge of the shoulder along the top of the embankment as directed by the engineer .
construct the ditch to form an earth mound on the embankment side of the ditch and carry runoff from the roadway along the shoulder to the flumes and roadside ditches .
use temporary berm ditches at the top of fill slopes after completing the permanent seeding and num protection work and until beginning the surfacing operations .
stabilize the ditch and mound by spraying with asphaltic material when deemed necessary .
e temporary seeding and protection .
apply an annual rye seed mix at a rate of num pounds per acre during the months of march through august .
in addition to the annual rye add num pounds of german foxtailmillet setaria italica when performing temporary seeding during the months of june through august .
during the months of september through february apply winter wheat or rye grain at a rate of num pounds per acre .
obtain the engineers approval prior to the application of the seed mixture .
promptly perform the work of temporary seeding and protection to prevent visible erosion .
protect all seeded areas with a mulch that precludes siltation .
perform temporary seeding and protection under the following conditions num when it is impractical to bring an area to final line grade and finish so that permanent seeding and protection work can be performed without subsequent serious disturbance by additional grading .
num when soil erosion occurs or is considered to be a potential problem on areas where construction operations are temporarily suspended .
num when an immediate cover would be desirable to minimize erosion siltation or pollution .
num on temporary roadways that are expected to remain in place for longer than num days and that are constructed of erodible materials .
f temporary mulch .
obtain the engineers approval for the mulch before use .
when temporary seeding and protection would be required but the time of exposure is num days or less perform the work of temporary mulching to prevent visible erosion .
place temporary mulch to an approximate numinch loose depth num tons per acre and anchor it into the soil by mechanically crimping it into the soil surface or applying tackifier to provide a protective cover .
regardless of the anchoring method used ensure the protective cover holds until disturbance is required or permanent controls are in installed .
num measurement .
the department will consider the various materials and labor used to construct maintain and when no longer needed remove the erosion control devices incidental to the initial construction .
the department will not measure maintenance or corrective work for payment when it is due to a failure in following the bmp .
num roadway excavation .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num embankmentinplace .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num temporary seeding and protection .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
the department will not measure temporary erosion and pollution control measures required due to negligence carelessness or failure to install permanent controls as a part of the work as scheduled .
when construction of a temporary roadway is required by the contract the department will measure the associated temporary seeding and protection .
the department will not measure temporary seeding and protection of temporary roadways constructed for the convenience of the contractor .
num temporary mulch .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
the department will not measure temporary erosion and pollution control measures required due to negligence carelessness or failure to install permanent controls as a part of the work as scheduled .
when construction of a temporary roadway is required num by the contract the department will measure the associated temporary mulch .
the department will not measure temporary mulch for temporary roadways constructed for the convenience of the contractor .
num pipe for flumes .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
num sedimentation basin .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards .
the department will not measure filter pipe drain pipe and spillway paving on sedimentation basins for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num clean sedimentation basin .
the department will measure the quantity of sediment removed in cubic yards .
num silt trap type .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num clean silt trap type .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num temporary silt fence .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet from end post to end post of each installation .
num clean temporary silt fence .
the department will measure quantity in linear feet along the fence .
num temporary ditch .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
the department will measure pipe used in temporary ditches according to subsection num .
the department will not measure materials used to construct silt checks within the temporary ditch and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num channel lining classes ia ii iii and iv .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num plants trees vines and shrubs .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num deflector gabion .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num deflector dumped stone .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num riffle structure dumped stone .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num riffle structure gabion .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num boulder .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num clean temporary ditch .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet along the ditch line .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following num code pay item num seeding and protection see subsection num pay unit num roadway excavation see subsection num num borrow excavation see subsection num num embankmentinplace see subsection num num temporary seeding and protection square yard num temporary mulch square yard pipe for flumes linear foot num sedimentation basin cubic yard num clean sedimentation basin cubic yard num num num silt trap type each num num num clean silt trap type each num temporary silt fence linear foot num clean temporary silt fence linear foot num channel lining classes ia ii iii and iv see subsection num num plants vines and shrubs see subsection num trees see subsection num num deflector gabion each num deflector dumped stone each num riffle structure dumped stone each num riffle structure gabion each num boulder each num temporary ditch linear foot num clean temporary ditch linear foot the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num geotextile construction num description .
install geotextile fabric when required in the contract for slope protection and channel lining underdrains and drainage blankets and subgrade or embankment foundation stabilization .
num materials .
num geotextile fabric .
conform to section num .
num steel pins .
conform to section num .
num construction .
the engineer will reject the fabric if it has defects rips holes flaws deterioration or damage .
prepare the surface to receive the fabric to a smooth condition free of obstructions debris or sharp objects that may puncture the fabric .
place the fabric smooth and free of tension stress folds wrinkles or creases .
do not operate equipment directly on the fabric .
protect the fabric at all times from contamination .
remove and replace any contaminated fabric with uncontaminated fabric .
repair or replace any fabric damaged .
repair individual isolated cuts tears or punctures by placing a patch of geotextile fabric that extends at least num feet beyond the damage in all directions or by field splicing the patch .
cover the fabric with a layer of the specified material within num calendar days .
remove and replace fabric not covered within the num days .
num laps .
when more than one strip is necessary place an overlap of at least num inches .
place transverse laps so the upstream strip laps over the downstream strip .
place horizontal laps so the upper strip laps over the lower strip .
install fastener pins through both strips of overlapped fabric at no less than numfoot intervals along a line through the midpoint of the overlap and at any other locations as necessary to prevent any slippage of the fabric .
the department will allow field splices in place of laps .
num field splices .
sew the full length of the boundary between adjacent sheets of fabric .
ensure that the seam strength conforms to the requirements of section num .
num slope protection and channel lining .
place type i fabric with the long dimension parallel to the channel or toe of slope .
protect the fabric from damage due to the placement of the slope protection or channel lining either by limiting the height of drop of the material to no greater than num feet or by placing a cushioning layer of sand on top of the fabric before dumping the material .
demonstrate to the engineer that the placement technique prevents damage to the fabric .
begin placement of material at the toe and proceed up the slope .
num underdrains .
place and shape type ii fabric to the sides and bottom of the trench without stretching the fabric .
place filter aggregate so as not to damage displace or dislodge the fabric according to subsection num .
fold the fabric over the backfilled trench and secured it with steel pins at intervals of num feet to produce a double thickness of fabric over the top of the trench .
num subgrade or embankment foundation stabilization .
place type iii fabric with the long dimension parallel to the long dimension of the area to be covered .
leave surface vegetation in place .
during back dumping and spreading do not allow the wheels of trucks dozer blades and other equipment to come into direct contact with the fabric .
spread the material in the direction of the fabric overlap .
if large fabric wrinkles develop during spreading num operations fold and flatten the wrinkles in the direction of spreading .
avoid large folds which reduce the fabric overlap width .
num drainage blankets .
place type iv fabric with the long dimension parallel to the long dimension of the area to be covered .
place the drainage blanket material to present a reasonably even surface free from mounds or depressions .
after the material is placed fold the fabric over the ends and sides of the material and place additional fabric over the material so that the material is completely encased within the fabric .
install additional pins regardless of the location as necessary to prevent any slippage of the fabric .
place the fabric so that laps do not occur at the edges or ends of the drainage blanket .
place embankment in a manner to avoid damage or displacement of the completed drainage blanket .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
the department will not measure fabric when the contract indicates the fabric is incidental to the work or when the specification for another item requires incidental installation of geotextile fabric .
the department will not measure material in laps or seams .
when fabric is used for underdrains either to wrap perforated pipe or to wrap aggregate the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
when the fabric is used to completely enclose an aggregate drainage blanket the department will measure the quantity as the sum of num the area of the lower surface of the aggregate layer num the area of the upper surface of the aggregate layer and num the area of the sides and ends of the aggregate layer using the dimensions specified in the plans .
the department will not measure for payment the repair or replacement of damaged fabric or replacement of fabric not covered within num days .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num fabricgeotextile type square yard pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num treatment of open sinkholes num description .
clean and fill open sinkholes and cap open sinkholes not used for drainage .
protect sinkholes not being filled and capped .
num materials .
num geotextile fabric .
conform to section num type iv .
num concrete .
use class b concrete conforming to subsection num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num construction .
locate and flag all open sinkholes before starting clearing and grubbing operations .
clear the sinkhole area according to section num .
remove the soil overburden organic material and debris from the sinkhole as specified in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
place geotextile fabric between any soil and the granular embankment refill .
refill the sinkhole with granular embankment and compact it as the engineer directs .
furnish granular embankment refill conforming to the following requirements a roadway excavation .
when obtaining granular embankment from roadway excavation the engineer will accept it by visual inspection .
use granular embankment that is free of shale or other deleterious materials .
b offsite materials .
use granular embankment having no more than num percent passing the no .
num sieve when tested according to km num .
the engineer will inspect the quality of all granular embankments .
the engineer will accept the processed material by visual inspection when the material includes a significant amount of fragments greater than num num inches .
do not use natural sand and other fine aggregates .
the engineer will approve the size and type of refill .
c clay .
for clay soil cap use an impervious clay the engineer approves .
compact according to section num .
d concrete .
use a cap of reinforced concrete precast or castinplace with a minimum thickness of one foot as specified in the contract or as the engineer directs .
use class b concrete according to subsection num .
furnish precast concrete according to section num .
reinforce the concrete with no .
num bars placed on onefoot centers in both directions and located num inches from the bottom surface of the concrete .
interlock the concrete cap with bedrock .
protect sinkholes not to be filled and capped when runoff may reach its location .
place a protective ring using type ii geotextile fabric clean no .
num aggregate or shot rock of similar size quality and gradation approved by the engineer and crushed aggregate .
num measurement .
num granular embankment .
when the material is available within the right ofway the department will consider granular embankment used for refill incidental to roadway excavation or embankmentinplace .
when material within the rightofway is unacceptable for refill the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards as granular embankment .
num clay soil cap .
the department will not measure the clay soil cap as a separate item of work and will consider it incidental to roadway excavation or embankmentin place .
num geotextile fabric .
the department will measure the quantity according num to subsection num .
num concrete class b .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num cleaning sinkhole .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit cleaned .
num steel reinforcement .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num crushed aggregate .
the department will measure the quantity in tons according to section num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num granular embankment cubic yard pay unit num geotextile fabric type see subsection num num concrete class b see subsection num num clean sinkhole each num steel reinforcement see section num crushed aggregate size ton the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num settlement platforms num description .
furnish all materials construction installation and maintenance of settlement platforms as the engineer directs .
num materials .
num miscellaneous metals .
conform to section num .
num fine aggregate .
conform to section num .
num steel pipe .
the engineer will visually inspect for acceptance .
num construction .
fabricate from the materials and to the dimensions specified in the plans or standard drawing for settlement platforms .
level the ground surface to an elevation num inches below the desired elevation of the base plate of the settlement platform .
level over a sufficient area to accommodate the bottom plate and at the location shown or directed .
place lightly tamp and level a numinch layer of fine aggregate at the proposed location of the bottom plate .
set and level the bottom plate on the fine aggregate .
place loose soil to an elevation corresponding to that of the top plate of the settlement platform .
ensure that the loose soil does not disturb the platform and that it extends laterally from the perimeter of the top plate to a slope of num or flatter .
after placing and leveling the top plate complete the embankment as specified for the project and ensure that the settlement platform is not damaged or disturbed .
the engineer will measure and record settlement to the nearest num foot and elevation of the embankment at weekly intervals or more frequently in order that no more than num percent of the expected settlement occurs between readings .
the engineer will submit the data to the division of materials weekly .
stop work at any location where settlement platforms are disturbed or damaged and make necessary repairs or replacement .
as the embankment is constructed add sections of num numinch and numinch pipe to the assembly tighten each new section of num numinch pipe with a pipe wrench before taking a reading to ensure that the next added section does not affect future readings .
keep the top of the outer pipe closed as work progresses with a num inch standard cap .
when work is complete secure the cap to the final outer pipe section .
num measurement .
num settlement platforms .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num steel pipe .
the department will measure each size in linear feet .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num settlement platform each pay unit num steel pipe num numinch linear foot num steel pipe numinch linear foot the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
division num aggregate base courses num section num trafficbound base num description .
construct trafficbound base courses with one or more courses of coarse aggregate on a prepared subgrade .
when the contract provides for trafficbound surfacing of road approaches private entrances and turnouts in conjunction with other highway surfacing or paving operations perform such work according to section num .
num materials .
furnish aggregate conforming to section num .
num construction .
num preparation of subgrade .
prepare and maintain the subgrade according to section num .
num placing aggregates .
spread the aggregate in the number of courses and at the rate of application indicated in the contract to the width and depth specified .
place additional aggregate to strengthen weakened areas as the engineer directs .
when practical route hauling equipment uniformly over all portions of the previously laid courses of the base .
the department will not require any additional compaction .
obtain the engineers permission prior to revising this procedure for distribution of aggregate into the dense grade aggregate or crush stone base lift .
when plans require the removal and replacement of traffic bound base any new aggregate used will be paid as traffic bound base .
when the engineer deems the traffic bound base has been contaminated by the contractor or their vendors with foreign materials to such an extent that it no longer provides the required riding surface replace the traffic bound base at no cost to the cabinet .
all traffic bound base used for mailbox turn outs and entrances is to be paid as part of the bid item .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity in tons according to section num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num trafficbound base ton pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num dense graded aggregate base dga and crushed stone base csb num description .
construct the base on a prepared subgrade .
num materials .
num aggregate .
conform to section num .
num water .
conform to section num .
num mixer .
equip the mixer with a water flow system with a positive cutoff control that will stop the flow of water simultaneously with any stoppage in the flow of aggregate and with valves or other devices that can be easily reset when a change in the rate of flow is desired .
num construction .
prepare the subgrade according to section num and keep it free from irregularities .
when reshaping and compacting or scarifying and reshaping is not specified for existing trafficbound surfaces grade and shape to the grade and cross section required .
construct shoulders according to section num .
num mixing .
thoroughly mix the aggregate and water in a pugmill type mixer unless another type mixer is approved .
add water as needed to compact to the specified inplace density .
num transporting .
transport the plantmixed material to the project without loss or segregation .
cover each truck load with a heavy canvas sheet to reduce the loss of moisture during transit .
num placing and spreading .
place and shape the mixture by use of approved power equipment to the specified lines grades cross sections and depths without segregation .
equipment used should provide a uniform depth and cross section unless special circumstances prevent the use of the equipment .
in these cases written approval by the engineer must be obtained prior to placement of the material .. place spread shape and compact in a manner that is as continuous as practical during each days run .
wet the base as directed during shaping and compaction operations to maintain the moisture content at the level necessary to ensure proper compaction .
placement of aggregate base courses is not allowed from december numth to march numst without the permission of the engineer .
when the required thickness of base is no more than num inches for csb and num num inches for dga and the engineer is satisfied that acceptable compaction can be achieved throughout the full depth place the material in one layer .
otherwise place the material in num or more layers of no less than num inches .
wet the subgrade or previous base layer as directed before placing the base material .
num compacting .
a control strips .
before constructing the base complete a control strip to determine the level of compaction necessary to achieve the target density for the remaining base course .
construct additional control strips whenever a change is made in the source gradation type of subgrade type of base aggregate layer thickness or as the engineer requires .
num compact with an effort greater than or equal to that produced by a numton pneumatic roller or an numton steelwheel vibratory roller .
operate vibratory rollers according to the manufacturers instructions .
leave each control strip in place to become part of the project .
complete at least one control strip for each layer of base material .
unless the engineer approves otherwise construct the control strip to a minimum length of num feet and to the full lane width of the aggregate base course being placed at that time .
use the same equipment and procedures intended for the construction of the remainder of the base course .
after num passes of the compaction equipment the department will mark and take num density measurements at randomly selected sites at least num feet from the edge of the base .
the department will take density measurements at the same num locations after subsequent passes of the compaction equipment .
compact the control strip until no further increase in density can be obtained from additional passes .
the engineer will visually inspect the base material after each pass to determine if the aggregate is being crushed into fine material .
if the aggregate is being crushed cracked shoved or shows other signs of distress cease compaction efforts .
if compaction of the base is not satisfactory use other methods to achieve satisfactory results .
regardless of lift thickness the department will require a control strip to establish a roller pattern .
b target density .
after completing compaction of the control strip the engineer will conduct num field density measurements at random locations in the control strip and average the num measurements to obtain the target density for the compaction of the base .
c field density measurement .
when the total compacted thickness is num inches or more the engineer will determine the field density with nuclear gauges .
when the total compacted thickness is less than num inches the engineer will determine compaction by nuclear gauge or make acceptance by visual inspection .
d test sections .
the engineer will divide the remaining tonnage of base after the control strip into lots of num tons of material .
each lot will be tested at five random locations determined by random number generator .
the average of the num tests must be at least num percent of the target density with no individual measurement less than num percent of the target density .
when the average density of a test section does not meet the density required above cease laydown operations and either provide additional compaction effort or rework the entire test section to obtain the required average density .
when an individual density measurement does not meet the required density provide additional compaction efforts or rework the area represented by that measurement to meet the required density .
e general .
maintain the initial layers of base to a uniform grade and cross section during compaction .
shape the final layer with additional material when necessary .
when trimming the final layer to the final grade with an automatic grading machine provide a layer approximately num to one inch above grade for continuous cutting .
after making the final pass with the grading machine wet and roll the base with a static roller .
the engineer will recheck density to ensure the material still conforms to the density requirements .
reuse excess material removed by the grading machine in shoulders islands or other areas where aggregate stone base is specified but not under roadway pavement .
use manually operated mechanical tampers in areas inaccessible to power equipment .
do not add fines to meet target density .
num maintenance and protection .
restrict traffic on the completed base to the minimum necessary to complete the work and maintain public traffic .
moisten areas subjected to traffic as directed to avoid the loss of fine materials .
if desired use a diluted num emulsified asphalt for dust control .
placement of materials on the aggregate base is to be limited until the base has cured to proper strength .
before constructing succeeding courses check for damage such as raveling and lost density and recheck the grade and cross section .
make corrections as necessary .
make every reasonable effort to completely cover the aggregate base course with a minimum of num course of pavement before suspending work for the winter months .
when the aggregate base course is not completely covered with the specified pavement courses determine and perform all work necessary to protect and maintain the uncompleted work during the winter months .
perform all work necessary to acceptably repair or restore the uncompleted work before the beginning of spring paving operations .
obtain the engineers approval for all work necessary to protect maintain and repair the base .
num surface tolerances .
ensure that the surface of the top course of the base is smooth and uniform .
when performing final grading trim the base to within num inch of the specified cross section and num inch in num feet from the specified longitudinal grade at any location or to an accuracy allowing the succeeding courses to meet their specified surface and thickness tolerances whichever is stricter .
furnish all devices and labor necessary to check the surface .
num measurement .
the department will not measure water used to moisten the subgrade for mixing the base material and to maintain moisture during compaction and maintenance of the base for payment .
the department will measure the quantity of plantmixed materials according to section num .
the department will not make deductions for water in the mixture .
the department will not measure construction of control strips any necessary reworking of control strips or test sections for additional payment .
the department will not measure dust control for payment .
the department will not measure any work necessary to check the final surface tolerances for payment .
the department will not measure for payment any extra materials methods or construction techniques the engineer determines not to be a part of the specified construction to protect maintain or repair any portion of the uncompleted work during the winter months .
the department will measure and deduct material wasted from trimming the final grade .
num dense aggregate base .
the department will measure the quantity in tons .
num crushed stone base .
the department will measure the quantity in tons .
num payment .
the department will pay for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num dga base ton pay unit num crushed stone base ton the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num pavement drainage blanket num description .
this section covers pavement drainage blankets .
for jpc pavements construct either an asphalttreated or cementtreated drainage blanket .
for asphalt pavements construct an asphalttreated or cementtreated drainage blanket as the contract specifies .
num materials .
num aggregate .
use crushed stone conforming to sections num and num .
num asphalt binder .
conform to section num pg num .
num cement .
conform to section num type i or iii .
num waterreducing admixture .
conform to subsection num type a d f or g. num water .
conform to section num .
num curing compound .
conform to subsection num .
num construction .
num composition .
a asphalttreated drainage blanket atdb .
use no .
num aggregate or a gradation within the master range in the following table sieve size num num inch num percent passing num inch num num inch num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num test gradation according to km num km num or km num .
use an asphalt binder content of num to num percent by weight of the mixture .
when using a porous aggregate increase the asphalt binder content as needed to compensate for asphalt absorption by the aggregate .
submit aggregate samples and a proposed jmf for approval according to km num .
maintain the jmf asphalt binder content within num percentage points as determined according to km num km num or aashto t num .
asphalt binder content will be based on visual inspection of the extent the aggregate is coated .
the department will not adjust payment due to adjustment of the asphalt binder content .
request adjustments in the jmf gradation if deemed necessary to increase stability of the drainage blanket providing the revised jmf gradation and asphalt binder content are maintained within the specified limits .
b cement treated mixture .
provide size no .
num aggregate .
submit aggregate samples and proposed cement content and the engineer will perform testing as necessary to determine if the proposed mix design is acceptable .
ensure the mix design conforms to the following num minimum compressive strength of num psi shall be attained in num hours num num hours .
determine the compressive strength according to km num except the specimen shall remain in the mold until the time of the test .
num maximum watercement ratio of num .
num use a waterreducing admixture .
num placement of drainage blanket .
a atdb .
all requirements of section num for asphalt mixtures apply except as follows num maintain the temperatures of the materials and the mixture in degrees fahrenheit within the following ranges minimum aggregate num num maximum asphalt binder num num mixture at plant num num mixture when placed num num num avoid excess drainage of the asphalt binder while being stored .
num compact the atdb using a smoothwheel roller .
do not use vibrating rollers .
avoid over rolling to the extent that aggregate particles are broken .
num the surface of the atdb shall be smooth and uniform and shall reasonably conform to the specified lines grades and typical section .
the completed atdb shall meet the surface tolerances specified in subsection num for base courses .
perform any corrective work necessary using asphalt mixtures the engineer approves .
the department will not allow procedures or mixtures that might produce fine material that would tend to clog or reduce drainage .
num allow the atdb to cure at least num hours or as the engineer directs before placing subsequent courses .
b cementtreated drainage blanket .
num plant mixing and hauling .
conform to the applicable batch plant mixing procedures and hauling equipment requirements of section num for jpc pavement .
num placing and spreading .
use spreading consolidation and finishing equipment that conforms to the requirements of section num or is approved by the engineer upon demonstration of satisfactory performance on a test strip of approximately num square yards .
num compaction .
compact the material with a steelwheeled tandem roller weighing approximately num tons unless the drainage blanket is placed by a slipform paver and the engineer determines consolidation is acceptable without rolling .
compact within num minutes after spreading by completing at least num complete coverages of the drainage blanket with the roller .
provide sufficient equipment and rollers to ensure that no more than num hours elapse between the time that water is added to the combined aggregate and cement and the time the final compaction is completed .
num curing .
cure by one of the following methods immediately after spreading and compacting the drainage blanket a cover the entire surface and exposed edges of the drainage blanket with transparent or white plastic of at least num mils thickness .
for asphalt pavements hold the plastic in place with aggregate or other acceptable means for at least num days .
immediately repair any damage occurring to the plastic during the curing period .
num b membranecure according to subsection num b .
for jpc pavements the department will waive the curing time requirements .
num surface finish .
the surface of the drainage blanket shall be smooth and uniform and shall reasonably conform to the specified lines grades and cross section .
ensure the completed drainage blanket does not show a deviation greater than num inch from a numfoot straightedge and the cross slope does not deviate more than num inch in num feet from the specified cross slope .
num perform any corrective work necessary using mixtures the engineer approves .
the department will not allow procedures or mixtures that might produce fine material that would tend to clog or reduce drainage .
num weather limitations and protection .
mix and place the cement treated material when the air temperature in the shade away from artificial heat is num f and rising .
unless otherwise authorized in writing by the engineer discontinue mixing and placing the cementtreated material when a descending air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat reaches num f. num maintenance and protection .
limit traffic over the drainage blanket to the minimum necessary for succeeding or adjacent work .
prevent contamination of the drainage blanket by dust dirt or mud .
remove and replace portions of the blanket that is contaminated to the extent that the drainage is clogged or reduced at no additional cost to the department .
preserve the integrity of the subgrade base courses perforated pipe pavement drainage blanket and the subsequent paving courses .
control the gross weights and types of hauling vehicles so no component is damaged by hauling for construction of the next component .
do not operate trucks or other equipment longitudinally directly over the perforated pipe .
repair damage to any of the various items except damage caused by public traffic at no cost to the department .
num overlaying of drainage blankets .
exercise extreme caution when placing asphalt mixtures near or over underdrains to avoid displacing or damaging the drain .
repair any damage at no cost to the department .
a asphalt mixture overlay .
when asphalt pavement is constructed on a treated drainage blanket place the first course using a paver mounted on tracks .
compact asphalt base according to subsection num .
allow the first course of asphalt mixture to cure overnight before placing the succeeding course .
the temperature of the asphalt must not be less than num degrees before proceeding with the next course .
place the thickness of asphalt base on treated drainage blankets according to subsection num .
b jpc pavement overlay .
place without damaging the drainage blanket or underdrain system .
use anchor hooks of sufficient length to extend through the drainage blanket and hold the loadtransfer assemblies securely in place .
num measurement .
num drainage blankettype ii atdb .
the department will measure the quantity in tons according to subsection num num drainage blankettype iii cementtreated .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards according to section num .
num num jpc pavement drainage blanket .
the department will measure the quantity in tons according to subsection num or num as appropriate .
num payment .
the department will pay for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num drainage blankettype ii asphalt treated ton pay unit num drainage blankettype iii cement treated square yard num jpc pavement drainage blanket ton the department will make payment for drainage blankettype ii atdb according to the lot pay adjustment schedule for specialty mixtures in section num .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num geogrid reinforcement for subgrade and aggregate base courses num description .
this specification covers geogrid used for the reinforcement of subgrade and aggregate bases .
num materials .
furnish geogrid composed of polypropylene or highdensity polyethylene resins .
num physical requirements .
furnish the specified geogrid type conforming to the required geogrid properties table .
required geogrid propertiesnum num num property test method required value english metric strength at num strain astm d num num lbft num knm strength at num strain astm d num num lbft num knm ultimate tensile strength astm d num num lbft num knm minimum opening sizenum direct measure num in num mm maximum opening sizenum direct measure num in num mm junction strength griggnum num ultimate tensile strength ultraviolet stability astm d num num at num hrs separation astm d num dnum of aggregate above geogrid num x dnum subgrade .
otherwise use a separation geotextile with geogrid notes num .
acceptance of geogrid material shall be based on astm d num .
num .
acceptance shall be based upon testing of either conformance sample obtained using procedure a of astm d num or based on manufacturers certifications and testing of quality assurance sample obtained using procedure b of astm d num .
num .
minimum use value in weaker principal direction .
all numerical values represent minimum average roll value i.e .
test results from any sampled roll in a lot shall meet or exceed the minimum values in the table .
lot samples according to astm d num .
num .
minimum opening size must be dnum of aggregate above geogrid to provide interlock .
num .
maximum opening size must be num x dnum of aggregate above geogrid to prevent aggregate from penetrating into the subgrade num packaging shipment and storage .
ensure each geogrid shipment is accompanied by a manufacturers certification listing minimum average roll specification values of each lot number for those properties specified .
ensure that each roll is labeled with the manufacturers name product type lot number roll number manufactured date and roll dimension .
protect the geogrid from direct sunlight ultraviolet rays temperatures greater than num f mud dirt dust and debris during all periods of shipment and storage .
keep geogrids dry until installation and do not store directly on the ground .
num num construction .
num geogrid representative .
ensure that a representative of the geogrid manufacturer is on the project when work begins and remains on call as the project progresses to advise the engineer .
num surface preparation .
prepare the surface according to section num or section num .
num geogrid placement .
place geogrids at the proper elevation and alignment in continuous strips without joints seams or connections according to the manufacturers recommendations .
verify the geogrid orientation roll direction .
geogrid strips are to be overlapped according to the manufactures recommendations or a minimum of one num foot .
geogrid may be temporarily secured in place with staples pins sand bags or backfill as required by fill properties fill placement procedures or weather conditions as the engineer directs .
num aggregate placement .
place aggregate over the geogrid according to the contract .
place spread and compact the aggregate in such a manner that minimizes the development of wrinkles and movement in the geogrid .
aggregate is to be placed by back dumping the material from trucks and spread using rubber tired equipment .
the department will require a minimum loose fill thickness of num inches prior to operation of tracked vehicles over the geogrid .
keep the turning of tracked vehicles to a minimum to prevent displacement of the fill and damage to the geogrid .
rubber tired equipment may pass over the geogrid reinforcement at slow speeds less than num mph when integrally formed geogrid is used .
avoid sudden braking and sharp turning movements .
repair any damage caused during placement or by vehicles .
num sampling and testing .
the department will sample the geogrid at the project site according to km num .
the department will test the geogrid for all properties possible given the testing equipment availability .
when the department determines that an individual sample fails to meet any specification requirement the department will reject that roll and sample num additional rolls from the same lot .
when the department determines that either of these num additional samples fails to comply with any part of the specification the department will reject the entire quantity of rolls represented by that sample .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity of geogrid in square yards .
the department will not measure geogrid when the contract indicates that the geogrid are incidental to the work being performed or when no separate bid item for geogrid is listed in the proposal .
the department will not measure providing the geogrid manufacturers representative for payment and will consider it incidental to the geogrid .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num geogrid reinforcement for subgrade square yard pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
division num asphalt pavements num section num asphalt mixing plant requirements num description .
provide and maintain a plant and all equipment necessary to produce and test asphalt mixtures .
num equipment .
num all asphalt mixing plants .
ensure that all asphalt mixing plants are inspected and approved by the department before initial use and a minimum of once annually thereafter .
for initial approval submit a contractors master certification of asphalt mixing plant and related equipment form for each plant to the engineer .
for previously approved plants submit an annual renewal certification for previously approved plants and related equipment form to the engineer before beginning each season .
when significant changes are made in the plant equipment or in the method of operation at an approved plant reapply for approval .
ensure the manufacturers plate listing the maximum capacity of the plant is attached to the plant .
do not operate the plant at a production rate greater than the operational capacity of any plant component .
operate the plant so that it produces a fully coated mixture within the specified properties gradation tolerances and asphalt binder tolerances .
when plants are in operation the department will require one computer with a printer attached on the site of operations for the purpose of recording and submitting test data .
ensure the computer is installed with and utilizes the following minimum system requirements microsoft office num professional full installation .
additionally the department will require that each company provide at least one internet access site for sending and receiving electronic mail .
a field laboratory .
furnish and maintain a field laboratory facility according to subsection num .
a field laboratory may be a building trailer or space within a building provided the space is completely closed to the remainder of the building .
provide means for visually monitoring mixing plant operations .
do not use laboratories for storage .
provide a laboratory inspected and qualified according to the departments quality assurance program for materials testing and acceptance and conforming to the following minimum requirements num a floor space of num square feet with a minimum width of num feet num provisions for heating and cooling within the range of num to num f num adequate lighting and num a sufficient number of electric wall outlets numv to accommodate all equipment .
in addition to the equipment required to perform testing according to the aashto standards and kentucky methods km equip each laboratory with the following minimum furnishings and equipment conforming to the applicable specifications as required for the type of construction specified in the contract num one workbench at least num feet wide by num feet long num one desk or table and num chairs num a fire extinguisher located near the door and num a firstaid kit .
when using solvent extractions for asphalt binder content determination provide equipment and solvent for either the centrifuge method a or the vacuum extractor method b according to km num .
ensure that the extractor stand is fully enclosed and equipped with fans capable of exhausting at least num num cubic feet per minute .
build ductwork across the entire backside of the workbench with an access port into an enclosed cabinet so as to direct any fumes or dust from the top of the workbench into the enclosed cabinet .
the engineer will furnish a sketch of an acceptable exhaust system upon request .
the engineer will approve other configurations if he determines that they meet the intended purpose .
mount all control switches outside the cabinet and in accordance with all applicable safety standards .
b aggregate storage .
provide sufficient storage for separate stockpiles bins or stalls for each size of aggregate .
keep different sizes separated until delivery through the cold feed proportioning devices .
maintain the storage area in an orderly condition with walkways between any stockpiles that are not separated by bins or stalls .
provide adequate provisions for sampling aggregates from the stockpiles .
c asphalt binder equipment .
provide tanks for storage of asphalt binders equipped for heating the material to the temperature required in subsection num .
when directfire heating systems are utilized heat the tank without letting the flames contact it .
provide a circulating system for the asphalt binder of a capacity that ensures continuous circulation between the storage tank and proportioning unit during the entire operating period .
place the discharge end of the asphalt binder circulating pipe at the opposite end of the circulating pump near the bottom of the storage tank .
heat and insulate all pipelines and fittings to prevent heat loss .
provide a storage tank with a capacity that ensures continuous plant operation and uniform temperature of the asphalt binder when it is introduced into the mixture .
provide means for accurately measuring the volume of asphalt binder in the storage tank at any time .
provide separate storage for each type and grade of asphalt binder stored at each plant site .
provide a sampling outlet that is readily accessible and free from obstruction in each storage tank or in the asphalt binder feed lines connecting the plant storage tanks to the asphalt plant .
when the sampling valve is located in the feed line provide it between the pump and the return line discharge in a location that is readily accessible and free from obstruction .
provide a drainage receptacle for flushing the outlet before sampling .
d feeder for drier .
provide a mechanical feeder that is an apron belt reciprocating plate or vibrating type with accurate and separate adjustments for total and proportional feed .
install total and proportional feed adjustments that are continuously variable and capable of being fixed in any position .
e drier .
provide a drier capable of drying and heating the aggregate to the moisture content and temperature requirements set forth in the applicable mixture specifications without leaving any visible unburned residue on the aggregate when discharged from the drier .
f screens .
provide plant screens to prevent oversized material and to separate all aggregates so they may be recombined consistently within the specification limits for the asphalt mixture being produced .
g bins .
except for drummix plants provide the plant with a hotbin storage of a sufficient capacity to ensure uniform and continuous operation .
use bins that are divided into at least num compartments and arranged to ensure storage of appropriate fractions of the aggregates .
use bins that are designed such that samples of dry screened aggregates may be readily sampled from each compartment .
provide each compartment with an overflow pipe that prevents material from backing up into other bins or into contact with the screen .
provide dry storage for mineral filler and provisions for accurate proportioning .
equip each compartment with an alarm to indicate when there is a low num supply of material .
equip batch plants with an actuating device that prevents material from being drawn from other compartments when material is low in the compartment being used .
h asphalt binder control unit .
provide a means either by weighing or metering to obtain the proper quantity of asphalt binder .
ensure that metering devices are accurate to within num percent when tested for accuracy .
provide a calibration tank with a minimum capacity of num gallons that is mounted on load cells for checking the accuracy of the metering system .
use asphalt binder scales that conform to subsection num b .
when metering the quantity of asphalt binder check the delivery of the meter by actual weight .
for drum mixing plants calibrate the asphalt binder delivery system and metering device in the presence of the engineer before starting production at the beginning of each construction season each time the plant is relocated after making significant changes in the plant equipment after revising the method of operation and whenever the engineer deems it necessary .
maintain the specified temperatures of asphalt binder in the pipelines meters buckets spray bars and other containers or flow lines .
i recordation .
provide an automatic graphic or digital record of the production quantities according to aashto m num .
j thermometers .
provide a nonrecording thermometer in the asphalt binder feed line between the storage tank and the charging valve .
when a nonrecording thermometer is installed in the asphalt binder storage tanks the department will not require a nonrecording thermometer in the feed line .
provide a nonrecording thermometer near the discharge of the aggregate bin unless the aggregate dryer is equipped with an automatic burner control system capable of heating the aggregate and consistently maintaining the temperature of the asphalt mixture within num f. k control of mixing time .
use a plant equipped with means for governing mixing time .
l dust collectors .
equip the plant with an effective dust collector capable of either wasting the collected dust or using it in the mixture .
m power sprayer .
furnish a power sprayer to apply a fine uniform spray or mist of material conforming to subsection num in truck beds to prevent the adherence of asphalt mixtures during hauling .
n signs .
place a sign on or near the plant visible to all asphalt mixture haulers prior to loading stating trucks hauling state material will not be loaded when beds contain contaminating material and must be tarped prior to leaving plant .
o other requirements .
provide adequate and safe stairways to the mixer platform and guarded ladders for other plant units at all locations necessary to provide access to all plant operations .
provide a sturdy platform of sufficient height to inspect and sample the mixture after discharge into the haul units .
p safety requirements .
ensure that all plants and plant sites conform to the safety health and sanitation requirements of subsection num .
num special requirements for batch plants .
a weigh box or hopper .
provide equipment that weighs each bin size of aggregate into a weigh box or hopper that is suspended on scales and holds a full batch size of aggregate .
provide gates that prevent leakage when closed .
b scales .
provide springless dial type or another approved type of scales for any aggregate weigh box or hopper and for weighing asphalt material .
provide scales of standard make and design having tolerances on overregistration and underregistration not exceeding num percent of the indicated weight when tested for accuracy .
ensure that the change in load required to noticeably alter the position of num rest of the indicating elements of a nonautomatic indicating scale is not greater than num percent of the nominal scale capacity .
ensure that graduation intervals for scales are less than num percent of the nominal scale capacity and are plainly visible .
on dial scales reduce parallax effects to the practical minimum with clearance between the indicator index and scale graduations not exceeding num inches .
provide scales equipped with adjustable set points or pointers for marking the weight of each material to be weighed into the batch .
ensure the component batching scales are inspected and certified as specified in subsection num .
provide no fewer than num test weights each of at least num pounds nominal weight and stamped with its actual weight for the purpose of testing and calibrating the scales .
for each scale provide a suitable cradle or platform for applying test loads .
keep test weights clean and conveniently located for calibration of the scale or provide means for testing and calibrating the scales by a commercial scale company when the engineer requests .
the department will allow batch plants to operate with no screens other than a scalper screen provided num the plant is equipped with an aggregate weighing device belt scales that provides positive weight control num the system controls aggregate flow from each bin num the system controls the proportion from each bin in relation to the total aggregate flow num the system provides the plant operator with a continuous digital display of the flow rate from each bin and the total aggregate flow rate and num the system provides an alarm or automatic shutoff on the aggregate feed that operates when the flow from any individual feeder is interrupted .
calibrate each cold feeder along with the aggregate weighing devices according to subsection num a and b .
c bins .
for batch plants equipped with the aggregate weighing devices that subsection num b specifies the department will not require num separate hot aggregate bin compartments .
d asphalt materials bucket .
if using a bucket provide one large enough to handle a batch in a single weighing .
provide a filling system that prevents asphalt binder material from overflowing splashing or spilling outside the bucket during filling and weighing .
use a steam or oiljacketed bucket or a bucket with properly insulated electric heating units .
arrange the bucket so it delivers the asphalt binder in a thin uniform sheet or in multiple sprays over the full length of the mixer .
e mixer unit for batch method .
include at the plant a batch mixer of an approved twin pugmill type .
ensure that the mixer does not leak or cause segregation during discharge .
provide a blade clearance from all fixed and moving parts that does not exceed num num inches .
provide a mixer with an accurate time lock .
control the operation of a complete mixer cycle by locking the weighbox gate after charging the mixer until closing of the mixer gates at the completion of the cycle .
ensure that the asphalt materials bucket remains locked throughout the drymixing period and that the mixer gates remain locked throughout the dry and wet mixing periods .
the drymixing period is the interval of time between the opening of the weigh num box gate and the application of asphalt binder .
the wetmixing period is the interval of time between the start of the introduction of asphalt binder and the opening of the mixer gate .
num special requirements for automatic batching .
provide a system with equipment for accurately proportioning batches of the various components of the mixture by weight in the proper sequence and for controlling the sequence and timing of mixing operations .
equip the plant with adjustable timing devices and other timedelay circuits that integrate the individual components of batching and mixing operations with the auxiliary interlock cutoff circuits necessary to stop the automatic cycling of the batching operations whenever the quantity of any ingredient falls outside the tolerance specified below ensure that the accumulated weight of the batches is within num percent of the total batch weight .
record batch quantities according to aashto m num .
num special requirements for dryer drum plants .
a aggregate weighing device .
provide an aggregate weighing device that includes a compensating adjustment for aggregate weight changes due to such factors as moisture content wasting collected fines and adding mineral filler .
provide a device that is capable of being set to the nearest num percent .
ensure that the weighing devices belt scales are accurate within num percent .
b feeder for drier .
provide a scalping screen of appropriate size in advance of the weighing device .
control aggregate flow from each bin .
control the proportion from each bin in relation to the total aggregate flow .
provide the plant operator with a continuous digital display of the flow rate from each bin and the total aggregate flow rate .
when devices other than belt scales are used to control individual aggregate proportions or when belt scales do not have the capability to control the proportioning from each bin in relation to the total aggregate flow provide an alarm that operates when the sum of the individual cold feeds differs by more than num percent from the measured weight of the total aggregate feed .
provide an aggregate feed system with belt scales or other devices to provide positive weight control of the total aggregate feed .
ensure that the total aggregate flow is automatically coupled with the asphalt binder proportioning device .
calibrate each cold feeder using the gate openings and aggregate sizes specific to each mix type .
provide an alarm or automatic shutoff on the total aggregate feed that operates when the flow from any individual feeder or the flow of asphalt binder to the drum is interrupted .
provide means for obtaining representative samples of individual and combined aggregate from belts or feeders before their introduction into the dryer .
calibrate the aggregate weigh bridges in the presence of the engineer before starting production at the beginning of each construction season each batch tolerances percent of total material batch weights batch aggregate component num mineral filler num asphalt binder num zero return aggregate num zero return asphalt binder num num time the plant is relocated after making significant changes in the plant equipment after revising the method of operation and whenever the engineer deems necessary .
c drier .
use a dryer drum mixer capable of simultaneously heating mixing and thoroughly coating the aggregate with a controlled amount of asphalt binder in a rotating cylindrical drum .
the department may allow coating of the aggregate with asphalt binder in a separate chamber with an approved design .
equip the dryer drum plant with approved thermometric instruments at the discharge chute of the drum mixer .
equip the system with automatic burner controls regulated by approved temperaturesensing devices .
d surge andor storage bin .
provide a surge andor storage bin conforming to subsection num c. e dust collector .
use a dust collector capable of proportioning collected dust in the vicinity of the asphalt injection device .
f production quality control .
stop mixing operations immediately if at any time a failure of the automatic electronic weighing system of the aggregate feed asphalt binder feed or water injection system control occurs .
do not manually operate the proportioning controls .
g water injection system .
provided each system has prior approval as specified in subsection num the department will allow the use of water injection systems for the purpose of foaming the asphalt binder for production of warm mix asphalt wma .
ensure the equipment for water injection meets the following requirements num injection equipment computer controls are automatically coupled to the plants controls manual operation is not permitted num injection equipment has variable controls that introduce water ratios based on production rates of mixtures num injects water into the flow of asphalt binder prior to contacting the aggregate num provides alarms on the water injection system that operate when the flow of water is interrupted or deviates from the prescribed water rate .
num construction .
num preparation of mixtures .
deposit the coarse and fine aggregates in the cold elevators at a rate to ensure correct and uniform temperature control of the heating and drying operations .
if the supplier heats the asphalt binder outside the specified range let it reach a temperature within the specified range before mixing it with the aggregates .
the engineer may retest or reject asphalt mixture in storage at the plant that has been heated by the contractor outside the specified range .
do not use asphalt binder while it is foaming in a storage tank .
maintain the temperature of the component materials and asphalt mixture within the ranges listed in the following table num mixing and laying temperatures f material minimum maximum aggregates num num aggregates used with recycled asphalt pavement reclaimed materials num asphalt binders pg num pg num num num num num pg num num num asphalt mixtures at plant pg num hma num num measured in truck pg num hma pg num wma pg num wma num num num num num num asphalt mixtures at project pg num hma num num measured in truck pg num hma num num when discharging pg num wma pg num wma num num num num see section num asphalt mixtures using reclaimed materials .
num mixing and holding .
measure each size of aggregate and the asphalt binder separately .
regulate the proportion for each component to produce a mixture within the limits of the jobmix formula jmf and having all particles coated with asphalt binder .
thoroughly mix the hot aggregates at the temperatures specified and proportion them by weight .
the engineer may establish maximum mixing times when deemed necessary .
a batch plants .
use the following mixing times unless the engineer determines that longer times are necessary to produce acceptable mixtures num three seconds minimum for mixing the dry aggregates beginning at the time of the opening of the aggregate weigh hopper discharge gate num fifteen seconds maximum for introducing asphalt binder in an even distribution throughout the full length of the mixer beginning at the end of the drymixing interval num twentyfive seconds minimum for mixing the aggregates and asphalt binder beginning with the start of flow of the asphalt binder to the mixer num when the time for introducing the asphalt binder exceeds num seconds mix the asphalt binder and aggregates after all asphalt binder has been introduced a minimum of num seconds and num thirty seconds minimum for the total mixing time from the time of the opening of the aggregate weigh hopper discharge gate until the time of the opening of the mixer discharge gate .
when the engineer extends either the time for drymixing or the time for introducing the asphalt binder into the mixer or both extend the minimum total mixing time to the same time as the sum of the drymixing and asphalt binder introduction time .
b dryer drum .
for a dryer drum mixing plant the engineer will not establish the mixing time .
however maintain production at the rate required to obtain a satisfactory aggregate coating and a uniform mixture conforming to the mixture specifications .
c surge or storage systems .
provided each system has prior approval the department will allow surge or storage systems for hot asphalt mixtures .
the engineer will approve the surge or storage system if tests indicate the system is num capable of conveying retaining and delivering the asphalt mixture without balling or hardening appreciable loss of mixture temperature segregation of the aggregates or excessive oxidation of the asphalt binder .
add a silicone additive to the asphalt binder for mixtures to be stored beyond the day of mixing .
the engineer may withdraw approval of a surge or storage system when tests or inspections indicate the system is having a detrimental effect on the asphalt mixture .
insulate bins intended for storage and seal the top and bottom of the bins to prevent infiltration of outside air .
when using bins for storage ensure they are nearly full in order to provide a nonoxidizing condition .
maintain mixture temperatures within those specified for asphalt mixtures at plant according to subsection num .
completely empty surge bins by the end of each working day .
when the bins can not be emptied store the asphalt mixtures overnight in a manner that prevents damage .
obtain the engineers approval for storage longer than overnight up to num hours .
the engineer will reject any asphalt mixture damaged in any way by use of a surge or storage system .
num measurement .
reserved .
num payment .
reserved .
num section num control and acceptance of asphalt mixtures num description .
provide the process control and quality control testing for the departments acceptance determination of all classes and types of asphalt mixtures which may be furnished either as hot mix asphalt hma or warm mix asphalt wma produced with water injection systems .
num warm mix asphalt wma evaluation and approval .
the department will evaluate trial production of wma by use of a water injection system provided the system is installed according to the manufacturers requirements and satisfies the requirements of section num .
evaluation will include production and placement of wma to demonstrate adequate mixture quality including volumetric properties and density by option a as specified in subsection num d. do not place wma for evaluation on department projects .
provided production and placement operations satisfy the applicable quality levels the department will approve wma production on department projects using the water injection system as installed on the specific asphalt mixing plant evaluated .
num materials and equipment .
num personnel .
provide a qualified superpave mix design technologist smdt to be responsible for the submission and adjustment of the mix designs .
provide a qualified superpave plant technologist spt to be present during production and to perform the daily inspection processcontrol adjustments of the job mix formula and quality control testing at the plant site for the departments acceptance determination .
the department will use a qualified smdt for approval of all mix designs and a qualified spt for verification testing .
num construction .
num responsibilities .
a composition of mixtures .
a jmf is defined as a single percentage for each specified sieve size for aggregate gradations and a specified asphalt binder content ac expressed to the nearest num percent .
the department will require an approved jmf within the specified gradation requirements for each mixture required on the project .
submit the jmf for the engineers approval according to km num .
b setup .
notify the district materials engineer of the intent to start a minimum of num hours before beginning production of each type of mixture .
furnish the facilities equipment personnel and all other resources needed to comply with km num and km num .
provide a quality control plan qcp and complete the setup duties of km num .
upon completing setup prepare num duplicate handmixed maximum specific gravity gmm samples according to km num and furnish them to the engineer before the start of the second day of production .
complete the process control operations of km num .
when the engineer directs obtain samples for department use .
c process control .
after the setup period perform the process control operations of km num .
num contractor quality control and department acceptance .
a general .
the department will accept asphalt mixtures from the plant on a lot basis .
a lot is num tons .
a sublot is num tons .
monitor and evaluate the ac air voids av voidsinmineral aggregate vma density and gradation .
num document and report all quality control tests for the departments acceptance determination on the asphalt mixtures acceptance workbook amaw .
submit the completed amaw for each lot to the department within num working days after the completion of the lot .
b sampling .
obtain all samples from the truck bed at the asphalt mixing plant .
the department will randomly determine when to obtain the quality control samples according to kmnum .
take one sample for each sublot .
at the beginning of each production day do not take any quality control samples before the production of num tons .
if the random number falls within the first num tons take the sample from the first loaded truck following the truck containing the numth ton produced .
c setup .
the setup period is the first sublot of production .
perform volumetric testing for ac av and vma within the first num hours of project production .
by the end of the first sublot test to document that the mixture meets a num minimum pay value for each of these properties .
for mixtures with a total project quantity between num and num tons perform a minimum of one process control test for ac av and vma and report the results to the engineer .
the department will monitor the setup duties and testing and may test to confirm the setup results .
when any of the mixture properties do not meet the minimum pay value cease all shipments to the project and adjust procedures or mixture properties until they are acceptable .
provide the engineer with documentation of the acceptable test results .
provide the engineer with a copy of the random number chart established for the total tonnage for the mixture specified .
develop the rolling pattern during the first sublot .
when necessary during setup adjust the ac up to num percent provided all other properties stay within their specified acceptance limits .
ensure the adjusted ac remains above the minimums specified in subsection num c num .
obtain the engineers approval to make this adjustment on all specialty mixtures .
d testing responsibilities .
beginning with the second sublot complete the following tests num ac .
perform one evaluation corresponding to each avvma analysis per sublot .
test according to km num km num km num km num num or aashto t num .
num av .
prepare and analyze one set of num specimens per sublot .
test according to km num .
num vma .
analyze the set of num specimens corresponding to each av analysis per sublot .
test according to km num .
num density .
the contract will state the compaction option to be used .
option a .
the department will randomly locate and mark core locations after compaction is complete .
perform coring by the end of the work day .
immediately provide the cores to the engineer at the coring site .
replace all cores the engineer deems damaged .
when directed by the engineer saw cores at the project site to the thickness actually placed .
fill each core hole with compacted asphalt mixture or nonshrink grout within num working days .
the department will perform acceptance testing for density from the furnished cores according to km num .
the department will base values on the percent of solid density for the sublots gmm value .
mainline furnish num cores per sublot to the engineer for density determination .
under inspection by department personnel core the finished course at locations randomly selected by the engineer according to km num num .
for random locations falling near the pavement driving lane joints obtain the core as close to the location as possible without having any part of the core circumference coming closer than num inches to the pavement edge or joint .
joint for surface mixtures placed on driving lanes and ramps furnish num num cores per sublot to the engineer for density determination .
under inspection by department personnel core the finished course at locations randomly selected in the longitudinal direction by the engineer according to km num .
select the transverse direction such that some part of the core circumference is within num num inches of the longitudinal joint .
option b .
the department will not require any cores .
num gradation .
control according to km num km num or km num as needed .
use the same field sample as taken for tests num through num .
use the same specimens as produced for tests num and num .
retain the avvma specimens and one additional corresponding gmm sample for num working days for verification testing by the department .
for specialty mixtures retain a mixture sample for num working days for verification testing by the department .
e shoulder mixtures .
the department will accept shoulder mixtures as follows num placed monolithically with the mainline .
perform tests num num and num of part d above as part of the mainline mixture .
do not take cores from the shoulder for quality control testing .
num placed separately .
perform tests num num and num of part d above .
do not take cores from the shoulders for quality control testing .
f specialty mixtures .
the department will accept opengraded friction course ogfc asphalttreated drainage blanket atdb asphalt mixture for pavement wedge leveling and wedging scratch course asphalt mixtures for temporary applications and asphalt mixtures for base failure repair as follows .
perform one ac and one gradation determination per sublot .
determine the gradation from samples corresponding to the same production time period as the ac determination .
obtain and test the gradation samples according to km num num km num or km num .
g mixtures with reclaimed materials .
furnish the grade of asphalt binder determined according to km num .
furnish a reclaimed material sample and a minimum of num representative ac and extracted gradation determinations with the mixture design submittal .
for the reclaimed material perform ac and extracted gradation determination according to kmnum .
h unsatisfactory work .
num based on lab data .
after the setup period when the contractor or department determines any individual sublot pay value would be below num for ac av or vma in any qc or qa test make adjustments as necessary and immediately perform the tests again .
if the second round of tests determines any individual sublot pay value would have been below num for ac av or vma cease all shipments to the project and adjust procedures or mixture composition until they are acceptable .
document acceptable materials and work before restarting operations .
when a second round of tests are required report the actual random number acceptance test results on the amaw for the sublot .
when the engineer determines that safety concerns or other considerations prohibit an immediate shutdown continue work and the department will make an evaluation of acceptability according to subsection num .
num based on field review .
if the department determines that a portion of in place material is unsatisfactory the department may require that the location be cored .
the department will then test the material for ac and num density .
the department will consider the work unsatisfactory and require corrective work to the affected area when a property met or exceeded a num pay value in the sublot acceptance test and the core shows the property having a pay value of below num .
additionally the department will consider the work unsatisfactory and require corrective work to the affected area when the property of the core falls outside the following thresholds regardless of the sublot quality control test results property threshold ac num deviation from jmf density num or num num verification .
for volumetric properties the department will perform a minimum of one verification test for ac av and vma for each randomly selected lot according to the corresponding procedures as given in subsection num .
for specialty mixtures the department will perform one ac and one gradation determination per lot according to the corresponding procedures as given in subsection num .
however department personnel will not perform ac determinations according to km num num .
the department will obtain an independent sample at the same time the contractor is obtaining the random sample .
the department may perform the verification test on the contractors equipment or on the departments equipment .
a evaluation of sublots verified by department .
provided the differences are within the tolerances listed below the department will use the contractors test values to compute the appropriate lot pay value .
when differences between test results are not within the tolerances listed below the department will retest the contractors retained samples for the affected sublots .
the departments results will be used in the computation of the appropriate lot pay adjustment .
for volumetric properties the department will perform a statistical comparison between the departments test results and the contractors test results for ac av and vma for the sublots verified by the department .
the department will perform this comparison using the paired ttest with a level of significance of num as provided in the amaw .
when the paired ttest indicates that the contractors data and departments data are possibly not from the same population the department will investigate the cause for the difference according to subsection num and implement corrective measures as the engineer deems appropriate .
b evaluation of sublots not verified by department .
for volumetric properties the department will perform a comparison between the departments test results and the average of the contractors test results for ac av and comparison of department and contractor testing applied when evaluating sublots that department verified test tolerance ac num av and vma num same equipment num different equipment num inch and larger num num inch no .
num no .
num and no .
num num no .
num no .
num and no .
num num no .
num num num vma for the sublots not verified by the department .
provided the differences are within the tolerances listed below the department will use the contractors test values to compute the appropriate lot pay value .
when differences between test results are not within the tolerances listed below the department will resolve the discrepancy according to subsection num .
when the departments test results are ultimately determined to be correct the departments results will be used in the computation of the appropriate lot pay adjustment .
comparison of department and contractor testing applied when evaluating sublots that department did not verify test tolerance ac num av num vma num for volumetric properties the department will perform a statistical comparison between the departments test results and the contractors test results for ac av and vma for the sublots not verified by the department .
the department will perform this comparison using the ftest and ttest with a level of significance of num as provided in the amaw .
when the ftest or t test indicates that the contractors data and departments data are possibly not from the same population the department will investigate the cause for the difference according to subsection num and implement corrective measures as the engineer deems appropriate .
c test data patterns .
primarily by the use of control charts generated from the amaw and as required by km num the department will monitor the test results of the acceptance testing for each sublot to identify patterns within the data .
when patterns indicate substantial differences between the verified and nonverified sublots the department will perform further comparative testing according to subsection num .
d independent assurance testing .
the department will perform independent assurance testing iast at the frequency prescribed by the departments materials field sampling and testing manual .
num dispute resolution .
when differences between the department and contractor continue to exist and impact acceptability or payment resolve the dispute according to subsection num .
num measurement .
the department will measure asphalt mixtures by the ton .
on initial treatment and resurfacing jobs the department will not measure material placed in excess of the numpercent tolerance specified in subsection num .
the department will not measure for payment any extra materials methods or construction techniques determined by the engineer not to be a part of the specified construction used to protect maintain or repair any portion of the uncompleted work during the winter months .
the department will not measure the filling of core sample holes of asphalt mixtures for payment and will consider them incidental to the asphalt mixture .
when reshape and compact is not listed as a bid item the department will not measure the preparation of the foundation for the mixture courses .
the department will not measure antistrip additive for payment and will consider it incidental to the asphalt mixture .
for initial treatment the department will not measure excavation at bridge ends and related disposal of materials for payment and will consider it incidental to the asphalt mixture .
the department will not measure construction of rolled rumble strips or pavement num wedge texturing for payment and will consider them incidental to the asphalt mixture .
num weight .
the department will weigh asphalt mixtures according to section num .
the actual weight equals the pay weight except when the aggregates used have a combined bulk specific gravity in excess of num .
when the combined bulk specific gravity is greater than num the department will determine the pay weight according to the following formula t w ac mf aggregate x numg num where t pay weight .
w actual weight .
ac percent by weight of asphalt binder in the total mixture .
aggregate percent by weight of total mixture of mineral aggregates excluding mineral filler .
g calculated combined bulk ovendry specific gravity of aggregates used in the mixture excluding mineral filler .
mf percent by weight of mineral filler .
the department will determine the bulk ovendry specific gravity for the fine and coarse aggregates according to km num and aashto t num respectively .
the department will determine the frequency of testing for specific gravity of the actual project aggregates to determine the pay weight .
num thickness on new construction .
when the core thickness exceeds the compacted plan thickness by more than num inch the department will deduct the thickness exceeding the numinch tolerance .
when calculating the deduction for excess thickness the department will not include in the thickness measurements any leveling course placed at the contractors expense or any materials placed on top of the completed base at the direction of the engineer .
when the engineer determines the asphalt base is deficient in thickness by more than num inch from the compacted plan thickness the department will measure material required according to subsection num b for the overlay as asphalt base .
the department will only measure the calculated quantity necessary to bring the deficient area to the plan thickness .
the department will not measure material placed in excess of the plan thickness to achieve smooth transitions or to match grades .
when the engineer waives the overlaying requirement he will make a reduction in payment for the theoretical quantity of asphalt base as determined deficient .
the department will not measure initial thickness check coring or coring of corrective work for payment and will consider it incidental to the asphalt mixture .
num payment .
num specialty mixtures .
the department will calculate pay for ogfc atdb asphalt mixture for pavement wedge leveling and wedging scratch course asphalt mixtures for temporary applications and asphalt mixtures for base failure repair according to the lot pay adjustment schedule for specialty mixtures .
the department will assign a pay value for ac and gradation within each sublot and average the sublot pay values to determine the pay value for each lot .
num asphalt mixtures hma and wma including mixtures with reclaimed material .
the department will pay for the mixture at the contract unit bid price and apply a lot pay adjustment for each lot placed based on the degree of compliance with the specified tolerances .
using the appropriate lot pay adjustment schedule the department will assign a pay value for the applicable properties within each num sublot and average the sublot pay values to determine the pay value for a given property for each lot .
the department will apply the lot pay adjustment for each lot to a defined unit price of num per ton .
the department will calculate the lot pay adjustment using all possible incentives and disincentives .
final payment will be made for each mixture bid item for a project using the cumulative lot pay values .
each lots pay value will be averaged to determine the final overall bid item pay value but will not allow the bid item pay value to exceed num .
a first sublot setup .
when the engineer determines the first sublots individual pay values are num or greater the department will use num pay values for all properties in the sublot .
when the engineer determines any of the first sublots individual pay values are less than num the department will apply a pay value of num or less for that property and may require corrective work .
b after the first sublot setup .
the department will use the contractors test results for each sublot to determine the pay values for the applicable properties provided the mixtures values are acceptable according to subsection num .
when the contract specifies compaction option a the department will use the departments test results for each sublot to determine the pay value for lane and joint density .
when the randomly determined samples for ac av vma and gradation when applicable fall outside the final sublot the department will calculate payment for these properties using the test results from the previous sublot .
when the final sublot contains a tonnage amount resulting in less than the full amount of randomly selected cores the department will calculate payment for lane and joint density using the available test results for the final sublot .
c hma wma and reclaimed material mixtures placed on shoulders or placed as asphalt pavement wedge .
num placed monolithically with the mainline width of num feet or less .
the department will pay as mainline mixture .
num placed monolithically with the mainline width of greater than num feet .
the department will pay as mainline mixture but use num for the lane and joint density pay value for shoulder or asphalt pavement wedge quantities .
num placed separately .
the department will use num for the lane and joint density pay value .
d asphalt mixtures for temporary pavement .
when the engineer determines the individual pay values are num or greater the department will use a num pay value for all properties .
when the engineer determines any of the individual pay values are less than num the department will apply a pay value of num or less for that property and may require corrective work .
num num lot pay adjustment schedule compaction option a base and binder mixtures lot pay adjustment num quantity num ac pay value num av pay value num vma pay value num lane density pay value num weighted values ac av vma lane density weight num num num num ac pay value deviation from jmf num num num num .
num num num num vma pay value deviation from minimum num min .
vma num num below min .
num num below min .
num num below min .
av lane density pay value test result pay value test result esal class num esal class num or num esal class num esal class num or num num num num num num num num num avnum num num num num or num num or num num num numav num num num num num num num num num or num num or num num num or num num or num num num num num num num or num num or num num lot pay adjustment schedule compaction option a surface mixtures lot pay adjustment num quantity num ac pay value num av pay value num vma pay value num lane density pay value num joint density pay value num weighted values ac av vma lane density joint density weight num num num num num ac vma pay value deviation pay value deviation from jmf from minimum num num num min .
vma num num num num below min .
num num num num below min .
num num num num below min av lane density pay value test result pay value test result esal class num esal class num or num esal class num esal class num or num num num num num num num num num avnum num num num num or num num or num num num numav num num num num num num num num num or num num or num num num or num num or num num num num num joint density num num or num num or num pay value test result num num num num or num num num num num or num num num or num num num considering the guidance given in km num the department will evaluate the acceptability of the material to determine if it will remain in place at a reduced pay factor or be removed and replaced at no expense to the department .
at the contractors option and at no expense to the department the department will allow the contractor to core the pavement in question up to a maximum of num cores per sublot for the investigation of ac and lane density values corresponding to pay factors potentially necessitating removal and replacement .
under inspection by department personnel core the pavement in question and submit the samples to the department for further investigative testing .
the department may not permit coring to investigate density results when the pavement in question has been subjected to significant traffic loading .
any decision to remove and replace material must receive the concurrence of the divisions of construction and materials .
when the department decides to require removal and replacement the department will determine the quantity of material to be removed and replaced in the following manner .
for ac av and vma the department will identify the most recent preceding test process control quality control or verification of minimum acceptable quality and determine the tonnage at which that sample was obtained .
the department will define this level of quality as test results for ac av and vma corresponding to the following pay values num or greater for ac and vma for all mixtures num or greater for av for esal class num mixtures and num or greater for av for esal class num or num mixtures .
the department will also identify the most recent succeeding test process control quality control or verification of minimum acceptable quality and determine the tonnage at which that sample was obtained .
the department will define this level of quality as described above .
the material to be removed and replaced will be that quantity from a halfway between the acceptable preceding test and the test corresponding to this footnote to b halfway between the test corresponding to this footnote and the acceptable succeeding test .
for lane density the department will require removal and replacement only when the results for all num cores in a sublot or all available cores in a partial sublot are as follows less than num percent or greater than num percent of solid density for esal class num or less than num percent or greater than num percent of solid density for esal class num or num .
the department will require removal and replacement of the entire sublot of material in this case .
the department will apply a num pay factor to individual cores with these results for sublots allowed to remain in place .
aside from the preceding guidelines the engineer may adjust the quantity to be removed and replaced depending on the investigative test results or specific project conditions .
for any material allowed to remain in place the department will apply a num pay factor to the contract unit bid price for the asphalt mixture in question .
the department will apply the num pay factor to the quantity of asphalt mixture represented by the test result indicating substandard properties one sublot when the result originated from an acceptance test .
num lot pay adjustment schedule compaction option b mixtures lot pay adjustment num quantity num ac pay value num av pay value num vma pay value num num considering the guidance given in km num the department will evaluate the acceptability of the material to determine if it will remain in place at a reduced pay factor or be removed and replaced at no expense to the department .
at the contractors option and at no expense to the department the department will allow the contractor to core the pavement in question up to a maximum of num cores per sublot for the investigation of ac values corresponding to pay factors potentially necessitating removal and replacement .
under inspection by department personnel core the pavement in question and submit the samples to the department for further investigative testing .
any decision to remove and replace material must receive the concurrence of the divisions of construction and materials .
when the department decides to require removal and replacement the department will determine the quantity of material to be removed and replaced in the following manner .
the department will identify the most recent preceding test process control quality control or verification of minimum acceptable quality and determine the tonnage at which that sample was obtained .
the department will define this level of quality as test results corresponding to the following pay values weighted values ac av vma weight num num num ac vma pay value deviation pay value deviation from jmf from minimum num num num min .
vma num num num num below min .
num num num num below min .
num num num num below min .
av pay value test result esal class num esal class num or num num num num num num avnum num num num num numav num num num num num num or num num or num num num or greater for ac and vma for all mixtures num or greater for av for esal class num mixtures and num or greater for av for esal class num or num mixtures .
the department will also identify the most recent succeeding test process control quality control or verification of minimum acceptable quality and determine the tonnage at which that sample was obtained .
the department will define this level of quality as described above .
the material to be removed and replaced will be that quantity from a halfway between the acceptable preceding test and the test corresponding to this footnote to b halfway between the test corresponding to this footnote and the acceptable succeeding test .
aside from the preceding guidelines the engineer may adjust the quantity to be removed and replaced depending on the investigative test results or specific project conditions .
for any material allowed to remain in place the department will apply a num pay factor to the contract unit bid price for the asphalt mixture in question .
the department will apply the num pay factor to the quantity of asphalt mixture represented by the test result indicating substandard properties one sublot when the result originated from an acceptance test .
num section num production and placement of asphalt mixtures num description .
this section includes general requirements that are applicable to all types of asphalt mixtures .
deviations from these general requirements are indicated in the specific requirements for each type mixture .
designate the qualified asphalt field technician for the project at the preconstruction conference or prepaving meeting .
ensure an asphalt field technician is present on site when any paving operation is in progress .
construct one or more courses of asphalt mixture on the prepared foundation according to these specifications and the requirements of the type specified in the contract .
num materials and equipment .
num fine aggregate .
conform to section num .
num coarse aggregate .
conform to section num .
num asphalt binder .
conform to section num .
num selfleveling silicone rubber sealant .
conform to section num .
num asphalt release agent .
provide materials conforming to km num .
ensure each shipment is accompanied by a certification of conformance .
num transport equipment .
provide trucks for transporting asphalt mixtures that have tight clean and smooth metal beds that have been sprayed with a minimum amount of release agent .
drain excess release agents from truck beds .
do not load trucks that are contaminated with an unapproved release agent .
when such contamination is identified after loading reject the load .
in either case remove the truck and respective driver from the project for the duration of the project .
equip all trucks with covers made of heavy canvas or similar material suitable for protecting the mixture from the weather that completely cover the loaded material .
num asphalt pavers .
use asphalt pavers that are selfpropelled and capable of spreading and finishing all courses to the indicated widths and depths line grade and cross section with a smooth finish uniform in density and texture without requiring an undue amount of backdressing for correcting irregularities .
equip the paver with the following num a screed or strikeoff assembly that easily adjusts to the required crown and will place the asphalt mixture in variable widths num an auger and vibrator that operates along the full width of the screed num a level that is attached to the screed and in full view of the operator num automatic screed controls with sensors for both sides of the paver capable of sensing grade from an outside reference sensing the transverse slope of the screed and providing the automatic signals that operate the screed to maintain the desired grade and transverse slope num a transverse slope controller that is capable of maintaining the screed at the desired slope within num percent and num automatic feeder controls that properly adjust to maintain a uniform depth of material ahead of the screed .
num rollers .
provide selfpropelled rollers that are capable of reversing smoothly .
equip steelwheel rollers with adjustable scrapers spray bars and wetting pads to keep the wheels clean at all times .
num small tools and portable equipment .
provide all necessary small tools num and portable equipment required for satisfactory execution of the work and devices necessary for routine checks of finishing requirements .
do not use an unapproved release agent on any small tools or equipment incidental to the paving operation .
provide standard numfoot long straightedges .
have straightedges available on the project before the work is started and all times thereafter until completion of the work .
num material transfer vehicle mtv .
in addition to the equipment specified above provide a mtv with the following minimum characteristics when specified in the contract num a system to independently deliver asphalt mixtures from the hauling equipment to the paving equipment num a high capacity truck unloading system capable of num tons per hour that will receive asphalt mixtures from the hauling equipment num a minimum combined capacity including the mtv storage bin and paver hopper of num tons of asphalt mixture num an auger system in the storage bin to continuously blend the asphalt mixture prior to discharge to the conveyor system and num a discharge conveyor with the ability to swivel to deliver the mixture to the paving spreader while allowing the mtv to operate from an adjacent lane .
num construction .
num seasonal and weather limitations .
do not load trucks with asphalt mixtures when the ambient air temperature is below num f. do not place asphalt mixtures on any wet surface when the ambient air and existing surface temperatures on the project are less than those specified in the table below or when weather conditions otherwise prevent the proper handling or finishing of the asphalt mixtures .
between november num and april num do not place asphalt mixture courses that will become a permanent part of the work without obtaining the approval from the engineer .
make every effort to have all asphalt base and binder courses covered before november num .
if all asphalt mixture courses are not completed before november num perform all further work necessary to protect and maintain the uncompleted work during the winter months .
perform any work necessary to repair or restore the uncompleted work before the beginning of spring paving operations .
perform all work necessary to protect maintain or repair the base subject to the engineers approval .
temperature limitations minimum ambient air temperature and minimum temperature of the existing surface for placing asphalt mixtures f opengraded friction course ogfc num sma base and surface num asphalt mixture surface one inch thick or less num leveling and wedging and scratch course num asphalt mixture surface thicker than one inch num asphalt mixture for pavement wedge num asphalt mixture base and binder num asphalttreated drainage blanket num num preparation of base .
prepare the foundation before placing the asphalt mixture courses .
the preparation may include fine grading and recompaction of earth or blasted rock subgrades or crushed or natural aggregate bases .
maintain prepared subgrades andor granular bases until placing the initial course of asphalt mixture to ensure that the foundation is true to the required grade and cross section .
num grade and shape existing traffic bound base to the required grade and cross section before applying any asphalt mixture course .
wet and roll any salvable floater material into the existing traffic bound base .
when required apply curing seal prime or tack coat or a combination according to section num .
when applying the initial asphalt mixture surfacing on the traffic bound base excavate as necessary at both ends of all bridges within the limits of the project .
excavate deep enough to apply the total thickness of the asphalt mixture courses being constructed .
the excavation should be wide enough to accommodate the width of the course or wider when directed and as long as necessary up to num feet for smooth transitions from the top surface course to the bridge deck .
sweep existing or previously placed asphalt mixture or concrete courses clean of all foreign material .
apply tack coat according to section num .
remove existing markers installed in grooves and fill the recess with the compacted asphalt mixture .
the department will not require filling of the grooves when milling of the existing pavement is included in the contract and the milling operation removes the grooves .
remove and dispose of the existing type v markers off of the rightofway .
fill the recess and any additional damaged area with compacted asphalt mixture within num hours of removal .
fill the damaged areas even when the contract includes milling unless the engineer determines the damaged areas are not hazardous to public traffic .
adjust small drainage structures such as catch basins as required to match the finished pavement or to provide proper drainage according to subsection num .
only when the engineer directs adjust manholes according to subsection num .
return manhole adjusting rings that are removed and not reused to the utility owner .
num preparation of mixture .
a mixture composition .
provide the appropriate mixture composition for the specified asphalt mixture or substitute a higher aggregate type .
when substituting a mixture of a higher esal class provide a mixture of no more than one esal class higher than the specified asphalt mixture .
conform to the gradation requirements control points of aashto m num for the superpave mixture .
unless the engineer authorizes otherwise in writing use the same type and source of ingredient aggregates and asphalt binder throughout the entire project for each type of mixture .
for asphalt surface courses containing num percent polishresistant coarse aggregate limit the portion of nonpolishresistant fine aggregate retained on the no .
num sieve to num percent of the total combined aggregates .
when using a porous aggregate increase the asphalt binder content ac as needed for asphalt binder absorption by the aggregate .
the following aggregate requirements are listed in order of the highest type a to the lowest type d num type a .
provide num percent of the coarse aggregate from class a sources .
ensure that num percent of the total combined aggregate is class a polish resistant fine aggregate .
num type b .
select either of the num following options a provide num percent of the coarse aggregate from class b sources .
b provide a combined aggregate retained on the no .
num sieve that is a minimum of num percent from any class a polishresistant aggregate source except those identified as not permitted as the polishresistant portion of class b blends .
submit all class b blends to the department for review .
for option a or b above ensure one of the following num num percent or more of the total combined aggregate is class a polishresistant fine aggregate .
num percent or more of the total combined aggregate is class b polishresistant fine aggregate .
num type d. no restriction on aggregate type .
b moisture content of mix .
determine the moisture content of the coated mixture according to aashto t num each time an asphalt content determination is performed .
when moisture contents are greater than num percent take corrective action to lower the moisture content .
when moisture contents are num percent or greater adjust the ac determination made on plantproduced mixture to reflect the actual ac as km num directs .
c mix design criteria .
conform to the gradation requirements control points of aashto m num for the superpave mixture type the contract specifies .
num preliminary mix design .
perform the volumetric mix design according to aashto r num and conforming to aashto m num .
the department will require a dusttobinder ratio range of num to num .
complete the volumetric mix design at the appropriate number of gyrations as given in the table below for the number of numyear esals .
the department will define the relationship between esal classes as given in the bid items for superpave mixtures and num year esal ranges as follows number of gyrations class esals millions ninitial ndesign nmax num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num selection of optimum ac .
normally the department will approve the ac at an airvoid content of num percent .
the engineer may assign an ac corresponding to other airvoid levels as deemed appropriate .
ensure the optimum ac is a minimum of num percent by weight of the total mixture for all numinch nominal surface mixtures and num percent by weight of the total mixture for all numinch nominal surface mixtures .
num tensile strength ratio tsr .
analyze the mixture for tsr according to astm d num with one freezethaw cycle nummm specimens compacted with a superpave gyratory compactor and a target degree of saturation of the conditioned specimens of num num percent .
num transporting material .
for all types of sizes of hma and wma load all triaxle or larger trucks with a minimum of three drops utilizing the three drop method to prevent segregation of the asphalt mixture .
securely fasten all covers in place on the truck before leaving the plant .
during cool weather or when an unexpected delay occurs keep the loads covered until just before unloading .
insulate truck beds when necessary to maintain the specified temperature to the point of delivery .
do not use any truck that causes excessive segregation of mixture or that leaks .
num spreading and finishing .
prevent segregation of the fine and coarse aggregates during all phases of construction .
spread the mixtures with a paver .
heat the screed uniformly throughout its length .
do not allow flames to directly contact the mixture .
adjust the paver speed to provide the best results for the mixture being used and to coordinate with the rate of delivery of the mixture to the paver to provide a uniform num placement rate without intermittent operation .
operate the screed or strikeoff assembly without tearing shoving or gouging the mixture when laying the mixture .
operate vibrating screeds or other compacting features of the paver according to the manufacturers recommendations during the placement of the pavement .
use automatic screed and slope controls .
however if the engineer determines that under certain conditions better results may be obtained without using the controls then the engineer may waive using either the grade control or slope control requirements or both .
notify the plant to stop shipment whenever the automatic screed controls break down or malfunction .
obtain the engineers approval to manually operate the equipment or operate it by other methods to place the remainder of material already in transit provided the method of operation produces results otherwise conforming to this section .
obtain vertical control for the outer edges of each mainline roadway from reference lines or by using a ski arrangement .
the department will allow obtaining horizontal control from the reference line .
automatically control the grade and slope for intermediate lines using reference lines or a ski and a slope control device or a dual ski arrangement .
immediately after striking off and before rolling visually inspect each course for irregularities and correct if necessary .
keep hand raking of the mixtures to the absolute minimum .
ensure that the finished surface has a uniform appearance free from segregated areas .
immediately remove and replace as directed all portions of a pavement course that are defective in mixture composition show excessive segregation or do not otherwise comply with the contract .
correct irregularities in alignment of the outside edge or edges of longitudinal joints by adding or removing material before compacting the edges .
over uniform narrow areas such as widening or narrow paved shoulders where the use of pavers would be impractical spread by a mechanical spreader .
ensure that the material is placed to the required lines grades and cross section without segregation of the mixture .
over areas where machine spreading is impractical due to irregularities or obstructions spread the mixture by approved methods .
place the material to avoid segregation and to reduce to a minimum the amount of patching required during compaction .
discard all coarse aggregate particles brought to the surface by raking .
do not scatter or broadcast excess mixture or particles across the surface of the uncompacted mat .
spread all surface courses with allowances made for compacting to finish approximately num inch above forms gutters or similar construction .
the department may allow shoulders and asphalt mixture for pavement wedge to be paved monolithically with the mainline if it is in the best interest of the department .
obtain the engineers approval before doing so .
do not place or compact asphalt mixture when the natural light is insufficient without providing artificial lighting satisfactory to the engineer .
unless the contract specifies nighttime paving do not place binder surface or other asphalt mixture wearing courses at night without first obtaining the engineers permission .
the engineer may require daytime paving if the engineer deems the nighttime work unsatisfactory .
a use a mtv to place the asphalt mixture for all layers of pavement excluding drainage blanket in the driving lanes for all interstates and parkways .
use a mtv on other routes when required by the contract or proposal .
the mtv is not required on ramps andor shoulders unless specified in the contract .
when the engineer determines the use of the mtv is not practical for a portion of the project the engineer may waive its requirement for that portion of pavement .
num thickness tolerances .
place asphalt mixtures at the lift thickness specified in the contract .
when lift thickness is not specified in the contract or when deviations to the pavement thickness is approved by the engineer use the following table for application of asphalt mixture thickness .
num nominal maximum aggregate size inches lift thickness inches num num num num num num num num num a initial treatment and resurfacing projects .
ensure that the total combined thickness of each class of asphalt base conforms to the contract .
control the thickness by the rate of application .
place the mixture at the contractspecified weight per square yard .
do not exceed the rate of application by more than num percent .
b new construction .
under the engineers supervision perform coring for thickness checks according to km num as soon as practical after completion of all or a major portion of the asphalt base .
the engineer will measure the cores .
fill all core holes either with compacted asphalt mixture or nonshrink grout .
complete all remedial overlay work before placing the final course .
when constructing an overlay match the grades of the adjacent work such as storage lanes approaches entrances etc .
to the overlay section whether these adjacent areas are deficient in thickness or not .
ensure the total combined thickness of all layers is within num inch of the compacted plan thickness .
when there is an asphalt binder course consider it as asphalt base for the purpose of determining compliance with thickness tolerances .
when the top layer of a new pavement is ogfc sand seal surface or sand asphalt surface consider all asphalt mixtures beneath that course as asphalt base for the purpose of determining compliance with thickness tolerances .
when the engineer determines the asphalt base is deficient in total thickness by more than num inch from the compacted plan thickness overlay the full width of the pavement to bring the pavement to the required plan thickness .
when placing additional material is not feasible due to structures drainage or other engineering reasons the engineer may waive the requirement for overlaying .
num joints .
when curbs gutters pavement and other structures adjoin the new construction coat all contact surfaces of the existing construction and joints of previously placed new construction both longitudinal and transverse with tack .
when the pavement construction consists of num or more courses offset the longitudinal joint a minimum of num inches .
place the longitudinal joint in the final surface course along the dividing line between the lanes .
clean adjacent surfaces of all loose materials so the joint shall receive full compaction from the rollers .
place and spread all courses as continuously as possible keeping the number of joints to a minimum .
when a transverse joint is necessary complete the spreading of the material by the finishing machine and adjust the course to a straight line square with the pavement .
before work is resumed cut back the joint on the previous run exposing the full depth of the course .
remove all excess material .
check the joint with a numfoot straightedge at intervals of num feet or less immediately after initial rolling .
immediately correct any irregularities not conforming to subsection num either by additional raking or adding hot material or both .
discard all coarse aggregate particles brought to the surface by raking .
do not scatter or broadcast excess mixture or particles across the surface of the uncompacted mat .
roll joints to compress the material and to produce as tight a joint as possible .
avoid cold longitudinal joints when practical by either placing the full width of the course in one pass operating pavers in echelon or moving pavers back each day after placing sufficient tonnage in each traffic lane so the course placed will be the full width of the pavement at the end of each day .
obtain the engineers approval for the method of paving .
num comply with subsection num d for density of joint cores obtained from surface mixtures when option a applies .
num shoulder rumble strips and pavement texturing .
a shoulder rumble strips .
num interstates and parkways .
construct sawed rumble strips on all mainline and ramp shoulders to the dimensions shown below .
place sawed rumble strips one foot out from the mainline pavement and to a length of num inches .
num other roads .
construct sawed rumble strips on shoulders of facilities with posted speed limits greater than num mph and shoulder widths num feet or greater .
unless specified in the plans or directed by the engineer do not construct rumble strips on facilities with posted speed limits of num mph or less .
construct sawed rumble strips on all mainline shoulders to the dimensions shown below .
place sawed rumble strips one foot out from the mainline pavement and to a length of num inches .
b shoulder pavement texturing .
perform texturing on all paved shoulder widths less than num feet and constructed monolithically with the mainline or constructed using a surface mixture .
when furnishing asphalt mixture for pavement wedge binder or a base mixture for the wedge the department will not require texturing .
texture to the dimensions shown below .
place num foot out from the mainline pavement and to a length of num feet .
on paved shoulders less than num feet shorten the length and distance of the texturing as the engineer directs .
time the rolling operation so indentations are at the specified size and depth without causing unacceptable displacement of the asphalt mat .
the department may require a sawed rumble strip when texturing is required but omitted or not in reasonably close conformity with the dimensions shown .
num leveling and wedging and scratch course .
a leveling and wedging .
conform to the gradation requirements control points of aashto m num for base binder or surface as the engineer directs .
submit a jmf to the engineer for ac approval according to km num .
the engineer may adjust the gradation requirements of the asphalt mixture being used for leveling and wedging in order to provide smooth transitions .
upon completing each course of asphalt mixture and before spreading the num next course check the surface of that course by a stringline for deviations from a uniform grade .
correct any such deviations from the required uniformity by applying additional material spreading and rolling as directed .
when construction of the previous course is included in the same contract mill any high joints or other high areas as required in addition to leveling and wedging .
when leveling and wedging is included on resurfacing projects check the existing surface by stringline for deviations from a uniform grade .
correct the courses in the same manner with an application of the type mixture specified by the engineer .
when an asphalt mixture has been included in the proposal for leveling and wedging perform this work at the locations designated before starting the normal paving operations .
thoroughly clean the areas to receive the corrective work and apply the same tack material as specified for the courses being constructed .
do not apply the material as a scratch course over the entire area of the existing pavement .
do not apply the material monolithically with the surface course .
spread the asphalt mixture for leveling and wedging with a motorpatrol grader or paver .
after spreading thoroughly compact the mixture .
b scratch course .
when required by the contract place an asphalt mixture as a scratch course .
conform to the gradation requirements control points of aashto m num for base binder or surface as the engineer directs .
submit a jmf to the engineer for ac approval according to km num .
apply the mixture over the entire area of the existing pavement before constructing the final surface course do not apply material monolithically with the surface course .
set the paver to a minimum thickness as directed to correct rutting adverse warping dipping and other imperfections in the existing pavement and to provide a smooth level surface for the final surface course .
compact with a pneumatictired roller to ensure proper compaction in rutted and warped areas in the existing pavement .
when required by conditions on the project the engineer may adjust the gradation requirements of the specified mixture .
num compaction .
compact asphalt mixtures by option a or b as specified in the contract .
operate the rollers to eliminate all roller marks and obtain the specified compaction .
operate vibratory rollers of a design weight and frequency that produces the specified compaction without damaging the mat .
during the initial rolling of each course visually inspect its surface for any irregularities that may develop .
remove and replace areas in which the material is not in compliance as specified in subsection num .
do not allow the rollers at any time to stand on the material being placed immediately behind the paver .
when rolling is temporarily suspended stop the rollers as far behind the paver as practical .
move the rollers at a slow but uniform speed with the drive roll or wheels nearest the paver .
immediately correct any displacement due to reversing the direction of a roller or from other causes using rakes and adding fresh mixture when required .
while rolling do not displace the line and grade of the edges of the asphalt mixture .
when the engineer allows use a pneumatictired roller for final rolling on base courses .
to prevent adhesion of the material to the wheels of steelwheeled rollers keep the wheels moistened with water but do not use excess water .
do not use kerosene oil or other harmful liquids .
the department will allow a small quantity of detergent to be mixed with the water .
compact areas adjacent to manholes curbs narrow widening and other small areas inaccessible to a roller by mechanical tampers .
num a compaction under option a .
develop the rolling pattern during the first sublot .
b compaction under option b .
provide initial or breakdown rolling consisting of one complete coverage by a numwheel roller or tandem roller weighing at least num tons and having a compressive capability on the rear wheels of at least num pounds per linear inch of wheel width .
ensure that numaxle steelwheeled rollers weigh at least num tons .
ensure that numaxle steelwheeled tandem rollers weigh at least num tons .
for initial or breakdown rolling provide rollers that are equipped with wheels having a diameter of num inches or more .
perform the rolling immediately after spreading and finishing the mixture .
provide intermediate rolling consisting of at least num complete coverages with a tandem roller weighing at least num tons .
start intermediate rolling after completing the breakdown rolling as closely as possible without causing undue displacement cracking or shoving of the material .
for intermediate rolling of num numinch and numinch nominal size mixes a pneumatictired roller may be used .
use pneumatictired rollers that weigh at least num tons and have num to num tires capable of inflation pressures up to num psi .
maintain an inflation pressure in all tires within num psi of the manufacturers recommended pressure .
arrange the tires so that the gap between the tires of the front axle is covered by the tires of the rear axle .
mount wheels to provide equal contact pressure under each wheel .
use a tire tread that is satisfactory to the engineer .
maintain tire size and inflation pressure such that the contact pressure is at least num psi .
perform final rolling of the uppermost layer or surface course with a tandem roller .
operate the roller at all times parallel to the centerline .
when the engineer allows use a pneumatictired roller for final rolling on base courses .
begin rolling at the sides and progress to the center on crowned surfaces .
begin rolling at the low side and progress to the high side on superelevated sections .
operate the rollers parallel to the centerline and lap successive trips of each roller uniformly to the previous trip .
during breakdown rolling the engineer may allow the course to be rolled without the required lap of the wheels on successive trips .
end alternate trips of the rollers on transverse lines at least num feet apart .
regulate starting and stopping of the rollers to avoid distorting the surface .
num surface tolerances .
check the surface of each course with templates straightedges or stringlines .
check the surfaces of the finished courses longitudinally with a numfoot straightedge placed parallel to the centerline over the width of the surface .
ensure the following num the finished surfaces of the base and binder courses do not deviate more than num inch from the numfoot straightedge .
num the finished surface of the final surface course does not deviate more than num inch from the numfoot straightedge .
num the cross slope of all courses does not deviate more than num inch in num feet from the required cross slope .
num the asphalt surface conforms to all requirements for a final surface course when the top portion of a new pavement consists of a wearing course underlain by asphalt surface .
correct all irregularities exceeding the allowable tolerances .
correct surface course irregularities by removing and replacing the entire lift thickness or by overlaying .
do not remove the irregular areas of the surface course by surface grinders .
on resurfacing projects when no provisions are made for constructing leveling and wedging courses scratch courses or milling the engineer will waive the specified requirements for surface tolerances .
num num transverse joints .
when specified in the contract cut transverse joints in overlays of jpc pavement base and shoulders .
seal with selfleveling silicone rubber sealant .
num pavement marking .
apply and maintain pavement marking as specified in section num .
num measurement .
num removing type v pavement markers .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
the department will determine the quantity by dividing the length of each run of markers by the markers average spacing plus one .
the department will not measure other marker types for removal disposal or filling of their grooves for payment .
the department will consider all of this work incidental to the surfacing items in the contract .
num adjust manhole .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num asphalt mixtures .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
the department will not measure rolled rumble strips or pavement wedge texturing for payment and will consider them incidental to this bid item .
num leveling and wedging .
for resurfacing projects when leveling and wedging is listed as a bid item the department will measure the quantity in tons according to subsection num .
for reconstruction and new construction the department will measure the quantity of leveling and wedging placed on the first base course in tons as base material .
the department will not measure leveling and wedging used to correct irregularities in subsequent courses for payment and will consider it incidental to placing the course .
num asphalt scratch course .
the department will measure the quantity according to section num .
num protective and restorative work .
the department will not measure for payment any extra materials methods or construction techniques determined by the engineer not to be a part of the specified construction used to protect maintain or repair any portion of the uncompleted work during the winter months .
num rumble strips .
the department will measure the quantity of sawed rumble strip in linear feet along the length of the roadway .
when pavement shoulder texturing is required or utilized the department will not measure the quantity for payment and will consider them incidental to the asphalt mixture .
num asphalt placement with mtv .
the department will not measure the mtv for payment and will consider its use incidental to the asphalt mixture .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following num adjust manhole .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities according to subsection num .
num asphalt mixtures .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities according to section num .
num leveling and wedging .
the department will make payment for the num completed and accepted quantities according to the lot pay adjustment schedule for specialty mixtures in section num .
num asphalt scratch course .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities according to the lot pay adjustment schedule for specialty mixtures in section num .
num adjust manhole frame to grade .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities according to subsection num .
code pay item num remove pavement marker type v each pay unit num adjust manhole frame to grade each num shoulder rumble strips sawed linear foot asphalt mixture type ton the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num opengraded friction course ogfc num description .
construct one course of hotmixed hotplaced ogfc approximately numinch thick on a foundation provided by either new or existing pavements .
num materials and equipment .
num aggregates .
conform to subsection num and the following a fine aggregate .
limit sands from sources other than class a polishresistant fine aggregate sources to num percent of the total aggregate in the mixture .
b coarse aggregate .
provide num percent class a polishresistant aggregate .
num asphalt binder .
provide the pg binder specified in the contract conforming to section num .
num antistripping additive .
select from the departments list of approved materials .
num tack .
conform to section num .
num reclaimed materials .
limit the use of reclaimed materials to a maximum of ten percent in the mixture .
num construction .
conform to section num except as provided in this section and in the contract .
the ogfc is intended to provide a coarsetextured welldraining skidresistant wearing surface .
construct this course at a higher elevation than adjacent gutters to provide proper lateral drainage of water through the course .
for multiple lanes in the same direction place the material continuously in one lane each day .
protect it from traffic until it has cured overnight .
when placing ogfc on twolane twoway pavements operate the paver according to subsection num .
num weather limitations .
follow weather limitations outlined in subsection num .
num leveling and wedging .
perform the necessary leveling wedging and patching to repair an existing pavement before beginning construction of this surface course .
num tack coat .
apply according to section num except as follows .
when furnishing emulsions for the tack coat do not dilute the emulsions .
apply undiluted ssnum ssnumh or rsnum at an approximate rate of num pounds num gallons per square yard .
num preparation of mixtures .
submit the jmf for ogfc for approval according to subsection num .
conform to the gradation requirements specified .
the department will perform a mix design according to km num .
test the approved jmf of the mixture according to km num or km num and ensure that it conforms to the requirements shown in the table below .
during the operation of the plant conform to the following tolerances from the approved jmf and also maintain the master gradation ranges below at all times .
num obtain the engineers approval for the percent by weight of asphalt binder in the mixture .
do not deviate from the established ac by more than num percent .
test the mixture according to km num km num km num km num or aashto t num .
use the antistripping additive at the rate of num percent by weight of asphalt binder .
maintain temperatures of the ingredient materials and the mixture within the following ranges mixing and laying temperatures f material minimum maximum aggregates num num asphalt binders pg num num num pg num num num asphalt mixtures at plant pg num num num measured in truck pg num num num asphalt mixtures at project pg num num num measured in truck pg num num num when discharging spread the ogfc at an approximate rate of num pounds per square yard to provide an approximate thickness of num inch .
roll in the static mode with a steelwheeled tandem roller weighing between num and num tons .
begin rolling immediately after placing the course .
limit rolling to the minimum necessary for consolidating the mixture and bonding it to the underlying surface .
avoid excessive rolling and breakage of the aggregate .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity in tons according to subsection num .
the department will not measure asphalt tack coat and antistrip additives for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will calculate payment by the lot pay adjustment schedule for specialty mixtures in section num .
the department will apply the schedules tolerances to the average of the absolute values of deviations from the jmf .
when the deviation is on the fine side of the jmf the engineer will evaluate each occurrence and determine if it is detrimental to the pavement performance .
the department will evaluate the acceptability of the material to determine if it will remain in place at a reduced pay factor or be removed and replaced at no expense to the department .
when a pay factor less than num is determined for gradation on more than one sieve the department will use the lowest single pay factor determined .
when a pay factor less than num is determined for both ac and gradation on one or more sieves the engineer will evaluate and determine if the deficiencies will have a cumulative negative influence on the mixture .
if so the engineer will apply both the reduced pay factor for the ac and the largest deduction for the gradation failures .
if not sieve master gradation range jmf size percent passing by weight tolerances num inch num num inch num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num no .
num num num the engineer will apply the larger single deduction .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num asphalt surface opengraded grade ton pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num asphalt seal coat num description .
construct an asphalt seal coat consisting of one or more applications each of asphalt material and cover aggregate .
num materials and equipment .
num asphalt material .
furnish rsnum or hfrsnum conforming to section num .
num aggregate .
conform to section num or num as applicable .
num equipment .
provide and keep on the project at all times an accurate thermometer hand brooms and other small tools and equipment essential for completion of the work .
provide equipment for heating the asphalt material and pressure distributors conforming to subsection num .
provide a mechanical broom or sweeper for cleaning the existing surface and for sweeping the completed seal coat .
provide an aggregate spreader equipped with a mechanical feed .
ensure that the spreader is capable of depositing aggregate from the transporting vehicle directly onto the fresh asphalt material at the rate specified in smooth uniform layers independent of the forward speed .
ensure that the spreader is capable of being filled and moved without discharging aggregate .
provide a pneumatictired roller for roadway surfaces .
on slopes the department will allow a steelwheel roller .
num construction .
num weather limitations .
do not construct any seal coat when the ambient temperature is below num f nor when the ambient temperature within the preceding num hours has been num f or lower except with the engineers written permission .
num preparation of surface .
sweep the road with a mechanical sweeper and with wire hand brooms when necessary .
clean the edges of the surface so that the full width of the roadway to be treated is uniformly clean .
where any mud or earth exists remove it in advance of the application of the asphalt material and allow the surface to thoroughly dry .
if cracks can not be adequately filled by the seal coat fill them with asphalt material and apply cover aggregate before applying the seal coat .
num heating and applying asphalt material .
heat and maintain the asphalt material between num and numf during application .
apply asphalt material by means of a pressure distributor in a uniform continuous spread over the section to be treated in the quantity per square yard specified in the contract or as the engineer directs .
keep the nozzles of the spray bar clean at all times .
immediately make any streaked areas uniform by use of a hand hose equipped with a nozzle .
treat areas over which it is impractical to operate a distributor by means of a hand hose equipped with a nozzle or by means of a pouring pot .
do not apply the asphalt material farther in advance of the spreading of the aggregate than can be covered directly by the aggregate immediately available at the site of work .
when the seal coat treatment is constructed in halfwidths provide complete coverage by overlapping the num applications approximately num inches along the centerline .
prevent spotting or discoloring curbs headwalls and other structures .
when such discolorations occur remove them at no expense to the department .
make joints utilizing an approved method .
num num application of cover material .
provide the gradation specified in the contract .
ensure that the aggregate for cover material is surfacedry when applied unless damp aggregate is allowed or required due to the type of asphalt material being used .
spread the aggregate immediately following the application of the asphalt material .
spread the aggregate before the asphalt material breaks .
ensure that the spreading equipment does not contact the asphalt material before it is covered with aggregate .
apply the cover material at the rate designated in the contract with precautions taken not to exceed the designated rate by more than num percent .
use hand brooms to correct any irregularities .
when applied on the roadway lanes and shoulders roll the entire surface width with pneumatictired rollers immediately following the spreading of the aggregate .
do not use steelwheel rollers except as specified in subsection num .
operate the rollers parallel to the centerline and cover the entire surface with at least num passes of the rollers or more when the engineer directs .
when applied on the roadway lanes and shoulders after rolling mechanically sweep the completed seal coat to remove all excess cover aggregate after the asphalt material has cured sufficiently to allow sweeping without dislodging the imbedded aggregate when deemed necessary .
if an asphalt surface course is to be applied over the seal coat do not allow traffic on the seal coat before applying the surface course unless required by the traffic control plan or the engineer .
num measurement .
when an authorized adjustment is made the department will measure quantities up to num percent in excess of the designated application rate for payment .
the department will not measure quantities exceeding the designated application rate by more than num percent for payment .
num asphalt material for asphalt seal coat .
the department will measure the quantity in tons according to section num .
num asphalt seal aggregate .
the department will measure the quantity in tons according to section num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num asphalt seal coat ton pay unit num asphalt seal aggregate ton the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num asphalt curing seal and asphalt prime and tack coats num description .
prepare existing bases or surfaces and apply asphalt material before placing covering courses of asphalt mixtures or treatments .
num materials and equipment .
num tack coat .
furnish ssnum or ssnumh conforming to section num .
num prime coat .
furnish ssnumh conforming to section num unless the contract allows another material .
num curing seal .
furnish rsnum ssnum or ssnumh conforming to section num .
num water .
conform to section num .
num equipment .
provide hand brooms and other small tools and equipment essential to completing the work in addition to a mechanical broom or sweeper asphalt heating equipment and a pressure distributor .
provide a mechanical broom or sweeper that is adjustable to make uniform contact with the surface and that thoroughly cleans without cutting into the surface being swept .
provide equipment for heating the asphalt material in tanks railroad cars trucks and distributors that is capable of heating the material to the required temperature without introducing moisture localized overheating or otherwise changing the characteristics of the material .
mount the pressure distributor on a selfpropelled motor vehicle equipped with pneumatic tires and ensure that it has sufficient power to maintain a constant and uniform speed under all operating conditions .
use a distributor designed to apply the material uniformly at the rate required for the type of construction .
use a distributor conforming to the following requirements a tank .
use a tank with a capacity of at least num gallons and equipped with a removable manhole cover an overflow pipe and a dial gage for indicating the contents mounted so as to be plainly visible to the operator .
carry an accurate measuring stick on the distributor at all times .
b heating system .
ensure that the heating system evenly heats and maintains the asphalt material within the required temperature range at all times .
provide a temperature measuring device that will quickly and accurately determine the temperature of the material .
c distributing system .
ensure that the pressure distributing system contains a separate power and pump unit of sufficient capacity to distribute the required quantity of asphalt material at a constant flow and uniform pressure .
mount a dial pressure gage plainly visible to the operator .
d spray bar and nozzles .
use a fullcirculating spray bar that adjusts in length to conform to the width of the application being made without overlapping .
use a spray bar that swings laterally over a distance of num inches or more .
provide a positive and immediate cutoff and means to prevent material from dripping onto the road surface when the flow is shut off .
use individual nozzles that maintain an equal flow from all nozzles at the same time .
to prevent clogging of the nozzles provide screens for the circulating system and keep the screens clean .
also provide a hand spray bar and nozzle having an adequate length of flexible steel hose with packed couplings .
e tachometer or synchronizer .
provide a tachometer visible to the truck operator to enable him to maintain the constant speed necessary for the application of the specified quantity of material .
furnish suitable charts showing the truck speeds necessary for the correct application .
num when using a synchronizer the tachometer may be omitted .
use a synchronizer that delivers a specified quantity of asphalt material onto the road surface independent of the truck speed .
num construction .
for the asphalt prime coat apply liquid asphalt material to granulartype bases .
for the asphalt tack coat apply liquid asphalt material to the surface of concrete or bases and to existing asphalt surfaces and when necessary to newly constructed asphalt courses .
num weather limitations .
conform to the temperature limitations specified for the asphalt mixture to be placed .
do not apply prime and tack coats to wet surfaces .
num preparation of surface .
obtain the engineers approval of the prepared surface before applying the prime or tack coat .
a asphalt prime coat .
grade and shape the existing traffic bound base to the required grade and cross section before applying any asphalt material .
wet and roll salvable floater material into the existing traffic bound base .
b asphalt tack coat .
use mechanical sweepers to clean the application surfaces of all dirt and other foreign matter .
use wire hand brooms when necessary .
extend sweeping beyond the edges of the surface to ensure a thorough cleaning of the full width to be treated .
c asphalt curing seal .
ensure the roadbed surface is dense free from loose extraneous material and contains sufficient moisture to prevent penetration of the asphalt material .
num application .
provide necessary barricades warning signs and flaggers to prevent traffic from traveling over a freshly applied prime or tack coat .
also provide for public convenience and safety as specified in sections num and num .
prevent spotting or discoloring curbs headwalls and other structures .
when discolorations occur remove them at no expense to the department .
protect the exposed treated surfaces from damage .
repair all damaged areas .
maintain the material within the following temperature ranges during application ssnum ssnumh num f rsnum num f a asphalt prime coat .
apply prime coats at the rate specified in the contract or as directed when conditions justify variations in the rates of application .
apply the number of applications of the prime coat as directed .
apply the material under pressure .
do not use handpouring except for special conditions and then only with the engineers approval .
allow the prime coat to cure before placing the asphalt mixture course unless the engineer approves otherwise .
b asphalt tack coat .
apply the tack coat with a spray bar that can be raised to a sufficient height so as to uniformly and completely coat the entire surface .
when a uniform application at the rate required can not be obtained from a spray bar then apply the tack coat by fogging with a hand spray attachment .
the engineer will only accept complete and uniform coverage .
unless otherwise specified in the requirements for the asphalt mixture being placed apply tack at a rate to achieve an undiluted residue of num pounds num gallons per square yard .
when furnishing ssnum or ssnumh for tack the department will allow diluted or undiluted application provided uniform and complete coverage is achieved .
when applying tack in a diluted form apply it a sufficient time in advance to ensure that all water has evaporated before placing the asphalt mixture .
on newly constructed base and binder courses adjust the application rate as num the engineer directs .
when placing asphalt material adjacent to curbs existing pavements or other structures first coat the contact surface of the existing structure with tack material .
if the initial application of any tack material is not uniform apply additional material as directed at no additional expense to the department .
remove asphalt material applied in excess of the requirements or cover it with a blotter course of dry sand or stone chips as the engineer directs .
on projects over which public traffic is being maintained apply the tack coat over onehalf of the pavement width not to exceed onehalf of the days work in advance of the construction of the asphalt cover course .
do not end the tack coat application at a location hazardous to traffic .
do not apply tack coat to a lane that requires overnight closure unless the engineer approves it in writing .
schedule the work so that at the end of the days production all tack is covered with the asphalt mixture or a sand blotter course .
at road intersections or other traffic crossings the engineer may require the application of a sand blotter course over the tack coat .
when sand for blotter is included in the contract as a bid item cover the tack coat with surfacedry natural sand in a minimum quantity sufficient to prevent the tack coat from being picked up by traffic .
apply the sand uniformly at the rate the engineer directs but not exceeding num pounds per square yard .
the normal rate is num to num pounds per square yard .
c asphalt curing seal .
uniformly apply the curing seal at the rate of approximately num pounds per square yard .
the engineer will determine the actual rate and application temperature of asphalt material .
apply the curing seal in sufficient quantity to provide a continuous membrane over the roadbed .
to avoid excessive runoff apply the seal in num or more applications when directed or allowed making each application as soon as possible after the previous application .
if any damage occurs immediately reseal the damaged area .
if the asphalt material is sticky apply a sand blotter material at a rate of approximately num pounds per square yard when the engineer directs to avoid damage to the seal or to avoid tracking material onto other facilities .
num measurement .
the department will not measure for payment the removal of discolorations maintenance and repair of the applied coating or removal of excess material .
num asphalt prime coat .
the department will measure the quantity according to section num .
the department will not measure water used to prepare dry surfaces for payment .
num asphalt material for tack .
the department will not measure tack for payment and will consider it incidental to the asphalt courses .
num asphalt curing seal .
the department will measure the quantity according to section num .
the department will not measure water used to prepare dry surfaces for payment .
num sand for blotter .
when listed as a bid item the department will measure the quantity in tons according to section num .
the department will not measure sand for payment when used to treat excessive asphalt material application .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num asphalt prime coat ton pay unit num num asphalt curing seal ton num sand for blotter ton the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num asphalt mixture for pavement wedge num description .
construct a pavement wedge composed of a hotmixed or warmmixed asphalt mixture .
prepare the area to be covered by the mixture when necessary .
num materials and equipment .
num asphalt binder .
furnish pg num conforming to section num .
num aggregate .
conform to sections num and num .
use a gradation within the requirements in the following table sieve size num num inch num percent passing num inch num num inch num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num test gradation according to km num or km num .
use an asphalt binder content ac between num and num percent by weight of the mixture .
when using a porous aggregate increase the ac as needed to compensate for asphalt absorption by the aggregate .
submit a jmf to the engineer for approval according to km num .
maintain the approved ac within num percentage points as determined according to km num km num km num km num or aashto t num .
num construction .
conform to section num except as specified in this section and in the contract .
construct the wedge to the depth width and slope the contract specifies where existing conditions permit .
remove the sod or perform trench excavation only when necessary to obtain the specified depth and width .
do not remove solid rock .
compact the mixture with a roller weighing at least one ton .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
the department will not measure trench excavation or sod removal performed as specified in this section for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities according to the lot pay adjustment schedule for specialty mixtures in section num under the following code pay item num asphalt mixture for pavement wedge ton pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num asphalt pavement milling and texturing num description .
remove existing pavement by milling and texturing .
num materials and equipment .
provide a poweroperated selfpropelled milling machine capable of num removing asphalt pavement to the required depth profile cross slope and surface texture num accurately establishing profile grades by referencing from either the existing pavement or from an independent grade control num controlling cross slope num applying sufficient downpressure to plane the milled surface and num effectively removing cuttings from the pavement and preventing dust from escaping into the air .
provide supplemental equipment as necessary to remove material adjacent to curbs railroad crossings and other areas that can not be removed by the milling machine .
additionally provide a mechanical sweeper and when the engineer deems necessary a water truck to control dust .
num construction .
the depth of cut indicated in the contract is approximate only .
the engineer will specify the actual depth of cut .
when the contract requires a bottomofrut cut remove only the amount of material necessary to acceptably texture the bottom of the rut .
where there are no ruts remove only the amount of material necessary to obtain an acceptable texture .
remove the material in successive cuts of approximately num to num num inches measured at the edge of the cutting drum .
complete each cut over the entire length and width of the area .
do not begin the next cut until the engineer examines the area and determines that additional cutting is necessary .
when maintaining public traffic is not necessary the department may allow deeper cuts provided the final cut does not exceed num num inches and satisfactory results are obtained .
provide an average depth of num inch between the high and low points on the milled pavement .
after milling and texturing ensure that the finished surface conforms to the required grade and cross section and provides a smooth riding surface free from gouges ridges oil film and other imperfections of workmanship .
do not allow the elevation of the longitudinal edges of adjacent cuts to differ more than num inch .
unless the engineer allows do not leave vertical longitudinal faces during nonworking hours in areas exposed to public traffic .
limit the vertical longitudinal faces to num num inches in height and taper them in a manner the engineer approves to avoid creating a hazard for traffic .
when the engineer deems necessary apply water to control dust .
remove excess millings and fines that have collected at the vertical longitudinal faces and thoroughly sweep up all millings .
load and haul away all materials swept up .
repair pavement that is gouged torn or otherwise damaged during milling operations and repair damage done to any other property of any kind including utility frames grates and covers .
num surface tolerance .
ensure that the finished surface after the final cut does not deviate more than num inch from a numfoot straightedge and that the cross slope does not deviate more than num inch in num feet .
correct all irregularities exceeding these limits .
num approaches and tapers .
mill approaches and tapers as required by and to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the engineer will determine the length width and num depth of cut on approaches and tapers .
match the approaches and tapers to the finished cut on the mainline and transition them to the existing surface within num inch .
when the engineer deems necessary transition private entrances to provide a smooth approach to the roadway .
num pavement marking .
apply and maintain pavement markings according to section num .
num adjusting small drainage structures .
adjust small drainage structures such as catch basins as required to match the finished pavement or to provide proper drainage according to subsection num .
when existing catch basin grates are below the finished grade the department will require no adjustments .
keep all small drainage structures utility valves etc .
free of cuttings and other debris during the milling operation .
num adjusting manholes .
only when the engineer directs adjust manholes according to subsection num .
return manhole adjusting rings that are removed and not reused to the utility owner .
num measurement .
num asphalt pavement milling and texturing .
the department will measure the quantity of material removed from the areas milled and textured in tons .
when the original contract quantity is num tons or more weigh the material according to section num except that the department will accept commercial or portable scales certified by the kentucky department of agriculture division of weights and measures and approved by the engineer .
when the original contract quantity is less than num tons arrange for num trucks of each capacity to be weighed to determine the average net weight per load .
the department will calculate the total quantity using the average weight per load and the load count for each size of truck .
the engineer may require additional weighing if excessive variation in loading is apparent .
the engineer may perform checkweighing .
the department will not measure additional milling performed to correct deficiencies in the finished grade cross section or texture for material removed when the deficiencies are due to unsatisfactory workmanship .
the department will not measure work to repair damage caused by the milling operations .
the department will not measure water used to control dust for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num mobilization for asphalt pavement milling and texturing .
the department will measure the quantity by the lump sum .
the department will measure mobilization for asphalt pavement milling and texturing for payment only once per contract and will consider any additional mobilization operations for milling and texturing incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure mobilization for asphalt pavement milling and texturing for payment when milling is performed to correct deficiencies in the finished grade cross section or texture for material removed when the deficiencies are due to unsatisfactory workmanship .
for group contracts the department will measure the quantity for each project subsection that has a bid item for mobilization for asphalt pavement milling and texturing .
num adjusting small drainage structures .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num adjust manhole .
the department will measure the quantity by each num individual unit .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following num asphalt pavement milling and texturing .
when asphalt pavement milling and texturing is a major item the department will use the supplemental formulas established in subsection num for determining adjusted unit prices when either an underrun or an overrun of num percent occurs in the quantity of milling and texturing actually performed .
num adjust manhole .
in the event the engineer directs the contractor to adjust existing manholes and the contract does not include a bid item for this work the department will make payment at an agreed unit price of num for each manhole acceptably adjusted by using the adjusting ring method or an agreed unit price of num for each manhole acceptably adjusted by removing or adding masonry .
code pay item num asphalt pavement milling and texturing ton pay unit num mobilization for milling and texturing lump sum num num adjusting small drainage structures type size see subsection num num num num adjust manhole frame to grade each the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num asphalt mixtures using reclaimed materials num description .
use reclaimed asphalt pavement rap from department projects or other approved sources in hot mix asphalt hma or warm mix asphalt wma provided mixture requirements are satisfied .
for other sources to be approved satisfactorily establish to the engineer that the quality of the material is acceptable .
use either preconsumer manufacturer waste or new or postconsumer reclaimed asphalt shingles ras that are processed such that all the material passes the numin .
sieve .
ensure preconsumer ras is free of deleterious materials .
ensure postconsumer ras does not contain more than num percent wood by mass or more than num percent deleterious materials by mass .
num materials and equipment .
conform to the guidelines in subsection num for the required grade of asphalt binder which is based on the percentage of effective binder content of the mixture .
num construction .
keep reclaimed material of different gradation asphalt binder content asphalt binder properties and aggregate properties separate at all times including when stockpiling and feeding .
the department may approve other methods and procedures provided that all characteristics of the reclaimed material remain uniform .
num polishresistant aggregate .
when electing to utilize polishresistant aggregate in reclaimed material to satisfy a portion of the polishresistant aggregate requirements for the mix provide documentation to the engineers satisfaction that the reclaimed material consists of the specified amount of polishresistant aggregate .
provide samples of the reclaimed material to the engineer for verification testing .
num asphalt binder content adjustment for ras .
recognizing that not all asphalt binder in ras is activated during the mixing operation to fully blend with the virgin materials the department will reduce the asphalt binder content determined by kentucky method num for ras by num percent .
num preparation of mixture .
a mix requirements .
conform to the contract requirements for each mixture produced using reclaimed material consisting of rap ras or a combination of rap and ras .
conform to the following table to select the appropriate grade of virgin asphalt binder to blend with the reclaimed material .
calculate the percentage of effective binder content as follows percentage of effective binder content ab numcde where a asphalt binder content of the rap b percentage of rap in the mix c asphalt binder content of the ras d percentage of ras in the mix and e effective binder content of the mix .
num asphalt mixtures with nominalmaximum aggregate size of num in .
num in .
and no .
num asphalt binder specified in mixture bid item virgin asphalt binder rap num effective binder content num effective binder content pg num pg num pg num pg num pg num ras num effective binder content num effective binder content pg num pg num pg num pg num rap and ras num effective binder content num effective binder content pg num pg num pg num pg num asphalt mixtures with nominalmaximum aggregate size of num in .
num in .
and num in .
asphalt binder specified in mixture bid item virgin asphalt binder rap num effective binder content num effective binder content pg num pg num pg num pg num pg num ras num effective binder content num effective binder content pg num pg num pg num pg num rap and ras num effective binder content num effective binder content pg num pg num pg num pg num b mixing .
obtain the engineers approval for the method of incorporating the reclaimed material into the mixture .
thoroughly mix the new and reclaimed materials into a uniform mass .
ensure that the final mixture conforms to all requirements of the contract .
ensure that the moisture content of the final mixture is not detrimental to the handling hauling placing or compacting of the mixture .
num measurement .
the department will not measure reclaimed material separately but will include it in the measured quantities of asphalt mixture produced .
num num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the appropriate pay item for the asphalt mixture being produced .
the department will not make separate payment for incorporating reclaimed material .
the department will not increase or decrease the contract unit prices for any asphalt mixture on the project as a result of using or not using reclaimed material in the asphalt mixtures .
num section num asphalt pavement ride quality num description .
this section covers the requirements for the ride quality of completed asphalt pavements .
ride quality is a measurement of surface tolerance in terms of an international roughness index iri .
the iri is an index derived from controlled measurements of the longitudinal profile in the wheel tracks and correlated with panel ratings of ride quality .
the contract will specify when ride quality requirements apply .
num materials and equipment .
the department will measure the longitudinal profile of the surface with an astm e num class num device .
num construction .
num corrective work .
submit corrective work procedure plans to the engineer for approval before performing the work .
provide a final corrected surface comparable to adjacent acceptable pavement placed within the project limits with respect to texture appearance and skid resistance .
num ride quality .
a acceptance testing .
the department will test the ride quality of the pavement for acceptance after the contractor num makes a request at least num weeks in advance and num partially completes the paving and the department deems it necessary or num completes all mainline paving .
the department will determine the iri by applying a linear transform determined by correlation to the values average of num wheel paths determined by astm e num .
thoroughly clean the surface of all dirt and other foreign matter immediately before the department performs the testing .
the department will divide and test each traffic lane using nummile test sections starting at the beginning of the lane and proceeding in the direction of traffic .
the department will exclude discontinuities such as bridges in the pavement .
when a test section at the end of a lane is less than num mile long the department will include that section with the adjacent section .
when deemed necessary the department will retest the pavement after any corrective work is completed .
when the final riding surface is an opengraded friction course ogfc the department will test the underlying pavement before the ogfc is placed and when deemed necessary test the ogfc after it is placed .
b requirements .
the department will specify if the ride quality requirements are category a or category b when ride quality is specified in the contract .
categories b ride quality requirements shall apply when the department fails to classify which ride quality requirement will apply to a contract .
num category a .
achieve an iri of num or lower for each nummile section .
when the iri is greater than num for a nummile section perform corrective work or remove and replace the pavement to achieve the specified iri .
at the departments discretion a pay deduction of num per numlanemile section may be applied in lieu of corrective work .
the departments testing generates a computer file containing the measured longitudinal profile in terms of elevation values of each wheel track at numinch intervals .
the department will create a strip chart from the file showing the elevation and distance traveled when the iri is greater than num or upon request for lower iri values .
num category b .
achieve an iri of num or lower for each nummile section .
when num the iri is greater than num for a nummile section perform corrective work or remove and replace the pavement to achieve the specified iri .
at the departments discretion a pay deduction of num per numlanemile section may be applied in lieu of corrective work .
the departments testing generates a computer file containing the measured longitudinal profile in terms of elevation values of each wheel track at numinch intervals .
the department will create a strip chart from the file showing the elevation and distance traveled when the iri is greater than num or upon request for lower iri values .
num measurement .
the department will measure the ride quality in terms of the iri according to subsection num .
the department will not measure the iri as a separate pay unit but will use the iri to calculate a ride quality adjustment payment .
num payment .
the department will apply a ride quality adjustment for each numlanemile section tested .
the department will determine the ride quality adjustments for each numlanemile section using the ride quality adjustment schedule below .
the department will not apply positive ride quality adjustments to numlanemile sections when their associated sublots density value is less than num .
the sum of the pay value adjustments for ride quality shall not exceed num for the project as a whole .
when requesting tests on partially completed pavement the department will perform one test at no charge .
the department will perform additional requested testing and retesting for corrective work or pavement replacement at a cost of num per lanemile .
the department will deduct charges for additional requested testing and retesting for corrective work from monies due on the contract .
ride quality adjustment schedules category a projects category b projects iri pay value adjustmentnum iri pay value adjustment num or less num num num or less num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num to num num num to num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num or higher corrective worknum num or higher corrective worknum num the department will not apply a positive pay value for corrective work other than removal and replacement to achieve the iri .
num num when it is in the best interest of the department a minimum pay value deduction of num per numlanemile section may be applied in lieu of corrective work .
num when it is in the best interest of the department a minimum pay value deduction of num per numlanemile section may be applied in lieu of corrective work .
num section num asphalt wedge curbs and mountable medians num description .
construct extruded asphalt sections of constant width with an extrusiontype machine .
construct asphalt sections of variable width by machine or hand .
num materials and equipment .
num asphalt materials .
conform to section num .
for tack and paint coats use ssnum or ssnumh .
for the asphalt mixture use pg num .
num aggregate .
conform to sections num and num .
use a gradation that conforms to the following table sieve size num inch num percent passing no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num test gradation according to km num or km num .
use an asphalt binder content ac between num and num percent by weight of the mixture .
when using a porous aggregate increase the ac as needed to compensate for asphalt absorption by the aggregate .
submit a jmf to the engineer for approval according to km num .
maintain the approved ac within num percentage points as determined according to km num km num km num km num or aashto t num .
the department may allow an alternate jmf .
submit alternates for the engineers approval .
when the engineer determines that the results from an alternate jmf are not satisfactory repair or replace the defective work and complete the remainder of the work using the jmf specified in this section .
num extrusion equipment .
furnish a selfpropelled machine for placing extruded asphalt sections .
ensure that it is equipped with a material hopper a distributing screw and adjustable forming devices and capable of placing and compacting the asphalt mixture to the lines grades and cross section specified in a smooth homogenous section free of honeycomb areas .
num construction .
conform to section num except as specified in this section and in the contract .
thoroughly clean the surface where the extruded asphalt sections are to be placed and apply tack at a rate to achieve an undiluted asphalt residue of num pounds num gallons per square yard .
allow the tack material to cure before covering it .
for curbs and medians of constant width extrude the asphalt sections at the locations and to the dimensions specified in the contract .
in areas inaccessible to the machine and on variablewidth medians the department will allow handplacing .
ensure that the mixture is compacted and finished to a dense uniform section comparable to the machineplaced mixture .
apply an asphalt paint coat to the sections after construction .
prevent spotting or discoloring of concrete curbs headwalls and other structures and remove any discolorations that occur .
num measurement .
num asphalt wedge curb .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet along the top of the curb .
the department will not measure tack and paint coats for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num num mountable medians .
the department will measure the quantity of each type in square yards .
the department will not measure tack and paint coats for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
when an alternate jmf is approved for use the department will not make any change to the contract unit price for this item .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num asphalt wedge curb linear foot pay unit num mountable median type square yard the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num stonematrix asphalt sma num description .
construct one or more courses of a stonematrix asphalt sma upon the prepared foundation according to these specifications .
aashto rnum offers guidance for the design of sma mixtures using the superpave gyratory compactor sgc .
for clnum sma base numd pgnum conform to all requirements for clnum asph base numd pgnum unless specifically modified herein .
for clnum sma surf numa pgnum conform to all requirements for clnum asph surf numa pgnum unless specifically modified herein .
for clnum sma surf numa pgnum conform to all requirements for clnum asph surf numa pgnum unless specifically modified herein .
num materials and equipment .
num fine aggregate .
a polish resistance .
contrary to subsection num the department will not require any of the fine aggregate to be polishresistant .
b sand .
conform to the quality requirements of aashto mnum .
contrary to aashto mnum conform to subsection num for soundness .
c mineral filler .
conform to the quality requirements of aashto mnum .
do not use fly ash as the mineral filler component .
do not use collected baghouse fines or other airborne aggregate particles in lieu of mineral filler .
num coarse aggregate .
a all aggregate types except slag .
conform to the quality requirements of aashto mnum .
contrary to aashto mnum conform to subsection num for soundness .
b slag .
conform to aashto mnum for flatandelongated particles and crushed content .
conform to section num for wear absorption and soundness .
num asphalt binder .
provide a performancegraded pg num asphalt binder conforming to section num .
num reclaimed materials .
limit the use of reclaimed materials to a maximum of ten percent in the mixture .
num stabilizing additive .
select and utilize either cellulose or mineral fiber in the sma mixture .
conform to the dosage rates and quality requirements of aashto mnum .
furnish the fiber manufacturers certification to the engineer stating that the material conforms to all requirements therein .
num fibersupply system .
use a separate feed system to accurately proportion the required quantity of fibers into the mixture in a manner that ensures uniform distribution .
interlock this proportioning device with the aggregate feed or weigh system to maintain the correct proportions for all rates of production and batch sizes .
add the fiber in such a manner to prevent the material from becoming entrained in the exhaust system of the drier or plant .
control the proportion of fibers to within num percent of the amount required .
provide flow indicators or sensing devices for the fiber system interlocked with the plant controls to interrupt mixture production if the introduction of fiber fails .
prior to performing the trial demonstration specified in subsection num calibrate the fibersupply system .
provide the engineer at least num days notice of the calibration date so that a department representative may inspect the calibration process and verify that the system operates correctly .
num for batch plants add the fiber to the aggregate in the weigh hopper or as the engineer directs .
increase the dry mixing time by num to num seconds or as the engineer directs from the time the aggregate is completely emptied into the mixer .
ensure the fibers are uniformly distributed prior to the injection of asphalt binder into the mixer .
for continuous or drum plants add the fiber to the aggregate and ensure the fibers are uniformly dispersed prior to the injection of asphalt binder .
num mineral fillersupply system .
use a totally enclosed separate feed system to accurately proportion the mineral filler into the mixture in a manner that ensures uniform distribution .
do not introduce the mineral filler through the coldfeed system .
prior to performing the trial demonstration specified in subsection num of this note calibrate the mineral fillersupply system to within num percent of the desired amount .
provide the engineer at least num days notice of the calibration date so that a department representative may inspect the calibration process and verify that the system operates correctly .
num rollers .
do not use pneumatictired rollers .
use vibratory rollers for breakdown rolling only .
num material transfer vehicle mtv .
provide and utilize a mtv as specified in section num .
num .
construction .
num seasonal and weather limitations .
conform to the seasonal and weather limitations outlined in num .
num preparation of mixture .
conform to the following aggregate composition limits for the respective nominalmaximum size of sma .
aggregate composition limits sieve size numin .
base passing by mass numin .
surface passing by mass numin .
surface passing by mass num num inch num num num num inch num num num num inch num num num inch num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num num mix design criteria .
using a compaction effort of ndes num gyrations submit a preliminary mix design conforming to the following mixture specifications .
num mix design criteria property requirement air voids av num voidsinmineral aggregate vma clnum sma base numd pgnum num minimum clnum sma surf numa pgnum num minimum clnum sma surf numa pgnum num minimum voidsincoarse aggregate vcamix of compacted mixturenum vca of dry aggregate vcadrcnum retained tensile strength tsr num minimum draindown at production temperaturenum num maximum asphalt binder content clnum sma surf numa pgnum num minimum clnum sma surf numa pgnum num minimum numdetermine according to aashto rnum .
numdetermine according to aashto tnum .
num trial demonstrations .
at least two days prior to beginning mainline paving demonstrate that satisfactory production and placement of the sma mixture is possible .
furnish at least num tons each of two or more different asphalt binder contents acs for the trial demonstration .
the engineer will determine the site outside of the driving lanes and exact quantity of the trial placement and trial acs .
perform a minimum of one volumetric analysis two sgc specimens and two maximumspecific gravity tests one ac determination and one gradation determination for each of the different acs demonstrated .
document that the sma mixture meets a num minimum pay value for ac av and vma prior to beginning mainline paving .
num optimum ac selection .
the engineer will select the optimum ac based on the results of the trial demonstrations .
contrary to subsection num obtain the engineers approval prior to adjusting the ac during the setup period or thereafter .
num mixture handling .
a mixing temperatures .
maintain the temperature of the component materials for the sma mixture according to the instructions of the respective manufacturers .
however do not exceed the maximum temperatures indicated in subsection num for the pg binder specified .
b mixture storage .
due to the possibility of binder draindown do not store the sma mixture overnight .
num placement and compaction .
when constructing driving lanes use a mtv to place the sma mixtures .
compact the sma mixtures by option a .
do not allow traffic on the compacted mixture until it has cooled sufficiently to withstand traffic without damage normally about num of .
to expedite opening the pavement to construction equipment or traffic the department will allow the mat to be cooled by dousing it with water after compaction is complete .
num measurement .
num trial demonstrations .
the department will measure up to num tons of mixture used in the trial demonstration .
the department will measure the quantity as clnum sma base numd pgnum clnum sma surf numa pgnum or clnum sma surf numa pgnum as appropriate .
the department will not measure quantities exceeding num tons for payment and will consider them incidental to the clnum sma base numd pgnum clnum sma surf numa pgnum or clnum sma surf numa pgnum .
num num sma mixtures for driving lanes .
the department will measure clnum sma base numd pgnum clnum sma surf numa pgnum and clnum sma surf numa pgnum by the ton .
num payment .
num trial demonstrations .
the department will pay for the measured quantities at the contract unit bid price for clnum sma base numd pgnum clnum sma surf numa pgnum or clnum sma surf numa pgnum as appropriate with no adjustments .
num clnum sma base numd pgnum .
the department will calculate payment by the lot pay adjustment schedule for compaction option a base and binder mixtures in subsection num except for the lane density schedule .
the department will apply the following schedule for lane density .
lane density pay value test result num num num num num num or num num num or num num num or num num the department will require removal and replacement only when the results for all num cores in a sublot are less than num percent or greater than num percent of solid density .
the department will require removal and replacement of the entire sublot of material in this case .
the department will apply a num pay factor to individual cores with these results for sublots allowed to remain in place .
num clnum sma surf numa pgnum and clnum sma surf numa pgnum .
the department will calculate payment by the lot pay adjustment schedule for compaction option a surface mixtures in subsection num except for the lane density and joint density schedules .
the department will calculate the lot pay adjustment using all possible incentives and disincentives but will not allow the overall pay value for a lot to exceed num .
the department will apply the following schedules for lane density and joint density .
pay value lane density test result joint density test result num num num num num num num num or num num or num num num or num num or num num num or num num num or num density num num the department will require removal and replacement only when the results for all num cores in a sublot are less than num percent or greater than num percent of solid density .
the department will require removal and replacement of the entire sublot of material in this case .
the department will apply a num pay factor to individual cores with these results for sublots allowed to remain in place .
num pay items and units .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num clnum sma base numd pgnum ton pay unit num clnum sma surf numa pgnum ton num clnum sma surf numa pgnum ton division num jpc pavement and nonstructural concrete construction num section num jpc pavement pcc base and jpc shoulders num description .
construct a single course of jpc pavement pcc base or jpc shoulders .
construct longitudinal and transverse joints when required .
construct pavement base and shoulders on a prepared subgrade or an aggregate base course .
num materials and equipment .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num joint materials .
conform to section num .
a sealers .
use hotpoured elastic preformed or silicone .
b filler .
use preformed sponge rubber preformed cork or preformed asphalt .
num tie bars .
conform to section num for steel reinforcement no .
num epoxy grade num .
num reinforcing bar adhesive .
use type iv epoxy or grout adhesive conforming to section num .
num miscellaneous steel .
conform to section num for chairs hook tiebolts spacers aligning bars and upper tie bars used in joint assemblies .
num epoxy coating material .
conform to section num .
num dowel bars and sleeves .
conform to section num .
num curing materials .
conform to section num .
num batching plant equipment .
conform to subsection num except do not use continuous mixers .
num mixers .
conform to subsection num .
num slip form pavers .
provide slip form pavers of an approved self propelled type designed to spread consolidate and finish the concrete in one complete pass of the paver and in such a manner that minimizes hand finishing .
ensure that the paver consolidates the concrete without damaging or displacing the load transfer devices and finishes the concrete to produce a smooth uniformly textured surface having the specified crown and slope ready for final finishing .
use an automatic sensing device in continuous contact with a sensing guide to control the alignment .
maintain pavers according to the manufacturers specifications .
num auxiliary equipment for slip form paving .
provide auxiliary equipment used in placing and finishing slip formed concrete that is selfpropelled and designed to operate without unnecessary contact with the newly placed concrete .
num forms .
provide form sections num feet long or longer and with a base width sufficient to ensure form stability .
use steel forms with selfaligning joints designed to withstand the lateral and vertical loads imposed by spreaders finishing machines or other types of formriding equipment .
use form sections that have the base of one end of each form section cut on a diagonal so the forms can be assembled to negotiate the inside and outside curves of roadways .
ensure that each numfoot length of form has at least num stake pockets securely riveted num or welded to the web and base to act as diagonal braces .
equip each stake pocket with at least one steel wedge to securely key the form to the stake .
provide each form section with one lockjoint plate made of metal of a thickness equal to the form and of sufficient length to ensure stability located on one end of the form in such a manner as to connect to the adjoining form .
construct the joints so that there will be no difference in the elevation of the end of each form providing a smooth level track surface .
use plates formed or reinforced to allow hammering or driving without distortion or breakage .
use approved flexible forms for construction of circular pavement edges where the radius is num feet or less .
num fine grading machines .
provide fine grading machines that are capable of preparing the grade for the paving equipment to the specified base tolerance and to ensure that the finished pavement conforms to the specified surface tolerances .
num spreaders .
provide spreaders that distribute the concrete uniformly without segregation and strike off the concrete to a uniform depth .
use spreaders equipped with scraping devices designed to clean the top of the forms when traveling in either direction .
num finishing machines and floats .
provide transverse finishing machines longitudinal floats and combination float finishers that are power driven and designed to operate without slipping on the forms or displacing the forms .
use finishing machines and floats that screed and finish the pavement within the specified tolerances .
num vibrators .
use vibrators for full width vibration of concrete paving slabs of either the surface pan type or the internal type .
when using the internal type provide vibrators having immersed tube or multiple spuds .
when only spuds are used space the spuds no more than num feet apart .
either attach the spuds to the spreader or the finishing machine or mount the spuds on a separate carriage .
make the frequency of the vibrators such as to satisfactorily vibrate and consolidate the concrete throughout its full width and depth .
achieve consolidation using industry standards according to the guidelines in aci numr including frequency recommendations performance and application of internal vibrators .
do not use electrical multiple speed internal vibrators .
operate all consolidating devices so that when the forward movement of their mount stops the consolidating devices immediately stop .
ensure that all slip form pavers are equipped and using vibrator frequency recorders .
the recorder must be able to continuously monitor each vibrators operating frequency and provide an immediate visual or auditory warning when the frequency goes outside the acceptable range .
num miscellaneous equipment .
a straightedges .
provide straightedges required for testing the surface of the plastic concrete that are accurate numfoot squareedged straightedges with a handle that is at least num feet longer than half the width of the slab .
b bulkheads .
construct bulkheads for construction joints of lumber of at least num inch nominal thickness or use an approved metal type .
shape bulkheads to conform to the cross section of the pavement .
design bulkheads to provide for correct installation of tie bars .
c footbridges .
design and construct the bridges so they will not come in contact with the concrete .
d hand screeds .
provide hand screeds that are a minimum of num feet longer than the maximum width of the pavement to be struck off so shaped and sufficiently rigid to strike off the pavement true to the required cross section .
e hand vibrators .
use spud type internal vibrators for hand finishing .
f transverse floats .
provide transverse floats for hand finishing that are of num lightweight rigid construction free of warps and with handles of sufficient length to allow operation from off the pavement .
use floats with finishing faces that are at least num feet long and num inches in width .
use metal floats that are formed to a channel cross section so as to provide sides one inch high and perpendicular to the finishing face .
g longitudinal floats .
provide longitudinal floats for hand finishing that are at least num feet long num inches wide rigidly constructed and equipped with handles .
h small tools .
provide straightedges and templates for testing hardened pavement and forms and all other small tools necessary to completely and satisfactorily finish the work .
num water supply equipment .
provide approved truck tanks or pumps and pipe lines that are of such capacity and efficiency to ensure an ample supply and an adequate pressure of water simultaneously for all requirements of the work including mixing curing sprinkling the subgrade and cleaning hauling equipment as necessary .
num concrete saws .
provide concrete saws for sawing joints that are power driven having diamondedge or abrasive saw blades capable of cutting to the alignment depth and width specified for the joints and in sufficient numbers to ensure all joints are sawed within the specified time limits .
num equipment for applying membrane curing compound .
conform to subsection num .
num air compressors .
furnish air compressors having separators and traps .
num profiler .
the department will measure the longitudinal profile of the surface with an astm e num class num device .
num construction .
num care storage and handling of aggregates cement and fly ash .
furnish store and handle aggregates cement and fly ash according to subsection num .
num admixtures .
furnish admixtures according to subsection num except the department will not require a waterreducing admixture .
num concrete producer responsibilities .
design concrete mixtures and perform quality control and process control according to subsection num .
num proportioning and requirements .
furnish class p concrete according to subsection num .
num weather limitations and protection .
mix place and finish concrete when the lighting is sufficient .
discontinue mixing and concreting operations when a falling air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat reaches num f. do not resume mixing and concreting operations until rising air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat reaches num f. in cold weather when the engineer authorizes concreting of small or irregular areas such as crossovers temporary openings turnouts narrow or irregular widening and other areas where hand finishing is allowed the engineer may require the water and aggregates to be heated to no more than num f. heat the aggregates prior to being placed in the mixer .
use an apparatus that heats the mass uniformly and is arranged to preclude the possible occurrence of overheated areas .
ensure that the temperature of the heated mixture is no less than num f and no more than num f at the time of placing .
do not place concrete on a frozen base .
do not use frozen aggregates in the concrete .
num when deemed necessary install and maintain protective coverings and heating devices to protect the concrete in place and to prevent its temperature from falling below num f until the concrete is num calendar days old or has attained the required strength according to subsection num .
do not use admixtures to prevent freezing .
maintain the temperature of the mixture at or below num f during placement .
unless the engineer determines that safety concerns or other considerations prohibit a shutdown cease concrete production when the mixture exceeds num f until adequate methods are in place to reduce or maintain the mixture temperature .
do not place concrete in areas where hand finishing will be used if the ambient temperature is above num f. protect newly placed pavement that is threatened with damage by rain .
if the texture is damaged so the specified groove dimensions are not met restore acceptable texture to the damaged areas by sawing to conform to groove requirements .
num slump .
conform to subsection num .
num preparation of aggregate base course .
when placing the concrete by the slip form process prepare the grade for the paving equipment to the accuracy necessary to ensure that the finished concrete conforms to all surface tolerance requirements .
when placing the concrete using fixed forms prepare the aggregate base course to the required lines grades and cross section .
backfill low places and cavities in the base course detected during the final shaping with concrete placed in conjunction with the pavement base or shoulders .
maintain the finished aggregate base course in a smooth compacted condition .
ensure that the base course is moist when placing the concrete .
when required wet the base course prior to placing the concrete .
avoid creating mud or pools of water .
num forming .
stake and brace the forms to resist concrete pressure and the lateral thrust of formriding equipment .
set the forms so that they uniformly bear on the base course throughout their entire length and width .
set the forms directly in contact with the finished aggregate base course .
when the aggregate base is disturbed or loosened thoroughly tamp the material supporting the forms either mechanically or by hand at both the inside and outside edges of the base of the forms .
join all forms neatly and tightly and thoroughly clean and oil all forms before placing concrete against them .
after setting the forms in place check their top surfaces for grade and alignment .
reset or remove and replace any forms showing a top surface variation greater than num inch in num feet .
num mixing .
produce concrete by mixing according to subsection num .
the department reserves the right to stop the use of the mixing method in the construction of concrete pavements bases and shoulders when the concrete fails to conform to the specified requirements for proportioning consistency slump or expected strength .
num delivery .
deliver according to subsection num except when concrete produced by central mixing is delivered by approved truck mixers the engineer will allow maximum slump applicable to truckmixed concrete .
num placing concrete .
obtain the engineers approval of the condition of the base course before placing any concrete .
deposit the concrete on the grade to require as little rehandling as possible .
unless hauling equipment is equipped with means for discharge of concrete without segregation of the materials unload the concrete into an approved spreading device and mechanically spread it on the grade in a manner to prevent segregation of the materials .
the department will not require a mechanical spreader for pcc base .
perform necessary hand spreading with shovels not rakes .
during any temporary shutdown of less than num minutes cover the concrete at the num unfinished end of the slab with wet burlap .
when an interruption of the work exceeds num minutes duration the engineer may require that a construction joint be installed .
consolidate all concrete with mechanical vibratory equipment throughout its full width and depth .
the engineer will allow small manually operated vibrators for variable width areas such as tapers transitions blockouts parking areas and other similar construction where hand finishing may be necessary .
on mainline construction vibrate the concrete by equipment specifically used for that purpose in addition to vibration resulting from the operation of other placing or finishing equipment .
thoroughly consolidate concrete against and along the faces of all forms and headers and along the full length and on both sides of all joint assemblies .
when vibrating do not disturb load transfer devices tie bars hook bolts side forms or the aggregate base course .
when slip form pavers are used spread or distribute the concrete in front of the paver in a manner that will allow the paver to proceed uniformly without bulldozing large piles of concrete .
maintain the head of concrete at a uniform height and not so great as to cause erratic movements of the paver .
if placing concrete adjacent to a previously constructed lane of pavement base or shoulder and mechanical equipment is to be operated upon the previously constructed lane conform to the strength requirements of subsection num for that lane and place temporary seals according to subsection num before placing equipment in that lane .
when constructing the pavement using fixed forms provide at least num movable bridges from which finishers may satisfactorily finish the pavement .
num final strikeoff .
perform operations in the following sequence consolidation strike off machine finishing straight edging minor hand finishing and texturing .
do not add water to the surface of the concrete to aid finishing operations unless hand finishing .
when hand finishing the engineer may allow application of water or a finishing aid to the surface to aid finishing .
when the engineer allows water or a finishing aid apply it as a fog spray by means of approved spray equipment .
num finishing .
a finishing for slip form paver .
ensure that slip form pavers consolidate and finish the concrete in one pass of the paver in such a manner that a minimum of hand finishing is necessary producing a smooth uniformly textured surface with the specified cross section ready for final straight edging and texturing .
the department will not allow tube float finishing machines .
b machine finishing .
finish all concrete except that placed by the slip form process or in areas where hand finishing is allowed by machine methods .
distribute or spread the concrete while placing it .
immediately after placing the concrete consolidate it by vibration strike it off and screed it using approved finishing machines .
pass the machines over each area of pavement base or shoulder as many times and at such intervals to produce a surface of uniform texture .
the department will allow an approved manually operated strikeoff screed in lieu of a finishing machine for pcc base .
avoid excessive operation over a given area .
keep the tops of the forms clean by an effective device attached to the machine .
maintain the travel of the machine on the forms true without lift wobbling or other variation tending to affect the precision finish .
during the first pass of the finishing machine maintain a uniform ridge of concrete ahead of the front screed for its entire length .
c hand finishing .
the engineer may allow hand finishing methods when the following occurs num mechanical equipment breaks down after concrete has already been deposited on the grade num narrow widths or other small irregular dimensions where operation of mechanical equipment is impractical and num num lengths less than num feet .
consolidate the concrete using a vibrator immediately after placing then strikeoff and screed the pavement with a department approved portable screed .
in operation move the screed forward on the forms with a combined longitudinal and transverse shearing motion moving always in the direction in which the work is progressing and manipulated so that neither end is raised from the side forms during the striking and screeding process .
when necessary repeat this until the surface is of uniform texture true to grade and cross section and free from porous areas .
d floating .
immediately after completing the transverse screeding operation float the surface smooth using a longitudinal float or a pan float .
the department will not require floating on pcc base .
use transverse hand floats only when the engineer allows .
the department will allow the use of straightedges in lieu of hand floats for minor hand finishing done in connection with machine finishing .
use a mechanical float behind slip form pavers .
operate the longitudinal float transversely across the concrete with a sawing motion always maintaining the float parallel to the centerline of the work .
remove all variations in the surface .
remove all surplus water laitance and inert material .
float until the concrete shows no variation from straightedge requirements .
add additional concrete to fill depressions during the longitudinal floating operation .
do not move the longitudinal float ahead more than half its length at one time .
use care to preserve the cross section of the pavement base and shoulders including the crown .
when using the pan type float finisher adjust the suspended screeds and float pans to conform to the required grade and cross section and operate it to produce a smooth dense surface free of irregularities or porous areas .
when the float finisher is attached to a finishing machine equipped with approved screeds the engineer may allow the float finishing at the same time as the last pass of the screeding operation .
e surface correction .
while the concrete is still plastic scrape the pavement and shoulder surface to remove all laitance excess water and inert material and test the surface for trueness with a straightedge .
hold the straightedge in successive positions parallel to the road centerline in contact with the surface and swing it across the entire area from one side of the slab to the other until the entire surface is free from visual departures .
advance along the road in successive stages of no more than half the length of the straightedge .
immediately fill any depressions found with freshly mixed concrete strikeoff consolidate and refinish them .
continue the straightedge testing and refloating until the entire surface is free from observable departures from the straightedge and the slab has the required grade and cross section .
ensure that at the time of testing the surface is free from soft mortar or excess water .
f edging .
finish the outside edges of the slab when using fixed forms and the edges of all expansion joints with an edging tool to a radius of num inch .
g burlap drag .
finish the pavement using a burlap drag having a double thickness of burlap at least num feet wide .
attach the burlap to a bridge and keep it saturated while in use .
lay the burlap on the pavement surface and drag it in the direction that the pavement is being placed with approximately num feet of width in contact with the pavement surface .
the engineer will allow hand finishing of the outer edges with smaller pieces of burlap when necessary to avoid rounding or slumping of the edges of slip formed pavement .
in all other instances use burlap of sufficient width such that the full width of the pavement receives the burlap finish .
when allowing hand finishing on areas the engineer will allow manual means for the entire surface .
maintain drags clean and free from encrusted mortar .
discard drags that can not be cleaned and replace them with new drags .
num h texturing .
immediately after finishing the concrete with the burlap drag texture the surface by forming transverse grooves .
the department will waive the requirement for transverse grooves when the pavement is to be diamond ground before opening to traffic .
form the transverse grooves by mechanical equipment using a comb made with steel tines .
when allowing hand finishing on areas the department will allow the use of manual tools such as rakes with spring steel tines .
form transverse grooves in the concrete with a width between num inch and num inch and a depth between num inch and num inch .
space the grooves at random intervals between num inch to num inches with no more than num percent of the spacing being one inch or greater .
regardless of the method used to form the grooves ensure that the grooves are relatively smooth and uniform and form the grooves without tearing the surface or bringing pieces of the coarse aggregate to the top of the surface .
correct any individual areas of num square yards or larger of the hardened grooved concrete that do not conform to the above requirements .
correct by cutting acceptable grooves in the hardened surface with an approved cutting machine or by other methods approved by the engineer .
the department will not require texturing on pcc base .
i station numbers .
stencil station numbers into the pavement before it takes its final set .
mark the complete station number every num feet .
mark equations in the alignment when they occur in the pavement in the same manner and at the same locations as specified in the contract .
size and place the stencils according to the standard drawings .
j rumble strips in shoulders .
after finishing the shoulders form rumble strips according to the standard drawings .
when the shoulder is used to maintain traffic during construction do not form rumble strips until the mainline is opened to traffic .
when the mainline is open to traffic saw cut type num rumble strips according to the standard drawings .
num removing forms .
remove forms as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to allow sawing the transverse joints .
immediately fill all honeycombed areas appearing in the edges of the pavement base or shoulders with mortar composed of one part cement and num parts fine aggregate by loose volume .
then cure the edges of the pavement base or shoulders .
num curing .
immediately after completing finishing operations and the concrete has set sufficiently to prevent marring the surface cover and cure the entire surface of the newly placed concrete including the face of all construction joints .
in all cases in which curing requires the use of water ensure that water is available .
the department may suspend the placement of concrete when failure to provide sufficient cover or adequate water for curing occurs .
when it becomes necessary to uncover an area of the pavement before the end of the curing period do not expose the pavement for more than num minutes .
cure according to one of the following methods a white membrane curing .
after completely finishing the concrete and immediately after any free water has disappeared completely and uniformly coat the entire pavement surface with type num white pigmented liquid membrane forming curing compound .
apply the compound in one or num applications .
when num applications are necessary to meet the required rate apply the second application within num minutes of the first .
if there is a delay in applying the first application of the curing compound cover the pavement surface with wetted burlap .
apply the curing compound through a pressure sprayer at the rate of one gallon to no more than num square feet total application whether applied in one or num applications .
when desired decrease the application rate to one gallon to no num more than num square feet when texturing is not required .
during its application ensure that the compound is in a thoroughly mixed condition with the pigment dispersed throughout the vehicle .
continuously stir the compound by effective mechanical means while applying it .
the engineer will allow hand sprayers for coating odd widths or shapes and for coating areas exposed by the removal of forms .
correct honeycomb areas then coat the sides of the slab within num minutes following removal of the forms .
the department will not require removal of curing compound overspray from tie bars when the deformations are still visible .
when the compound is too thick to satisfactorily apply during cold weather warm it in a water bath at a temperature no greater than num f. do not thin the compound with solvents .
when rain falls on the newly coated pavement before the film has dried sufficiently to resist damage or when the film is damaged or is noticeably faulty apply a new coat of the compound to the affected areas .
protect the treated surface against damage for a period of at least num hours or until attaining the required strength .
the engineer will consider all traffic pedestrian or otherwise as injurious to the film of the applied compound .
the engineer will allow a minimum of traffic on the dried film as necessary to carry on the work such as joint sawing and sealing equipment .
when putting minimum traffic on the dried film immediately repair any damage to the film by an additional application to the affected areas .
take precautions to ensure proper curing at joints and to prevent any of the curing compound from entering the joints .
protect sawed joints by closing the opening with a moistened rope of paper or other approved fiber by covering the opening with a onefoot strip of curing paper or nummil white polyethylene film or by other approved methods before repairing the damaged areas adjacent to the joints with an additional application of the compound .
provide approved standby facilities or approved alternate methods for curing concrete pavements at a readily accessible location at the site of the work for use in the event of mechanical failure of the spraying equipment or other conditions which may prevent the proper application of the curing compound .
the engineer may stop this method of curing when unsatisfactory results are obtained and may require the remainder of the concrete to be cured with wet burlap or curing blankets .
do not use white membrane curing on pcc base that is to be surfaced with an asphalt mixture .
b wet burlap .
thoroughly wet the burlap before placing .
carefully place the burlap over the finished surface to completely cover the surface and sides of the slab .
clean the burlap of all coating of earth or other deleterious substances before using it .
soak new burlap in water for num hours before use .
during the first num hours the engineer will require a single thickness of burlap .
after the first num hours use a double thickness .
overlap adjacent burlap strips at least num inches .
keep the burlap thoroughly saturated and in place for at least num hours even when required strength is attained .
c curing blankets .
cure according to subsection num c. place curing blankets to completely cover the surface and the sides of the slab for num hours or until attaining the required strength .
num diamond grinding .
when electing to or when the contract specifies to diamond grind the pavement to achieve texture or ride quality conform to subsections num and num excluding num .
the department will determine pavement thickness according to subsection num after diamond grinding .
num joints .
construct all joints longitudinal and transverse according to the plans and standard drawings .
use epoxy coated or other approved corrosion resistant tie num bars and hook bolts .
construct all joints perpendicular to the surface of the pavement and to true alignment .
ensure that sawed joints are of uniform width throughout .
use sawing equipment to cut the joint in strict conformity with the required alignment and depth .
the engineer will allow spraying of water on the saw blades during the cutting .
do not saw the joints until the concrete has hardened to the extent that tearing and raveling will not occur but as soon as necessary to preclude random cracking .
do not allow any traffic on the pavement until the joints are sawed .
the engineer may require the construction of sawed joints at the time day or night and in the order or sequence that will most effectively hold random cracking to a minimum .
provide a standby machine and a sufficient supply of saw blades available at all times .
cut transverse saw cuts for joints that are to be sealed with preformed compression joint seals in one continuous cut across the pavement .
when curbs or concrete medians are constructed integral with the pavement construct all transverse joints continuous through the curb or median .
when constructing pcc base for adjacent slabs with approximately numfoot joint spacing match joints and construct additional joints at third points .
for adjacent slabs with numfoot joint spacing match joint and construct additional joints at midpoints .
the department will allow a transverse construction joint at a transverse joint provided a dowel bar basket is used .
thoroughly flush all sawed joints with clean water or clean with compressed air immediately after sawing so the vertical surfaces of the joint will be clean and will allow proper adherence of joint sealer to the surfaces .
protect all joints from intrusion of injurious foreign material including mortar or cuttings from adjacent sawing operations until sealed .
a longitudinal joints .
install longitudinal joints on the centerline or parallel to the centerline within num inch from the true theoretical position .
construct longitudinal sawed joints with tie bars when the width of the pavement base or shoulder is more than num feet .
cut longitudinal joints to true alignment within the tolerances specified in appendix a table of construction tolerances and to the depth specified in the contract and fill them with joint sealer according to subsection num .
place deformed steel tie bars of the dimensions shown on the standard drawings transversely through the longitudinal joint .
space the tie bars as indicated and rigidly secure them at both ends by department approved supports .
after the contractor places and strikes off the concrete the department may allow him to install tie bars using a mechanical device designed to install the bars true to position and alignment .
construct longitudinal saw construction joints between adjacent lanes or widths that are constructed separately according to the standard drawings .
install the tie bars as required by the plans and standard drawings by inserting the bars in the plastic concrete drilling and gluing the bars in place using secured tie bar assemblies or using a proposed alternative method approved by the engineer .
when installing by drilling and gluing in place drill a dowel hole that is no more than num inch larger in diameter than the bar .
ensure the dowel hole is dry and free of all drill and coring dust .
place the adhesive in the dowel hole according to the manufacturers instructions .
insert the bar to the bottom of the hole and twist num turn .
an excess amount of adhesive must be clearly visible as an extruded ring of material surrounding the reinforcing bar at the surface of the concrete .
the department will allow bending tie bars back when necessary while constructing the initial width and straighten them to the correct position before constructing the adjoining width .
when desired use approved epoxy coated hook tie bolts in lieu of tie bars .
when used install hook tie bolts so the length is equally divided between the num slabs .
the engineer may stop the use of any method that fails to provide secure num placement of the bars until satisfactory results can be achieved .
b transverse expansion joints .
place transverse expansion joints at all bridge approaches according to the standard drawings .
install the joints so the plane of the finished joint will be perpendicular to both the centerline and the surface of the pavement within num inch of true alignment in one lane width .
provide a continuous joint through the full width of the pavement with the length of individual pieces of joint filler no less than the width of one traffic lane .
securely connect adjoining sections to avoid an offset at their juncture .
install the joint filler for the full pavement width and from the bottom of the pavement to the bottom of the joint sealer as shown on the standard drawings .
place dowel bars or other approved load transfer devices when required through transverse joints according to the contract .
when used secure the dowels in position parallel to the surface and the centerline of the slab by a metal device that remains in the pavement .
securely stake the load transfer device to the subgrade with anchor hooks according to the standard drawings .
the engineer may allow hooks less than num inches in length when used in conjunction with rock subgrade or cement stabilized base however the engineer may require additional hooks to securely hold the assembly in place .
place a no .
num gage numinch thick metal removable finishing cap over the expansion joint material during construction operations to provide protection and support to the material .
after the engineer checks the joint for proper installation deposit the concrete on the base course as near the expansion joint as possible without touching it .
then shovel it against both sides of the joint simultaneously maintaining equal pressures .
deposit concrete to a height of approximately num inches more than the depth of the joint and carefully work the concrete under the loadtransfer devices .
do not dump concrete directly upon or against the loadtransfer devices .
prevent displacement of the dowel bars during placing and finishing operations .
work concrete around loadtransfer devices and against the body of the joints at all points .
reset and realign any displaced dowels before passing the finishing machine over them .
when necessary remove concrete to reset and realign any displaced dowels .
move the finishing machine forward during finishing operations and operate it in a manner that will avoid damage or misalignment of joints .
immediately after completing all finishing operations and before the concrete has taken its initial set finish the edge of the slab to the required radius adjacent to all expansion joints .
manipulate the edging tool to produce a welldefined continuous radius and a smooth dense mortar finish .
do not tilt the edging tool while manipulating it .
remove the edging tool marks from the surface so the texture blends with the final finish .
place numinch expansion joint material against all box inlets manholes concrete barriers retaining walls bridge abutments concrete gutter and similar structures that project through into or against the pavement .
c longitudinal expansion joints .
construct longitudinal expansion joints according to subsection num b at locations specified in the contract .
d transverse contraction joints .
construct transverse contraction joints in ramp tapers intersections and similar areas at locations specified in the plans and standard drawings .
on uniform width roadway construction install transverse contraction joints at the spacing specified in the plans and standard drawings .
form transverse contraction joints by sawing perpendicular to the surface of the pavement within the tolerances specified in appendix a tabulation of construction tolerances .
fill the joints with joint sealer as specified in subsection num .
install load transfer assemblies when specified in the contract according to num subsection num b for transverse expansion joints .
the department will not require dowel bar sleeves finishing caps expansion joint fillers or hand placement of concrete around the assemblies .
the department will not require load transfer assemblies for contraction joints in pcc base .
e transverse construction joints .
form the joints with a department approved metal or wooden bulkhead shaped to the cross section of the pavement and designed to allow correct installation of tie bars according to the standard drawings .
rigidly secure the bulkhead to the subgrade so the finished joint will conform to all requirements for position and alignment .
after removing the bulkhead and constructing the adjacent slab saw the joint as specified in the plans and subsequently fill with joint sealer .
when using a construction joint construct the joint no closer than num feet or onehalf the spacing between adjacent joints whichever is less to any transverse contraction joint or transverse expansion joint .
when the need for a construction joint occurs within the above distance from the preceding joint remove the concrete to the specified distance behind the preceding joint and install the bulkhead at that location .
num sealing joints .
a requirements for sealing all joints .
seal all joints as soon as practical and before opening the pavement base shoulders or any section of the pavement base or shoulders to any traffic .
configure joint sealant according to the standard drawings .
do not seal any joints until the engineer inspects and approves them for sealing .
before applying the sealer completely clean all joints of all loose scale laitance oils greases dirt and other foreign substances and remove all free water and loose particles by jetting with compressed air .
b uses of sealant types .
use any of the following sealant types for the indicated types of joints for jpc pavement and shoulders for pcc base use hotpoured elastic num preformed neoprene seals .
a transverse and longitudinal sawed joints b expansion joints num silicone rubber seals .
a transverse and longitudinal sawed joints b transverse and longitudinal expansion joints c longitudinal and transverse construction joints d joints between pavement and shoulders and fixed objects such as box inlets manholes retaining walls and concrete barriers num selfleveling silicone rubber sealant .
a resealing random cracks in jpc pavement base and shoulders b sealing joints between jpc pavement base and shoulders and asphalt pavement or shoulders c longitudinal and transverse construction joints d joints between pavement and shoulders and fixed objects such as box inlets manholes retaining walls and concrete barriers and sealing joints cut in asphalt overlays of jpc pavement base and shoulders for control of reflective cracking num hotpoured elastic .
num a longitudinal and transverse construction joints b joints between pavement base and shoulders and fixed objects such as box inlets manholes retaining walls and concrete barriers c for applications where the department allows selfleveling silicone joint sealant c preformed neoprene seals .
seal and repair damaged seals according to subsection num for preformed neoprene seals .
remove and replace all seals that are damaged twisted curled improperly positioned or stretched more than num percent .
do not seal transverse joints in the pavement until all adjacent sawed longitudinal joints have been sealed .
install each transverse seal in one piece without field or factory splicing for the full length of the transverse joints .
install continuous longitudinal joint seals for lengths no less than num feet except where intersected by transverse joint seals .
where the longitudinal joints intersect the transverse joints either sever the longitudinal seal after installation or insert it deeper at junctions with transverse joints .
thoroughly coat all intersections between longitudinal and transverse seals with an additional application of department approved lubricant adhesive so that the openings in the longitudinal seal are completely closed .
install continuous longitudinal seals through transverse construction joints sealed with hotpoured sealer .
when the department requires partial width construction the department will allow cutting the transverse seal at the longitudinal construction joint and installing it in part width .
thoroughly coat all intersections between the transverse and longitudinal seal with an additional application of approved lubricant adhesive so that the opening in the transverse seals is completely closed and sealed .
trim all transverse seals flush with the edge of the pavement base or shoulder after installation .
d silicone rubber sealant .
seal joints according to the contract and the written recommendations of the manufacturer .
place seals when the ambient temperature and the pavement temperature is num f or higher .
completely clean and dry joints and ensure that they are frost free .
immediately after sawing flush with a jet of water and use other tools as necessary to remove all cuttings .
after flushing blow the joint out with compressed air .
when the surfaces are thoroughly dry and within num hours prior to sealing the joint clean the joints by sandblasting followed by blowing out with compressed air .
sandblast in num passes one for each joint face with the nozzle held at an angle to the joint face and within one to num inches of the pavement .
direct the air blast following the sandblast in one direction to prevent recontamination of the joint .
if cleaned joints are not sealed within num hours after sandblasting reclean them by lightly sandblasting and blowing out again using compressed air .
supply compressed air free of water oil or any other injurious substances .
install foam backup rods according to the standard drawings .
when sealing num intersecting joints first place a continuous foam backup rod through the intersection .
either place this rod low at the intersection and place the intersecting rod over it at the specified depth or cut the intersecting rod and place it against the first rod at the intersection .
when necessary use additional air blasting to completely remove all moisture dust or debris that has accumulated in the joint after placing the back up rod .
ensure that the joint is completely clean dry and frostfree immediately prior to placement of the sealant .
install silicone rubber seals with an applicator having a builtin grooving tool .
install the seals by pushing not pulling the sealant ahead to form a uniform head .
this pushing of the sealant will ensure that the joint is filled from num the top of the backer rod to at least num inch below the pavement surface .
tool the sealant so that it is forced against the joint faces and recessed below the pavement surface .
use the same tool for both application and grooving .
demonstrate satisfactory results during production and the engineer may allow separate tools for application and grooving .
seal joints as soon as practical after sawing and before allowing traffic except construction traffic on the pavement .
do not allow any traffic over the sealed joints for the period of time recommended by the manufacturer for proper adhesion or curing or for a longer period if the seals have not completely adhered or cured .
for each working day the engineer will remove num sample plugs at locations determined by the engineer .
the engineer will test each plug for conformity to the geometry specified for the joint seals .
if the test plugs do not conform the engineer will remove additional plugs and will identify the location of the joint from which each plug was removed .
the engineer will test each plug to determine if any joints are deficient .
when joints are determined to be deficient remove and rework those joints .
after deficient joints have been reworked the engineer will remove sample plugs at locations determined by the engineer .
the engineer will repeat the sampling and testing .
repair holes from sample plugs no later than the next working day .
e selfleveling silicone rubber sealant .
install the selfleveling rubber sealant according to the manufacturers instructions .
f resealing joints .
saw cut and clean all joints to minimum widths or greater according to the specifications for each joint type .
the minimum width for joints before resealing is num inch wider than the existing joint .
if the saw cut of an existing joint is not of sufficient width to clean the joint faces resaw the joint to a width that will expose clean vertical faces of the joint .
perform all additional resawing of an existing joint to clean the faces of the joint and install seals appropriate for the resawed width .
clean joints before resealing according to the requirements for new seals .
install additional silicone rubber sealant following additional resawing of joints to clean faces or install wider preformed neoprene seals following additional resawing of an existing joint to clean faces .
remove all debris and old joint sealer resulting from the sawing operation from the pavement before opening to public traffic .
when necessary saw the pavement to the required depth at the pavement edge extend the saw cut into existing asphalt shoulders .
when edge drain construction is included in the contract and edge drains are to be placed in the asphalt shoulder adjacent to the jpc pavement being saw cut and resealed perform edge drain construction after sawing and sealing of the pavement so that sealing of cuts in the asphalt shoulder will not be necessary .
when edge drain construction is not included in the contract or an alternate construction sequence is specified seal all saw cuts in the asphalt shoulders that will remain in the finished work using hotpoured elastic joint sealer or selfleveling silicone rubber sealant .
perform sealing of cuts in the asphalt shoulder as soon as practical after completing pavement sealing in the adjacent lane .
g temporary seals .
when using temporary seals firmly embed them in the joint .
place the material num inch below the pavement surface .
provide a material that is sufficiently strong and durable to resist intrusion of incompressible materials and to allow complete removal after its usefulness has ended .
num surface tolerances and testing surface .
a edge slump .
prevent and correct the slumping of the pavement base or shoulder edges .
ensure that edge slump does not exceed num inch when the plans indicate the edge of the pavement base or shoulder being constructed is to be abutted by subsequently constructed pavement base or shoulders either by this contract or future contracts .
ensure that edge slump does not exceed num inch num where the edge is not to be abutted by subsequent pavement base or shoulder .
measure the edge slump with a straightedge laid on the pavement base or shoulder perpendicular to the edge .
use a planing device or a device consisting of multiple saws to perform corrective work .
use rotary grinders only on isolated irregularities less than num square feet .
prohibit the use of bush hammers or other impact devices .
texture all areas of the concrete corrected by grinding in the same manner as the undisturbed pavement base or shoulder .
when the specified texture is the transverse grooves texture the ground areas by sawing the transverse grooves .
provide a final surface comparable to the adjacent pavement that does not require corrective work for texture appearance or skid resistance .
complete all corrective work within a section before the department checks the thickness tolerance of that section .
the department will allow corrective work by diamond grinding according to subsection num .
b ride quality .
when the contract specifies that rideability applies the department will measure the ride quality in terms of the iri and will use the iri to determine acceptability and to calculate ride quality adjustments .
num acceptance testing .
the department will test the ride quality of the pavement for acceptance after the contractor a makes a request at least num weeks in advance b partially completes the paving and the department deems it necessary or c completes all mainline paving .
the department will determine the iri by applying a linear transform determined by correlation to the values average of num wheel paths determined by astm e num .
thoroughly clean the surface of all dirt and other foreign matter immediately before the department performs the testing .
the department will divide and test each traffic lane using nummile test sections starting at the beginning of the lane and proceeding in the direction of traffic .
the department will exclude discontinuities such as bridges in the pavement .
when a test section at the end of a lane is less than num mile long the department will include that section with the adjacent section .
when deemed necessary the department will retest the pavement after any corrective work is completed .
num category a requirements .
achieve an iri of num or lower for each nummile section .
when the iri is greater than num for a nummile section perform corrective work or remove and replace the pavement to achieve the specified iri .
at the departments discretion a pay deduction of num per lane mile may be applied in lieu of corrective work .
the departments testing generates a computer file containing the measured longitudinal profile in terms of elevation values of each wheel track at numinch intervals .
the department will create a strip chart from the file showing the elevation and distance traveled when the iri is greater than num or upon request for lower iri values .
num category b requirements .
achieve an iri of num or lower for each nummile section .
when the iri is greater than num for a nummile section perform corrective work or remove and replace the pavement to achieve the specified iri .
at the departments discretion a pay deduction of num per lane mile may be applied in lieu of corrective work .
the departments testing generates a computer file containing the measured longitudinal profile in terms of elevation values of each wheel track at numinch intervals .
the department will create a strip chart from the num file showing the elevation and distance traveled when the iri is greater than num or upon request for lower iri values .
when the contract does not specify that ride quality requirements apply straightedge the pavement or shoulder in the presence of the engineer .
place a numfoot straightedge parallel to the centerline to bridge all depressions and touch all high spots .
perform straight edging as soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to support walking but not later than num am of the day following the placing of the concrete .
plainly mark all high spots indicated by a variation exceeding num inch from the straightedge that are num inches or more from the pavement base or shoulder edge .
c corrective work .
submit corrective work procedure plans to the engineer for approval before performing the work .
provide a final surface comparable to adjacent pavement that does not require corrective work in respect to texture appearance and skid resistance .
num opening to public traffic .
open the pavement base or shoulders to traffic anytime numpsi strength is attained except when curing with wet burlap .
when curing with wet burlap wait at least num hours before opening the pavement to traffic .
complete the construction of shoulders and thoroughly clean the pavement base or shoulders and seal all joints as required before opening the pavement to traffic other than construction equipment .
prior to opening the pavement to traffic other than the construction equipment complete the construction of shoulders in a satisfactory manner .
when operating any equipment entirely or partially on the pavement provide means to protect the pavement from damage regardless of its age .
either provide the equipment with rubbertired wheels or operate the equipment over protective mats designed and constructed to prevent damage to the pavement surface and joints .
use mats consisting of wooden strips having a nominal thickness of num inches and a width of at least that of the treads .
the engineer may allow mats made of other suitable material .
sweep the pavement surface free of debris prior to placing the protective matting .
construct a ramp of compacted earth or other material of sufficient strength to prevent undue stress in the pavement slab from equipment moving on and off the pavement .
open residential entrances to traffic on which only automobile traffic is expected only at the end of the numhour curing period or at an attained strength of num psi .
clean the pavement and seal all joints before opening the residential entrances to traffic .
num tolerance in pavement thickness .
core the pavement as the engineer directs .
the engineer will determine the thickness of the pavement and concrete shoulders according to km num .
the engineer will evaluate areas of the pavement and shoulders found deficient in thickness by more than one inch .
when the engineer deems the areas warrant removal remove and replace the areas with concrete of the thickness specified in the plans .
num measurement .
num jpc pavement .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards according to the plan dimensions as shown in the record plans .
the department will determine the final quantity based on the design quantity with increases or decreases by authorized adjustments .
authorized adjustments include changes in the record plan dimensions additional areas not shown in the record plans and errors and omissions in the design quantity in excess of one percent .
the department will not measure reinforcing steel load transfer assemblies dowels joint construction including removal of concrete to accommodate a construction joint bulkhead joint sealing joint repair form pins texturing additional work for drilling num holes for form pins texturing areas of the pavement that have been corrected by grinding fly ash type ip cement type iii cement additional type i cement for high early strength formed rumbles strips and all other items necessary to construct the pavement according to the contract for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num pcc base .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards according to subsection num .
num jpc shoulders .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards according to subsection num .
the department will not measure rumble strips for payment unless they are constructed in a separate operation because the shoulder was used to maintain traffic and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num rumble strips type num .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
the department will not measure type num rumble strips for payment unless they are constructed in a separate operation because the shoulder was used to maintain traffic .
num diamond grinding .
when listed as a bid item the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
the department will not measure diamond grinding for payment when it is performed at the contractors option or for corrective work and will consider it incidental to jpc pavement .
num thickness .
the department will measure the pavement thickness tolerance according to km num .
the department will not measure the pavement thickness tolerance as a separate pay unit but will use the pavement thickness tolerance to calculate an adjusted contract unit price for jpc pavement pcc base or jpc shoulders .
the department will not measure coring for payment and will consider it incidental to the concrete pay items .
num ride quality .
when the contract specifies that rideability applies the department will measure the ride quality in terms of the iri .
the department will not measure the iri as a separate pay unit but will use the iri to calculate a ride quality adjustment payment .
num payment .
department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following num thickness .
the department will adjust the contract unit price for jpc pavement pcc base and jpc shoulders by the schedule for adjusted payment for thickness deficiency .
the adjusted quantity is equal to the area of jpc pavement pcc base or jpc shoulder specified in the kentucky method multiplied by the contract unit price for the item and the price adjustment .
the department will not make additional payment for average thicknesses of pavement base or shoulders in excess of the specified thickness .
num ride quality .
the department will apply a ride quality adjustment for each numlanemile section tested .
the department will determine the ride quality adjustments for each numlanemile section using the ride quality adjustment schedule below .
the department will not apply positive ride quality adjustments to numlanemile sections where thickness deductions have been applied .
the sum of the pay value adjustments for the ride quality shall not exceed num for the project as a whole .
when requesting tests on partially completed pavement the department will perform one test at no charge .
the department will perform additional requested testing and retesting for corrective work or pavement replacement at a cost of num per lanemile .
the department will deduct charges for additional requested testing and retesting for num corrective work from monies due on the contract .
code pay item num num jpc pavement nonreinforced square yard pay unit num num thickness num num num num num jpc pavement nonreinforced shoulder square yard num thickness num num num num num pcc base thickness square yard num rumble strips type num linear foot rideability testing each num ride quality adjustment jpc each num jpc pavement diamond grinding see subsection num schedule for adjusted payment for thickness deficiency thickness deficiency price adjustment inches num to num num percent of contract unit bid price num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num greater than num num num remove and replace these areas with concrete of the specified thickness at no expense to the department when the engineer directs .
num ride quality adjustment schedules category a projects category b projects iri pay value adjustmentnum iri pay value adjustment num or less num num num or less num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num to num num num to num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num or higher corrective worknum num or higher corrective worknum num contractor may correct areas to achieve a positive adjustment .
num when it is in the best interest of the department a minimum pay value deduction of num per numlanemile section may be applied in lieu of corrective work .
num when it is in the best interest of the department a minimum pay value deduction of num per numlanemile section may be applied in lieu of corrective work .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num jpc pavement num num description .
construct a single course of jpc pavement capable of attaining a num psi compressive strength within num hours num hours or num hours .
num materials and equipment .
conform to subsection num .
num construction .
conform to subsection num with the following exceptions and additions a proportioning and requirements .
num the department does not have slump requirements for class p concrete mixes except for the edge slump requirements of section num .
numthe department will allow a numlb reduction in the cement factor when using type iii cement .
b placing .
when water is permitted apply to the surface as a fog spray using equipment that the engineer approves .
place concrete within the mixture temperature range of num to num f. c curing and protecting pavement .
num when overnight ambient temperatures are expected to be below num f cover the concrete with one of the following a one layer of closedcell polystyrene foam protected by at least one layer of plastic film b num layers of burlap covered with one layer of nummil plastic c num inches of hay or straw covered with one layer of nummil plastic d a department approved alternate .
num when overnight ambient temperatures are expected to be below num f cover the concrete with one of the following a num layers of closedcell polystyrene foam protected by at least one layer of plastic film b num layers of burlap covered with one layer of nummil plastic c num inches of hay or straw covered with nummil plastic d a department approved alternative .
num the department will allow placement of the insulating cover to be delayed for up to num hours to accommodate sawing joints .
the department will allow temporary removal of the cover to accommodate sawing and sealing joints .
the modified ingredient proportions and requirements for class p concrete for early strength pavements class p maximum maximum minimum required time modified free water slumpnum cement to attain num psi mixture by wc factornum compressive ratio strength lblb inches lbydnum hours jpcpnum num num num jpcpnum num num num jpcpnum num num num num department will allow permanent removal of the cover when the concrete attains the required opening strength of num psi .
d strength testing and opening to traffic .
num testing .
the department will test one set of cylinders no later than num hours for jpc pavementnum num hours for jpc pavementnum and num hours for jpc pavementnum one hour from time of molding .
when the average compressive strength is num psi the department will allow the pavement to be opened to traffic and will test the remaining sets of cylinders at the required age .
when the average compressive strength is less than num psi at the required age do not open the pavement to traffic until the pavement has been in place for num days .
the engineer may accept the pavement based on additional testing .
when num consecutive first sets of cylinders or when num sets of any num sets do not reach num psi suspend work and propose a satisfactory mix design adjustment .
make the adjustment in the subsequent mixture .
the department will not require additional trial batches .
num coordinate work so that all joint sawing joint sealing shoulder or curb construction sweeping cleaning and other activities are complete when the pavement has attained the required strength to be open to traffic .
num measurement .
num jpc pavementnum .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num jpc pavementnum .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num jpc pavementnum .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num jpc pavementnum see subsection num pay unit num jpc pavementnum see subsection num num jpc pavementnum see subsection num rideability testing see subsection num numwhen the contract designates areas as must be opened on schedule and those areas do not attain the required compressive strength within the specified time period the department will adjust the contract unit price by the schedule of adjusted payment for delay of opening .
num schedule for adjusted payment for delay of opening price adjustment delay of opening hours percent of contract unit bid price jpcpnum jpcpnum jpcpnum num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num diamond grinding jpc pavement num description .
diamond grind existing jpc pavements .
eliminate faulting at joints and cracks restore the ride quality to meet or exceed limits specified and restore texture to the entire pavement surface .
num materials and equipment .
num grinding machine .
furnish a selfpropelled grinding machine with diamond blades that is specifically designed to smooth and texture jpc pavement .
furnish a machine that is capable of cutting or planing at least num feet wide on each pass and that does not encroach on traffic movement outside the work area .
num joint sealer .
conform to section num .
use preformed or silicone rubber .
num construction .
num test section .
at the beginning of work grind an initial test section at least num feet wide and num feet long .
the engineer will evaluate the initial test section to determine if the texture meets the requirements of this section .
modify the blade spacing or other features as necessary to produce the specified texture .
make similar modifications throughout the project to ensure acceptable surface texture .
num diamond grinding .
grind the entire surface of the jpc pavement mainline .
grind ramps tapers acceleration and deceleration lanes turn lanes median crossovers and bridge decks as the contract specifies .
grind shoulders or gutters when necessary for proper pavement drainage .
grind in a longitudinal direction and parallel to the pavement centerline .
begin and end at lines normal to the pavement centerline .
when the end of the cut is subject to public traffic grind a smooth transition from the smooth pavement to the nonground pavement .
maintain a constant crossslope between grinding extremities in each lane to ensure positive lateral drainage .
overlap the edge of grinding passes by less than num inches .
num cleaning .
remove solid residue from the pavement surface before traffic or wind blows it .
perform a separate washing operation to remove residue that may cause dust after the completion of grinding when the engineer directs .
ensure that waste water and residue do not flow across the pavement into gutters or into drainage structures .
dispose of waste water and residue as the engineer approves .
num lighting .
provide lighting as the engineer approves when grinding between dusk and dawn .
num joint seals .
a resealing existing joints .
after grinding is complete on areas adjacent to the joints and after conforming to the ride quality requirements clean and reseal the joints according to subsection num .
b preserving existing joints seals .
after grinding is complete and when the engineer directs remove and replace any damaged seals with new seals .
the engineer may require replacement of preformed compression joint seals when damage penetrates the top void of the seal and replacement of silicone joint seals when the seal shows loss of bond with the sides of the joint or significant loss of the profile of the seal .
remove damaged seals for the full traffic lane width thoroughly clean the joint and install new seals according to subsection num .
num pavement marking .
remove existing pavement marking and provide num temporary pavement markings according to section num where the contract specifies .
num texture .
the department will measure the dimensions of the longitudinal grooves .
if the dimensions are not within the following limits make adjustments to the grinding equipment to achieve the required texture groove dimension width of grooves between num and num value inch width between grooves between num and num height of groove peak to bottom between num and num num alignment tolerances .
the department will measure the transverse slope of ground pavement with a straightedge placed normal to the centerline .
if a depression or misalignment of slope greater than num inch in num feet occurs adjust the grinding equipment to correct the misalignment .
the engineer will measure the alignment of the top of the pavement surface across the joint and cracks .
correct all misalignments that exceed num inch by additional grinding .
num ride quality .
conform to section num with the following exceptions num all references are to diamond grinding in lieu of paving .
num achieve an iri equal to or lower than the target iri listed in the proposal for each nummile section .
when no target is listed in the proposal achieve an iri of num or lower for each nummile section .
num perform corrective work to achieve the required iri by regrinding the entire width of the traffic lane at areas having a high iri .
the engineer may exclude pavement areas where grinding alone will not correct deficiency .
num the department will create a strip chart when the test results show that the iri is greater than num or upon request for lower iri values .
num measurement .
num jpc diamond grinding .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
the department will measure the width as the width shown on the typical cross section of the plans and the length horizontally along the centerline of each lane or ramp .
the department will not measure corrective work for payment .
the department will not measure the ride quality to calculate an adjusted unit price for this item of work .
num joint sealing .
the department will measure joint sealing by linear feet .
the department will not measure removing existing joint material or cleaning joints for payment but will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num jpc pavement diamond grinding square yard pay unit num joint sealing linear foot the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num breaking and seating jpc pavement num description .
break and seat existing jpc pavement for full depth and full panel width .
num materials and equipement .
num asphalt material .
conform to subsection num .
num impact hammer .
break the pavement with an impact hammer capable of delivering sufficient energy to break the pavement .
furnish a hammer having a breaker equipped with a platetype shoe designed to prevent penetration into the existing surface .
the department may approve other equipment according to subsection num .
when necessary provide a screen for the hammer to protect vehicles in the adjacent lane from flying concrete chips during the breaking process .
num pneumatictire proof roller .
furnish a pneumatictire proof roller weighing a minimum of num tons of one of the following types .
a roller having the following num num rubbertired wheels equally spaced across the full width and mounted in line on a rigid steel frame in such manner that all wheels carry equal loads regardless of surface irregularities .
num roller tires capable of satisfactory operation at a minimum inflation pressure of num psi when inflated to the pressure necessary to obtain proper surface contact pressure to satisfactorily seat pavement slabs .
the department will allow tires to contain liquid .
num a rubbertired prime mover for towing .
or num twoaxles .
num selfpropelled .
num no more than num tires .
num tires capable of meeting inflation pressure and surface contact pressure requirements in num above .
num construction .
break and seat the existing pavement .
place specified succeeding leveling asphalt base and asphalt binder courses one lane at a time .
furnish and place asphalt mixtures according to division num for the appropriate mixture .
exercise care during breaking and seating to prevent damage to underground utilities and drainage facilities .
num breaking of jpc pavement .
a size requirements .
break the existing jpc pavement to the extent that no more than num percent of the broken fragments are larger than num feet and no individual fragments are larger than num inches .
determine the extent of the breakage based on cracks visible to unaided normal vision when the pavement surface is dry .
do not use water to detect additional cracks .
accomplish breaking uniformly to produce the desired size without displacing the concrete more than num inch vertically above the original jpc pavement surface elevation .
continuously monitor the breaking operation .
make adjustments in the striking pattern striking energy number of passes or other factors to continually achieve acceptable breaking throughout the project .
b test section .
before breaking operations begin the engineer will designate a num test section .
break the test section using varying energy and striking patterns .
when necessary repeat passes of the equipment over the pavement until the test section is acceptably broken according to a above .
use the extent of breakage of the test section as a guide for breaking the pavement on the remainder of the project .
the engineer may require additional test sections at any time during the course of the work when sizes do not conform to the size requirements of a above .
num seating of broken jpc pavement .
after breaking seat the broken concrete by rolling with a pneumatictire proof roller .
make at least num oneway passes with a minimum numton roller or num oneway passes with a minimum numton roller .
use a rolling pattern that will ensure that the entire area of the broken pavement is well seated and is thoroughly and uniformly compacted .
remove any large rocking fragments and fragments that are displaced more than num inch above the original pavement surface elevation after seating and fill the resulting void with asphalt and compact or tamp .
num placement of edge drains .
when the contract includes installation of pavement edge drains install the edge drains at least num weeks before breaking and seating operations .
num placement of asphalt .
sweep the broken and seated pavement clean of foreign material using mechanical sweepers and hand brooms .
place the asphalt base following the breaking and seating operation as closely as practical according to subsection num .
do not allow the broken pavement to remain exposed more than num hours .
if the broken pavement is exposed more than num hours suspend the breaking operations until all broken existing pavement has been covered by at least one course of asphalt base .
make any required changes to the cross slope with the paving of the base courses .
cure the fist course of base at least num hours before placing the second course .
do not open a lane to public traffic until num courses of asphalt not including leveling courses are in place .
offset the longitudinal joints in the asphalt num inches according to subsection num .
perform leveling and wedging according to subsection num on top of the first course of asphalt and not on the existing pavement .
however at specific locations where the engineer deems a substantial amount of leveling is necessary level and wedge directly on the broken and seated pavement .
correct deviations in the surface by leveling and wedging on each succeeding course unless the engineer directs or approves in writing that the leveling and wedging be delayed until after placing the succeeding courses .
construct asphalt courses succeeding the first num courses according to the contract .
num measurement .
num breaking and seating pavement .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
the department will measure the width as the actual width of the original jpc pavement and the length as the horizontal length along the centerline of each roadway or ramp .
num leveling and wedging .
the department will measure quantity according to subsection num .
num asphalt mixtures .
the department will measure quantity according to subsection num for the appropriate mixture .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following num code pay item num breaking and seating pavement square yard pay unit num leveling and wedging pg num see subsection num asphalt mixtures see subsection num the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num concrete sidewalks steps and entrance pavements num description .
construct concrete sidewalks steps and entrance pavements with or without reinforcement on a prepared subgrade in one course to the dimensions and design specified in the plans and standard drawings .
this work does not include sidewalks constructed integral with bridges or culverts .
num materials and equipment num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num joint materials .
conform to section num preformed fillers .
num aggregate .
conform to section num and num .
num forms .
conform to subsection num .
num pavers .
conform to astm c num astm c num class sx type i or astm c num type r or f. ensure the concrete pavers have a minimum thickness of num inches and truncated domes as shown in the standard drawings .
ensure their color is homogeneous throughout the paver and contrasts visually with adjoining surfaces either lightondark or darkonlight .
the department will allow either yellow or red as colors .
num mortar .
conform to subsection num .
num construction .
construct sidewalks steps and entrance pavements on a prepared compacted smooth subgrade of uniform density formed by trenching or filling to the required elevation .
use class a concrete according to subsection num .
when desired use class p concrete according to subsection num for the construction of entrance pavements .
remove large boulders and ledge rock found in the subgrade to a minimum depth of num inches below the finished subgrade elevation backfill the space with material that the engineer approves and thoroughly compact by rolling or tamping .
furnish a template and check the subgrade before depositing concrete .
moisten the subgrade immediately before placing concrete .
place a numinch thick course of no .
num coarse aggregate on the prepared subgrade before placing concrete for steps .
form all steps and cast them to the dimensions specified in the contract .
reinforce all steps according to the standard drawings .
round all exposed edges and corners to a num inch radius .
when there are num or more steps install handrail of the type specified in the contract according to section num .
num forming .
place sidewalks and entrance pavements by use of side forms or an approved slip form method according to subsection num .
a side form method .
deposit concrete on the moistened subgrade strike and compact to the required thickness and tamp sufficiently to bring mortar to the surface .
then finish the surface smooth and even with wooden floats and brushes and broom for texturing .
b slip forming .
correct any excess slumping or irregularities immediately after passage of the slip form machine and finish and broom to blend with the general appearance of the adjacent concrete .
num straight edging and edging .
before giving the concrete sidewalk and entrance pavement the final finish and brooming check the surfaces with a numfoot num straightedge and eliminate all irregularities of more than num inch .
num joints .
a joints for sidewalks .
either divide the surfaces of sidewalks into rectangular areas by means of a jointer having a radius of num inch and forming a groove no less than one inch in depth for the full width of the walk or saw the joints according to subsection num and the contract .
ensure that the length of the rectangles formed does not exceed the width of the sidewalk being constructed .
when the sidewalk is constructed integral with the curb ensure that the width and spacing of the joints conform to that in the curb .
round the edges of the sidewalk at all expansion joints with an approved edging tool to a num inch radius .
install numinch premolded expansion joint material to the full depth of the sidewalk where the sidewalk abuts any rigid structure or fixture such as curbs columns castings buildings and light standards .
b joints for entrance pavements .
construct numinch wide sawed contraction joints in entrance pavements according to subsection num .
construct these joints at locations shown on the standard drawings .
the department will not require steel reinforcement in contraction joints .
saw the joints to a minimum depth of num inches .
install numinch wide expansion joints where shown on the standard drawings .
seal both expansion joints and contraction joints according to subsection num and the standard drawings .
num detectable warnings .
install detectable warning pavers at all sidewalk ramps and on all commercial entrances with traffic control devices according to the standard drawings .
mortar all pavers in place .
ensure the detectable warnings extend the full surface width and a minimum length of num feet up the ramp .
if a walkway crosses or adjoins a vehicular way and the pedestrian walking surface is not separated by curbs railings or other elements define the boundary between the areas with a continuous numfoot minimum width detectable warning .
num curing and backfilling .
cure concrete sidewalks steps and entrance pavements according to subsection num .
after the concrete has set sufficiently remove forms and backfill areas adjacent to the concrete .
compact and grade the backfill .
num measurement .
num concrete sidewalk .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
num concrete entrance pavement .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
num class a concrete for steps .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
the department will not measure excavation steel reinforcement or crushed aggregate for steps for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num detectable warnings .
the department will measure the quantity in square feet .
all retrofit applications for maintenance projects will require the removal of existing sidewalks to meet the requirements of the standard drawings applicable to the project .
the cost associated with the removal of the existing sidewalk will be incidental to the detectable warnings bid item or incidental to the bid item for the construction of the concrete sidewalk unless otherwise noted .
num num roadway excavation .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num embankmentinplace .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num num sidewalk thickness concrete square yard pay unit num num cement concrete entrance square yard pavement thickness num concrete class a for steps see subsection num num roadway excavation see subsection num num embankmentinplace see subsection num numesnum detectable warnings square foot the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num concrete curbs and gutters num description .
construct on a prepared subgrade according to the standard drawings concrete curb and gutter concrete valley gutter concrete header curb and concrete integral curb .
num materials .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num joint fillers .
conform to section num preformed fillers .
num forms .
conform to subsections num. and num .
num fine aggregate .
conform to section num .
num coarse aggregate .
conform to section num .
num construction .
num header curb valley gutter and curb and gutter combination .
use combination curb and gutter in conjunction with asphalt pavements .
construct combination curb and gutter according to the typical section in the plans .
use header curb in conjunction with either asphalt or jpc pavement where the depth of pavement is a minimum of one foot or where the thickness of asphalt pavement is variable .
construct header curb before placing pavement .
construct valley gutter according to the plans and standard drawings .
prepare the foundation by excavating or constructing the embankment to the required subgrade elevation on which the curb gutter or combination curb and gutter is to be placed .
remove all soft yielding or otherwise unsuitable material and replace it with stable materials according to section num and compact and finish the subgrade to a firm even surface .
use class a concrete according to subsection num .
place concrete either by use of side forms or by an approved slip forming method according to subsection num .
when indicated or directed form entrance and drainage openings of the required dimensions through the curbs at the designated location .
prepare the subgrade as required and moisten before placing concrete .
during placement thoroughly spade the concrete and vibrate or tamp it until the mortar entirely covers the surface and eliminate all honeycomb and voids .
place concrete so that no concrete reaches initial set before placing the following lift .
strike off and float surfaces so all coarse aggregate is well below the surface .
place reinforcing steel according to the details specified in the contract .
construct contraction joints as specified in subsection num d. construct expansion joints at all breaks in alignment at all drainage boxes and other fixed objects at the beginning and ending points of curves and at the beginning quarter middle and ending points of semicircular curves except the engineer will not require joints at the quarter points for semicircles having radii of num feet or less .
give the top surfaces of curbs a uniform float finish and round edges according to the standard drawings .
correct all honeycombed areas by filling with mortar .
do not plaster .
finish the top and face of all curbs while the concrete is plastic by wetting and rubbing with a carborundum brick or wooden block .
finish the face of header curbs to num inches below the gutter line or the finished groundline .
before giving the concrete the final finish check surfaces with a numfoot straightedge and eliminate all irregularities of more than num inch .
finish concrete to a smooth surface presenting a uniform texture and color .
num cure the concrete according to subsection num .
construct precast curbs to the length and shape and reinforce according to the standard drawings .
cast finish and cure precast curbs according to section num .
set precast curbs to conform to the line and grade specified in the plans with tight joints .
fill all joints except expansion joints with mortar .
when the precast curb is set fill all remaining excavated areas with material that the engineer approves in lifts not exceeding num inches in depth and tamp .
num integral curb .
use integral curb in conjunction with jpc pavements where a portion of the jpc pavement is the gutter .
construct according to subsection num except for the following num use either class a concrete according to subsection num or class p concrete according to subsection num .
num construct integral curbs monolithic with the pavement or as a separate operation by anchoring to the pavement .
for integral curbs constructed monolithic with the pavement in a separate operation from placement of the pavement concrete place the curbs immediately following completion of the pavement finishing operations and before the concrete has taken its initial set .
do not exceed an elapsed time between placing concrete in the pavement and in the curb of one hour .
obtain a thorough bond between the pavement and curb by roughening the surface of the pavement covered by the curb by means of a trowel or wire brush .
place stirrups according to the standard drawings in the freshly finished concrete at intervals of num num feet before placing the curb .
do not place stirrups closer than num inches to the center of sawed construction joints .
when the curb is constructed as a separate operation clean the surface of the concrete in the pavement of all foreign material before placing concrete in the curbs .
should it be necessary for stirrups to be bent in order to allow equipment to pass over the bars at the beginning of a days run bend the bars before installation .
num insert preformed joint filler and cut it to conform to the cross section of the curb in the curb directly over the expansion joint in the pavement while placing the curb .
construct contraction joints at the same locations as those in the pavement .
num use side forms with a depth equal to that of the curb .
ensure that the forms are joined neatly fastened securely and held rigidly in place by adequate connections and bracing .
check curb forms for grade and alignment to the same degree of accuracy required for pavement forms .
after the concrete in the curb has hardened sufficiently but in no less than num hours after placement remove the inside forms and finish the inside face of the curb to a uniform color and texture by rubbing with a wooden block or a carborundum brick .
correct any honeycomb or other surface defects by pointing with mortar of the same proportions of cement and sand used in the concrete .
to obtain a neat line on the thin edge of the integral curb lip construct by placing a oneinch by numinch board at least num feet long and surfaced on all num sides on the concrete slab to act as a guide when forming the curb or use other approved methods .
seal all pavement joints according to subsection num before integral curb is constructed .
if the integral curb is constructed monolithically with the pavement seal the curb in the same manner as the pavement .
num measurement .
num header curb .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet along the face of the curb .
num valley gutter .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet num along the flowline of the gutter .
num curb and gutter combination .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet along the flowline of the gutter .
num integral curb .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet along the top of the curb .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num num num num type header curb linear foot pay unit num valley gutter linear foot num num num num num num type curb and gutter linear foot num num num num num num type integral curb linear foot the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num concrete mountable median and standard barrier median num description .
prepare the foundation for the mountable median or standard barrier median furnish place consolidate finish and cure concrete and construct all joints necessary for completing the work .
num materials .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num joint material .
conform to section num preformed fillers .
num forms .
conform to subsection num .
num construction .
construct concrete mountable medians or standard barrier medians on the accepted prepared subgrade or the completed and accepted base course or old pavement .
use class a concrete according to subsection num or class p concrete according to subsection num .
when required place dowel bars according to the contract .
place concrete either by use of side forms or by an approved slip forming method according to subsection num .
when constructing medians in conjunction with jpc pavement construct transverse joints at the same intervals and locations as joints in the adjacent pavement .
when constructing medians in conjunction with asphalt pavement space transverse joints at intervals of num feet or less to provide uniform spacing .
construct all median joints as either numinch expansion joints filled with preformed joint filler or numinch sawed joints .
when sawing construct median joints according to subsection num .
the engineer will not require steel dowels in either type of joint .
cure concrete placed in the median according to subsection num .
num measurement .
num standard barrier median .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
num mountable median .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num standard barrier median type square yard pay unit num mountable median type square yard the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num permanent concrete median barriers num description .
prepare the foundation for the median barrier furnish place consolidate finish and cure the barrier construct all transverse joints construct other incidentals necessary to complete the work and attach delineators and other appurtenances when specified in the contract .
num materials and equipment .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num joint material .
conform to section num preformed fillers .
num dowel bars .
conform to section num .
num tie bars for precast sections .
conform to section num .
num mortar sand .
conform to section num .
num cement .
conform to section num .
num water .
conform to section num .
num masonry coating .
conform to section num .
num delineators for barriers .
use stimsonite marker num akt corporation marker no .
num or a department approved equal .
num forms .
conform to subsection num .
in addition to the requirements for slip forms use a slip form or extrusion machine that is equipped with automatic guidance controls capable of sensing grade and alignment from an outside reference consisting of a taut line or wire .
num construction .
construct concrete median barriers of each type to the lines grades cross section and details specified in the plans and standard drawings .
use class a concrete according to subsection num .
when it is necessary to transition the concrete median barrier into a section different from the uniform section specified in the plans such as at a bridge pier sign pedestal or bridge end wall do so in a smooth uniform manner as shown on the standard drawings .
provide concrete median barrier that are precast castinplace using fixed forms or slip formed according to subsection num .
bevel the upper longitudinal edge of the barrier num inch or construct it to a radius satisfactory to the engineer .
when required construct items such as delineators and conduit according to the contract .
secure conduit to prevent movement .
cure castinplace concrete median barriers according to subsection num .
use the same method of curing on each continuous section of the barrier .
cure precast concrete median barriers according to subsection num .
num fixed form construction .
construct numinch transverse expansion joints throughout the entire cross section at uniform intervals of no less than num feet or greater than num feet .
for construction in conjunction with jpc pavements locate transverse expansion joints so that a joint occurs at the same stations as that of the rigid pavement transverse joints .
construct additional transverse contraction joints in the barrier num if necessary to maintain the num to numfoot interval .
fill all transverse and longitudinal joints with preformed joint filler .
construct oneinch expansion joints over expansion joints in rigid pavement or base .
construct numinch expansion joints when the barrier abuts a bridge and at all box inlets lamp posts sign posts and similar structures that project through into or against the concrete median barrier .
the department will allow construction of joints according to subsection num .
conform to the tolerance requirements of appendix a tabulation of construction tolerances .
uniformly coat the median barriers with masonry coating .
num slip form construction .
suspend reference lines from supports set at intervals no greater than num feet on vertical and horizontal curves or num feet on uniform grades or tangents .
do not use ski or shoe sensors to reflect the grade of the subgrade unless the ski or shoe can ride on the completed pavement surface .
provide a construction joint between the base and the barrier .
construct a num by numinch key either depressed or raised in the base .
insert steel dowels in the plastic concrete immediately behind the slip form machine at the locations shown on the standard drawing .
place the base using slip form or extrusion methods .
immediately repair all surface pits larger than num inch in diameter and all gouges behind the slip form machine .
the engineer will not require further finishing other than a light longitudinal brushing or brooming .
provide short sections such as sections adjacent to structures terminal sections etc .
that are cast using fixed forms .
construct oneinch transverse expansion joints at intervals no greater than num feet .
construct oneinch transverse expansion joints over all transverse expansion joints in rigid pavement or base .
construct numinch expansion joints when the barrier abuts a bridge and at all box inlets lamp posts and similar structures that project through into or against the concrete median barrier .
fill all transverse and longitudinal joints with preformed joint filler .
construct numinch transverse contraction joints num inches deep at uniform intervals of num to num feet .
make contraction joints by cutting into the plastic concrete using an edging tool and trowel using removable inserts or sawing .
when sawing contraction joints saw as soon as practical after the concrete has set sufficiently to preclude raveling and before any shrinkage cracking occurs in the concrete .
the engineer will not require sealing of contraction joints .
construct construction joints as oneinch expansion joints .
when constructing a concrete median barrier over jpc pavement or base locate transverse joints in the barrier to match transverse joints in the pavement or base .
construct additional transverse contraction joints in the barrier if necessary to maintain the num to numfoot interval specified above .
when constructing transverse joints in the jpc pavement or base at variable intervals adjust the joint interval in the wall to match the joint interval in the pavement or base and construct additional joints as necessary to avoid exceeding the numfoot maximum interval .
conform to the tolerance requirements of appendix a tabulation of construction tolerances num precast construction .
construct precast units according to section num and approved drawings .
place the precast units on a bed of mortar and trim and discard excess mortar .
uniformly coat the median barriers with masonry coating .
when precast concrete median barriers are specified or allowed for installation on an existing facility anchor them as the plans specify .
when using precast units cast short sections transitions terminal sections and other supplemental sections using fixed forms .
when casting threaded inserts into the barrier for use in lifting protect the inserts by installing a solid fulllength threaded plastic bolt coated with waterproof grease .
install the bolt immediately after manufacturing the barrier section .
leave the bolt in place at all times while the barrier is in storage or in service except when using the insert for lifting .
entirely fill joints between units including the num by numinch groove with grout num composed of one part mortar sand and num parts cement with enough water to make the mixture plastic .
when the barrier abuts a bridge or other rigid structure cut off the tie bars or fill the groove with grout as applicable and install numinch preformed joint filler in the joints .
install numinch preformed joint filler at all box inlets lamp posts sign posts and similar structures that project through into or against the concrete median barrier .
conform to the tolerance requirements for castinplace construction of appendix a tabulation of construction tolerances .
ensure that all concrete median barrier are uniform in appearance and true to line and grade .
repair or remove and replace all portions of the barrier that are not within the specified tolerances or precast units that can not be correctly installed .
num measurement .
num concrete median barrier .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet along the top centerline of the barrier .
the department will not measure furnishing installing or maintaining lifting devices in precast median barriers for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure portions of the barrier that are not within the specified tolerances precast units that are not correctly installed or damaged units .
num concrete terminal sections .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num delineators for barriers .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num masonry coating .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num num concrete median barrier type linear foot pay unit num num num num num concrete terminal section type each num num delineator for barrier color each num masonry coating see subsection num the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num temporary concrete median barriers num description .
furnish install maintain and remove temporary precast concrete median barriers .
the department will furnish the concrete median barriers when specified in the contract .
the department may allow the use of similar units that conform to the national cooperative highway research program nchrp num test level num tlnum requirements and the typical features depicted by the standard drawings .
obtain the engineers approval prior to use .
ensure the barrier wall shape length material drain slot dimensions and locations typical features are met and the reported maximum deflection is num feet or less from the nchrp num tlnum for test num num pickup truck impacting at num mph at a numdegree angle .
num materials .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num connector bar pins .
conform to astm a num .
galvanize after forming according to aashto m num .
num top connectors .
conform to astm a num .
galvanize after forming according to aashto m num .
num bottom connectors .
conform to astm a num .
galvanize according to aashto m num after forming .
num tack welding .
conform to subsection num .
num delineators for barriers .
use either stimsonite marker num akt corporation marker no .
num or a department approved equal .
num connector pins .
conform to astm a num bolt grade a national coarse thread num threads per inch .
num construction .
construct concrete median barriers according to section num and the standard drawings .
use class a concrete and provide all concrete with an ordinary surface finish according to subsection num .
place delineators according to the standard drawings .
lift and place the barrier units using a num point pickup or another approved method .
do not lift units by the connectors .
when casting threaded inserts into the barrier for use in lifting protect the inserts by installing a solid fulllength threaded plastic bolt coated with waterproof grease .
install the bolt immediately after manufacturing the barrier section .
leave the bolt in place at all times while the barrier is in storage or in service except when using the insert for lifting .
do not use any unit which has been cracked chipped scarred or otherwise damaged or disfigured unless the engineer approves .
install the units at the locations specified in the plans and connect them in the manner detailed on the plans and standard drawings .
keep delineators clean and provide replacement delineators when necessary .
for all units in a continuous run use units of the same type and height and provide a smooth transition .
replace all units damaged after installation with an undamaged unit .
when the units are no longer needed remove the units from the project .
take ownership of all units except department furnished units .
transport department furnished units to the location specified in the contract .
num num measurement .
num temporary concrete median barrier .
the department will measure the quantity furnished installed maintained and removed by multiplying the nominal length of each unit in linear feet by the number of units .
the department will measure units installed to replace units damaged by traffic .
the department will not measure the disposal of units or units installed to replace units damaged by construction operations for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure furnishing installing or maintaining lifting devices for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num install temporary concrete median barrier .
the department will measure the quantity installed maintained and removed by multiplying the nominal length of each unit in linear feet by the number of units .
the department will furnish the barrier .
the department will measure units installed to replace units damaged by traffic .
the department will not measure the disposal of units or units installed to replace units damaged by construction operations for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure furnishing installing or maintaining lifting devices for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num relocate temporary concrete median barrier .
the department will measure the quantity relocated by multiplying the nominal length of each unit in linear feet by the number of units .
num delineator for barrier .
the department will measure the quantity by the individual unit including replacement units .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num concrete barrier wall type numtnum linear foot pay unit num install temporary concrete median barrier num linear foot num relocate temporary concrete median barrier linear foot num num delineator for barrier color each numthe department will pay num percent of the quantity upon satisfactory installation of the units .
the department will pay the remaining num percent upon removal of the units from the project or upon placement to their final location .
numthe department will pay num percent of the quantity upon satisfactory installation of the units .
the department will pay the remaining num percent upon removal of the units from the project or upon placement to their final location .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num sealing and patching concrete with epoxy resin num description .
seal concrete surfaces except jpc pavement with an epoxy resin seal and patch concrete surfaces except jpc pavement with an epoxy resin mortar patch .
fill low areas with the patch material .
num materials and equipment .
num epoxy resin .
conform to section num .
num mortar sand .
conform to section num .
num sand for epoxy seal coats .
conform to section num .
num sandblasters .
provide sandblasters that are equipped with traps to prevent water or oil from being deposited on the surface .
num drills .
provide rotary electric numinch drills with a paddle or other mixing devices approved by the engineer .
num construction .
allow new concrete to cure at least num calendar days before applying any epoxy sealant or epoxy mortar patch .
do not apply to jpc pavement .
seal and patch jpc pavement as specified in the contract .
ensure that the surface temperature of concrete surfaces to be sealed or patched is at least num f. in cool weather provide artificial heat using space heaters or infrared heaters .
when providing artificial heat maintain a surface temperature between num and num f until the epoxy seal or epoxy mortar patch has cured .
num preparation of concrete surface for sealing or patching .
prepare concrete surfaces to be epoxy sealed or epoxy mortar patched by removing all laitance deteriorated concrete and deposits of oil grease and other adherent foreign materials .
remove oil grease and other adherent foreign materials using solvents heavy detergents or mechanical means such as scraping .
then prepare the surfaces by grinding sandblasting retexturing or chipping to remove all laitance and unsound concrete .
immediately before applying the epoxy seal or epoxy mortar patch remove all dust grit and debris from the surface .
num mixing epoxy resin .
thoroughly stir the contents of the separate packages containing component a and component b before combining the num components .
do not use the same mixer or paddle to mix component a as is used to mix component b .
combine the num components in a clean metal or polyethylene vessel .
combine the components in the proportions and mix them according to the manufacturers recommendations .
only mix the material in quantities that can be used within the pot life of the mixture .
num mixing epoxy mortar for patching .
establish the proportions of epoxy resin and mortar sand for the epoxy mortar mixture according to the manufacturers instructions .
mix the epoxy mortar with a drill equipped for mixing .
gradually add mortar sand to the epoxy resin and continue mixing the materials to obtain a uniform mixture .
num application of epoxy mortar for patching .
prime areas to be patched immediately before placing the epoxy mortar .
thoroughly brush or scrub the epoxy resin for the prime onto the prepared surface to be patched .
then place the epoxy mortar over the primed area .
tamp rod and consolidate the epoxy mortar into place to exclude internal voids within the mortar mixture .
level or finish the mortar surface to the num specified surface .
finish or treat the surface to conform to the surface texture of the concrete surrounding the patched area .
after the patch has cured broom vacuum or blow away all loose material from the area and remove it from the pavement or deck .
do not allow traffic on the patched areas until the resinous material has hardened for the amount of time specified in the manufacturers specifications .
num epoxy seal coat .
place the epoxy seal coat and the sand for the epoxy seal coat according to the manufacturers instructions .
num measurement .
the department will not measure concrete sealing or patching for payment and will consider them incidental to the bid item being patched or sealed .
num payment .
the department will not make payment for concrete sealing or patching .
num section num grouting and epoxy bond coat num description .
install steel dowel bars or deformed reinforcement steel bars into existing concrete using grout that provides a bond between the steel and concrete and bond plastic concrete to hardened concrete using an epoxy bond coat .
num materials .
num epoxy resin .
conform to section num .
num cement .
conform to section num .
num water .
conform to section num .
num mortar sand .
conform to section num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num dowel bars .
conform to section num .
num construction .
num grouting .
drill holes of the size recommended by the manufacturer for the insertion of bars using masonry bits to the depth specified in the contract or the manufacturers specifications and to the tolerances in appendix a tabulation of construction tolerances .
keep holes clean and dry at all times .
blow holes clean before grouting .
use bars that are free of rust mill scale oil grease and other foreign substances .
grout with epoxy grout expanding grout or other grout on the departments list of approved materials .
for epoxy grout mix the epoxy resin according to subsection num .
for expanding grout mix it according to the manufacturers instructions .
pour or force the grout into the drilled holes and apply a coating of at least num inch of grout to the portions of the bars being inserted into the holes .
slowly insert the coated bars into the full depth of the holes with a twisting motion .
after insertion look for a light overflow of grout which indicates complete filling of the drill holes .
when this overflow does not occur immediately remove the bars place additional grout in the holes and reinsert the bars .
wipe away all excess grout .
after placement and during the hardening of the grout do not disturb the bars .
num epoxy bond coat .
mix the epoxy resin according to subsection num .
mix and apply the epoxy bond coat mixture according to the manufacturers instructions .
apply the epoxy bond coat only to clean dry structurally sound concrete surfaces .
clean surfaces as specified in the plans or as directed by the engineer before applying the epoxy mixture .
num measurement .
the department will not measure grouting or epoxy bond coat for payment and will consider them incidental to the bid item being grouted or epoxy bond coated .
num payment .
the department will not make payment for grouting or epoxy bond coat .
num section num hook bolts with expansion anchors num description .
furnish and install epoxy coated hook bolts with expansion anchors for use in jpc pavement widening or concrete culvert extensions .
num materials .
num hook bolts with expansion anchors .
conform to section num .
in addition ensure that the installed bolts when tested just before placement of the adjoining concrete can resist a pullout load of num pounds .
num epoxy coating material .
conform to section num .
num construction .
epoxy coat and install hook bolts according to the installation requirements for epoxy coated steel reinforcement bars in subsection num and the standard drawings .
install hook bolts with expansion anchors at the location specified in the plans or directed by the engineer according to the manufacturers instructions .
num measurement .
num hook bolts with expansion anchors .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
the department will not measure epoxy coating for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num hook bolt with expansion anchor each pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
division num structures and concrete num section num concrete num description .
use concrete consisting of a mixture of cement fine aggregate coarse aggregate and water with admixtures as specified combined in the proportions and mixed to the consistency specified when forming or casting to dimensions specified in the plans or as the engineer directs .
provide the materials material proportions equipment and construction methods necessary to ensure that the concrete produced conforms to the contract .
structural concrete is concrete for structures such as bridges culverts and retaining walls and other items detailed as structures in contract documents .
nonstructural concrete is all other concrete .
num materials and equipment .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num cement .
conform to section num .
use type i cement .
the department will allow the use of type ia type ip type ipa type is type ism type ii type iia and type iii when the engineer approves .
the engineer will condition his approval upon satisfactory means of storage and handling to ensure the ready identification of these cements when used in portions of the work .
if unsatisfactory test results are obtained using types ia ip ipa is ism ii iia or iii cement complete the work using type i cement .
do not intermix cement types in any structural unit except when finishing with type i .
num admixtures .
conform to section num .
use airentraining and water reducing admixtures in all classes of concrete .
water reducing admixtures are not required when slip forming is used for concrete placement .
use other admixtures when the engineer directs or approves .
num water .
conform to section num .
num fine aggregate .
conform to section num .
num coarse aggregate .
conform to section num .
num joint materials .
conform to section num .
num structural steel .
conform to section num .
num miscellaneous metals .
conform to section num .
num concrete curing materials .
conform to section num .
num masonry coating .
conform to section num .
num mineral admixtures .
conform to section num .
num forms .
provide forms that are mortar tight true to the dimensions lines and grades of the structure and of sufficient strength to prevent appreciable deflection during placing concrete .
a form panels .
form panels are continuous sections of form facing material unbroken by joint marks against which concrete is placed .
for exposed surfaces use form panels of plywood conforming to u.s .
product standard psnum for exterior bb concrete form class i plywood or any material other than plywood that will produce an equivalent smooth uniform concrete surface .
b plywood forms .
ensure that plywood forms are at least num inch thick .
num c plastic forms .
conform to the manufacturers specifications .
d plastic lined forms .
conform to the manufacturers specifications .
e metal forms .
use metal forms of such thickness that the forms will remain true to shape .
do not use metal forms that do not present a smooth surface or line up properly .
f stayinplace metal forms .
conform to the following requirements num forms and supports .
fabricate permanent steel bridge deck forms and supports from steel conforming to astm a num grades a through e and having a zinc coating class of g num according to astm a num .
use forms having a minimum thickness of num gage .
num fastener hardware .
for miscellaneous fastener hardware bolts nuts metal screws and washers provide common stock hardware items with a zinc coating equal to or better than that required by astm a num .
num coarse aggregate .
conform to the requirements of section num for all coarse aggregate used in concrete for bridge decks and barrier walls when using permanent steel bridge deck forms .
num precast beam hardware .
provide all deck and overhang support hardware that is cast into precast beam tops with a zinc or epoxy coating of a commercial quality grade .
num anchor legs .
to anchor angle weld tabs use straight anchor legs containing a hole having a num numinch minimum diameter .
if necessary incline the anchor leg to vertical .
num tack welding .
certified welders are not required for installation of stayin place metal forms .
g plank forms .
use plank forms having a minimum nominal thickness of num num inches .
h form oil .
provide a commercial quality form oil or other equivalent coating that allows ready release of the forms and does not discolor the concrete or is detrimental to masonry coating .
i chamfer strips .
only use chamfer strips that are no less than num by num inch .
num scales .
for weighing water aggregates cement and mineral admixtures provide either beam springless dial or electronic load cell type scales designed as an integral unit of the batching plant .
when checked under static loads maintain the accuracy of the scales to within num percent of the net load on the scales .
the net load on the scales is the total weight of the actual test weights used in the accuracy determination .
use enough actual test weights to at least equal the weight necessary to check the cement scales to the net load required for a normal size batch .
the department will allow the use of aggregates in combination with test weights to obtain the accuracy determination of aggregate scales in the higher ranges .
provide dial scales having a minimum of num graduations with a clear interval between graduation marks of num inch or more .
provide beam scales having a graduation interval not greater than num percent of the scale capacity with a clear interval of num inch or more .
provide scales that are sensitive enough to discern movement due to the addition to the scales of a weight equal to num percent of the scale capacity under load when the scales are not connected for automatic operation or equal to num percent when the scales are connected for automatic operation .
equip each beam scale with an auxiliary dial or telltale that will indicate to the operator that the required load in the hopper is being approached .
the device shall show a minimum of num percent of the net rated capacity of the largest beam for underweight and num percent for overweight .
ensure that the indicator registers any movement of the beam .
provide dial scales with suitable markers capable of being set to indicate the correct position of the dial indicator for predetermined loads .
enclose the dial in a glassfaced case for protection against dust .
num ensure that all weighing and indicating devices are in full view of and readable by the operator while charging the hopper and provide the operator with convenient access to all controls .
have all scales inspected and certified before use and whenever the engineer may deem necessary to confirm the accuracy of the scales .
ensure that an inspection of the scales has been made within the preceding num months at any time a plant is supplying concrete to a department construction project .
have a representative of a commercial scales company certified by the division of weights and measures inspect and certify the scales .
after the inspection and certification only make adjustments or changes in the weighing mechanism at the direction of the engineer .
keep all exposed fulcrums clevises and similar working parts of the scales clean at all times .
furnish all weights and other equipment necessary for testing and calibrating the scales .
num batching plant equipment .
ensure that the plant conforms to all safety health and sanitation requirements specified in subsection num .
supply the batching plant with bins weighing hoppers and scales for the fine aggregate each size of coarse aggregate bulk cement and mineral admixtures .
the department will allow weighing of cementitious material cumulatively .
for the bulk cement provide scales separate and distinct from those used for aggregate .
install and maintain the batching plant in a manner to provide accurate operations at all times .
only use weatherproof equipment for unloading cement and protect the storage weighing and batching equipment for cement from the weather at all times .
provide bins with separate compartments of sufficient capacity for each size of fine and coarse aggregate and for bulk cement .
design each compartment to discharge efficiently and freely into the weighing hopper .
provide a means of control so that when the quantity desired is being approached the material may be added slowly and shut off with precision .
use freely suspended weighing hoppers that do not affect the free movement of the weighing mechanism .
enclose the cement weigh hopper to prevent the loss of cement during weighing and provide it with an approved device to transfer the cement to the batch trucks or the mixer .
construct all hoppers to eliminate leakage and the accumulation of tare materials and to discharge completely .
provide any hopper that does not discharge satisfactorily with a vibrator having the frequency and power necessary to affect complete discharge .
num mixers .
a batch mixer .
furnish a batch mixer of an approved size and type specified to positively ensure uniform distribution of materials throughout the mass and to ensure discharge of the entire batch without segregation .
do not use any mixers having a rated capacity of less than one bag batch .
equip the mixer with adequate water storage and a device for accurately measuring and automatically controlling water discharge into each batch .
provide a mechanical device to control time of mixing for each batch and to automatically prevent discharge of the mixture until materials have been mixed for the specified time .
equip the mixer with a mechanical means for preventing addition of aggregates after mixing has started .
b continuous mixer .
furnish a continuous mixer of an approved size and type specified to ensure uniform distribution of materials throughout the mass and to ensure discharge of the entire batch without segregation .
equip continuous type mixers to fix the proportions of admixture cement and fine and coarse aggregates by calibration according to km num .
provide devices to indicate the proportions of all components being incorporated into the mixture .
equip the water supply portion of the mixer with a readily accessible cumulative type meter which can be read to the nearest num gallon .
ensure that the meter is of sufficient size to allow for easy reading .
calibrate the continuous type mixer to num the satisfaction of the engineer before starting work .
recalibrate the mixer thereafter at least once during each num cubic yards of production when yield checks indicate recalibration is necessary and at any other times the engineer deems necessary .
c truck mixer .
furnish a truck mixer of an approved revolving drum or revolving blade type constructed to produce a thoroughly mixed concrete mass with a uniform distribution of materials throughout .
keep the interior of the mixer drums free from hardened concrete .
equip the truck mixer with a discharge mechanism which will ensure discharging of the mixed concrete without segregation .
when the engineer deems it necessary provide baffle plates in the chute to avoid segregation in the concrete placed in the work .
make satisfactory repairs to any truck mixers that will not discharge concrete within the specified slump and air content ranges before using them .
attach to each truck mixer a metal plate stating the manufacturers capacities in terms of volume of mixed concrete for the various uses the equipment is applicable and the manufacturers recommended speeds of rotation for mixing and agitation .
for the mixer drum apply the rates of rotation used for mixing and agitation as designated on the metal plate by the manufacturer of the equipment .
do not allow the mixer drum to lose any water or concrete during charging mixing and agitation or during transportation .
equip the truck mixer with an automatic revolution counter that allows reading of the count at the plant and at the destination .
do not use trucks equipped with defective revolution counters .
keep the interior of the mixer drums free from hardened concrete .
equip tanks containing mixing water on all trucks with a device for accurately determining the quantity of water added at the job site .
conduct annual tests to evaluate capability of the truck mixer to produce a uniform mixture according to km num .
the department will perform random checks of the tests .
d central mixer .
num drum type mixer .
equip each drum type mixer with a batch counter and an approved timing device that automatically locks the discharge mechanism during the mixing period .
num pan type mixer .
equip each pan type mixer with a batch counter and an approved timing device that automatically locks the discharge mechanism during the mixing period .
num concrete transfer equipment .
to transfer concrete from truck mixers or agitators only use equipment of adequate design and dimension to deposit concrete of the specified slump at the point of placement .
num vibrators .
use a type and design approved by the engineer that is capable of transmitting vibration to the concrete at frequencies to adequately consolidate the concrete and when applicable not damage the epoxy coating on reinforcing steel .
num tremies .
use tremies consisting of a tube having a diameter of num inches or more constructed in sections having flanged couplings fitted with water tight gaskets .
num wire brooms .
use department approved wire brooms .
num slip form machine extrusion machine .
use a selfpropelled slip form machine designed to consolidate and finish the concrete in one pass without damaging or displacing any steel reinforcement and that finishes the concrete to a smooth num uniformly textured surface conforming to the required cross section with a minimum of hand finishing .
num curing compound sprayer .
to apply the membrane forming curing compound use a sprayer consisting of a container having a capacity of no less than num gallons in which a consistent pressure can be maintained by mechanical means or by a suitable pumping arrangement in order to maintain a consistent pressure at the spray nozzle or nozzles and to uniformly apply the membrane forming curing compound at the specified rate .
use nozzles designed to deliver a uniform fine spray and that allow for easy cleaning .
provide a shield or apron to protect the spray from wind .
provide means for cleaning the nozzles as part of the spraying equipment .
num construction .
conduct a prepour meeting whenever the work will involve placing bridge slab concrete concrete pumping or trial batches .
the engineer will facilitate the meeting to discuss items such as timing of truck delivery target air content and slump of delivered concrete minimizing air content and slump loss through the pump sampling location and procedures and other items as appropriate .
attendance is required by the contractor concrete supplier pump contractor when pumping is involved and jobsite inspector .
when the plans call for the bridge deck to be placed in phases and a change in sequence is desired submit a request in writing to the engineer .
include in the request the proposed sequence supply rate of concrete delivery retarder schedule means of delivery bucketpump and any other details which the engineer may request .
the department will have the designer evaluate the requested change and determine feasibility .
make no changes without the engineers approval .
num care storage and handling of aggregates cement and mineral admixtures .
furnish stock and handle the fine and coarse aggregates at the job site or at the plant site to maintain uniformity of grading and free moisture contents at the time of batching .
the engineer may direct saturation to continue if necessary .
obtain the engineers permission prior to using materials stockpiled at areas remote from the plant site .
the engineer may revoke permission to use materials remote from the plant site any time it is apparent there is not uniformity of grading and free moisture content .
when storing in stockpiles place each size aggregate in separate stockpiles sufficiently removed from each other to prevent the intermixing of material at edges of piles .
do not use materials which have become mixed with foreign matter or fine and coarse aggregates which have become mixed with each other .
build stockpiles in layers not exceeding num feet in height .
complete each layer before beginning the next layer .
handle aggregates in a manner that ensures the uniformity of the moisture content for each pour .
do not batch directly from washing plants .
when handling by hydraulic methods or when washing is involved stockpile or use bins to drain all aggregates at least num hours before batching .
do not remove aggregates from stockpiles within one foot of the ground line until final cleanup of the work .
protect stored cement from dampness at all times .
for cement storage use weatherproof buildings that have ample space for storing separate shipments readily identified and accessible for sampling .
remove the cement from storage in the order received as practical to avoid long storage periods .
handle cement in a manner to prevent loss wetting or contamination .
when using bulk cement maintain a clean and clear cement feed to the cement batching bin to maintain the correct batch weight at all times .
furnish to the engineer daily records of the cement shipments to the job batch plant .
the engineer may not require daily records of cement shipments when using commercial concrete plants .
do not allow the temperature of the cement at the time of its incorporation into the mixture to exceed num f. store and handle fly ash and ggbf slag as specified for cement .
provide means such as double wall separation to prevent the intermixing of cement with fly ash or ggbf slag .
num num concrete producer responsibilities .
obtain the concrete from producers that are in compliance with km num and on the departments list of approved materials .
if a concrete plant becomes unqualified during a project and there are no other qualified plants in the region the department will provide qualified personnel to witness and ensure the producer follows the required specifications .
the department will assess the contractor a num per hour charge for this service .
regardless of quantity ensure that the all concrete producers comply with the following requirements a general .
design concrete mixtures and perform quality control and process control testing as needed .
b certified personnel .
employ concrete technicians responsible for the design of the concrete mixtures and for performing quality control and process control testing as necessary .
ensure that the concrete technicians are certified as aci level i level i and krmca level ii level ii .
c quality control .
take full responsibility for the batch weight calculations and quality control of concrete mixtures at the plant .
ensure that the level ii concrete technician is present when work is in progress and is responsible for inspecting trucks batch weight calculations monitoring batching making mixture adjustments reviewing the slump air content unit weight temperature and aggregate tests all to provide conforming concrete to the project .
a level i concrete technician is responsible for testing production material for slump entrained air unit weight and temperature of the mixture .
ensure the technician performs all sampling and testing according to the appropriate kentucky methods .
ensure that level ii concrete technicians cooperate with the engineer in making minor adjustments to the mixture proportions within the limits of the specifications that may be desirable due to conditions at the job site .
d producer testing .
when producing for state work have a qualified concrete aggregate technician or kytc qualified aggregate technician perform at a minimum weekly gradations and minus num wash tests and daily moisture contents of coarse and fine aggregate fine aggregates will not require a minus num wash test .
using the daily moisture contents adjust the approved mix design accordingly prior to production .
ensure that the level ii concrete technician is present when work is in progress and is responsible for inspecting trucks batch weight calculations monitoring batching making mixture adjustments reviewing the slump air content unit weight temperature and aggregate tests all to provide conforming concrete to the project .
e trip tickets .
furnish a trip ticket form tc num or equivalent for each load of concrete .
include on the trip ticket the sample id for the approved mix design and a statement certifying that the data on the ticket is correct and that the mixture conforms to the mix design .
the inspector will insert the required job site information in the spaces provided .
ensure that the plant manager or a level ii concrete technician signs the ticket .
f records .
retain all concrete technician records test results and batch tickets pertaining to concrete produced for a department project for at least num years after formal acceptance of the project .
make all records available to the engineer and the contractor on the project for review upon request .
g mix designs .
design the mixture for each class of concrete specified .
determine the proportions of materials to be used on an absolute volume basis .
establish quantities to yield as nearly practical the design volume .
before producing any concrete for the project submit a proposed mixture design to the engineer and obtain the district materials engineers or the central office materials approval .
submit the mix design electronically using the concrete num mix design spreadsheet located on the division of materials website .
spreadsheets require the minimum system requirements microsoft office num professional full installation .
consider any load of concrete delivered to the job site that fails to conform to specification requirements to be subject to rejection .
the engineer may allow the addition of water and admixtures at the job site .
when the engineer allows the addition of water or admixtures at the job site take responsibility for the quantity to be added .
water may only be added to the load as a onetime addition prior to depositing any concrete into the structure or pavement .
do not allow the total watercement ratio to exceed that listed in the ingredient proportions and requirements for various classes of concrete table .
the engineer may test remixed loads having additional water added to the mix at the job site .
the engineer will retest all loads when air entrainment admixtures are added at the jobsite .
all acceptance testing will be performed after all permitted additions have been added and remixed .
num new mixture designs .
base the proposed mix design on standard department methods unless the district materials engineer or central office materials approves otherwise .
include the following with the submitted design a the class of concrete and numday compressive strength .
b the source specific gravity percentage and quantity of fine and coarse aggregate .
the district materials engineer or central office materials will provide an average value of the specific gravity and aggregate absorption .
c the cement producer type and pounds of cement per cubic yard .
d the mineral admixture supplier type class percentage of cement reduction and replacement ratio and total pounds per cubic yard .
e the source of water predicted amount of total water per cubic yard and the maximum allowable water per cubic yard .
f the brands and predicted dosages of admixtures per cubic yard .
g if the concrete mixture is a class that the producer has not previously furnished to a department project have the producer provide trial batches of at least num cubic yards to demonstrate that the mixture will conform to the requirements for slump air content watercement ratio and compressive strength .
have the producer make the trial batches using the ingredients proportions and equipment including batching mixing and delivery time to be used on this project .
have the producer make at least num consecutive trial batches conforming to all specified requirements .
central office materials will observe all phases of the trial batches .
have the producer submit a report containing mix proportions and test results for slump air content watercement ratio unit weight and compressive strength for each trial batch to the engineer for central office materials review and approval .
num approval .
the district materials engineer or central office materials will base approval of the mixture design on the following criteria a provide concrete cylinders molded at the project site to verify that the specified compressive strength will be attained .
b the quantities of components given for a one cubic yard batch will on the basis of absolute volumes produce one cubic yard of concrete mix .
include the volume occupied by entrained air .
c the cement factor is at least the minimum specified in the ingredient proportions and requirements for various classes of concrete table in subsection num .
num d the watercement ratio does not exceed the maximum specified in the ingredient proportions and requirements for various classes of concrete table in subsection num. e the aggregate sources the cement supplier the mineral admixture supplier or producer and the admixture brands are on the departments list of approved materials .
f the trial batches when required produce acceptable results .
the engineer or district materials engineer may request trial batches at any time before or during a project .
num changes in approved mixture designs .
do not change the source of supply of the mixture ingredients without the district materials engineers or central office materials written permission .
if it is necessary to change the source of aggregates submit a new design reflecting the new source of aggregate to the engineer .
upon the district materials engineers or central office materials written approval the department will allow the use of aggregate from the new source .
num proportioning and requirements .
a concrete .
num the department may direct nonpayment additional construction or removal and replacement for concrete for which test cylinders indicate low compressive strength and followup investigations indicate inadequate strength .
the department may require some classes to attain the required compressive strength in less than num days .
num when the ambient air temperature while placing slab concrete is numf or more add to the concrete a waterreducing and retarding admixture .
the engineer may require or allow waterreducing and retarding admixture in slab concrete for ambient air temperatures of less than numf .
only use one type of admixture for concrete placed ingredient proportions and requirements for various classes of concrete class of concrete approximate percent fine to total aggregate maximum free water by wc ratio numday compressive strength num slump num minimum cement factor air content lblb psi inches lbydnum gravel stone anum num num num num num num num num a mod num num num num num num num num aanum num num num num num num num num num aaanum num num num num num num num num num b num num num num num num num num dnum num num num num num num num num d modnum num num num num num num num num mnum w type num cement num num num num num max .
num num num mnum w type iii cement num num num num num max .
num num num pnum num num num num num num num num num num during any individual contiguous pour .
num the department will require a compressive strength of num psi or greater when specified in the contract at or before num days for prestressed members .
num the engineer will allow slumps less than the minimum provided concrete is workable .
num the department will allow the use of jpc pavement mixture for nonstructural construction .
num at the option of the prestressed product fabricator the department will allow the slump of class d or class d modified concrete to be increased to a maximum of num inches for all items except products with voids .
for products with voids the slump may be increased to num inches .
provide a high range water reducer type f or g in an amount not to exceed the following watercement ratios summer mix designs num spring fall mix designs num winter mix designs num num the precast fabricator may increase the slump of class a concrete to a maximum of num inches provided the fabricator uses a high range water reducer type f or g and maximum watercement ratio of num .
num use a high range water reducer type f or g num the department will require num psi compressive strength before opening to traffic and num psi at num days .
num num lbydnum when using coarse aggregate sizes no .
num num or numm .
num num num when using coarse aggregate sizes no .
num num or numm .
num the department may allow the slump of aa concrete to be increased up to a numinch maximum provided the wc ratio does not exceed num and a high range water reducer type f or g is used .
trial batches will be required if producer has not previously supplied .
num the department does not have slump requirements for class p concrete mixes except for the edge slump requirements of section num .
b mortar grout flowable fill and selfconsolidating concrete .
when required ensure that the air content of mortar or grout is num percent num percent by volume .
do not allow the quantity of fly ash in mortar or grout to exceed num percent of the cement quantity .
num mortar .
proportion mortar mix with one part cement or cement with fly ash to num parts mortar sand by volume .
add water in an amount not to exceed a watercement ratio of num .
num grout .
proportion grout with water and one part cement or cement with fly ash to num parts mortar sand by volume .
adjust the water to produce a mixture of a consistency suitable for job conditions .
num nonshrink grout .
use the nonshrink grout on the departments list of approved materials .
use an approved nonshrink nonstaining grout consisting of either a mixture of hydraulic cement water fine aggregate and an approved nonferrous expansive admixture or a packaged commercial product .
to be placed on the departments list of approved materials nonshrink nonstaining grout must conform to the following requirements a use an initial set time of at least num minutes when tested according to astm c num or astm c num .
the department will allow the use of a setretarding admixture compatible with the expansive admixture .
b ensure that the grout exhibits expansion of no less than num percent and no more than num percent upon setting when tested according to astm c num with the exception that the glass plate shall remain in place during the test period .
c use grout that has a minimum num day compressive strength of num psi when tested using applicable portions of astm c num .
num d use grout that has a minimum durability factor of num percent and a maximum expansion of num percent when tested according to km num num. e keep the water content of the grout as low as possible for proper grouting and do not exceed a watercement ratio of num .
do not exceed the manufacturers recommendations for water added to commercial products .
f ensure that the grout does not contain chlorides or nitrates .
g cure grout mixtures by covering with num layers of wet burlap or other approved covering so as to keep the grout continuously moist for at least num calendar days except cure commercial mixtures as recommended by the manufacturer .
h ensure that commercial products are nonferrous and approximately match the color of hardened concrete .
i when preparing noncommercial grout mixture submit a proposed mix design and a sample of the expansive admixture to the engineer for testing and approval before use .
j when using packaged commercial grout provide certified test results from the manufacturer showing the material conforms to subsection num .
when the engineer requests provide samples of the grout mixture for testing and approval .
num latex grout .
use latex and cement mixture of a paste consistency .
num flowable fill .
use flowable fill consisting of a mixture of cement sand fly ash water and other materials the engineer approves .
contrary to section num do not allow the loss on ignition for class f fly ash to exceed num percent .
ensure that the concrete producer certifies mix proportions for flowable fill as follows a flowable fill for pipe backfill .
proportion as follows per cubic yard batch cement num pounds fly ash class f num pounds natural sand s.s.d .
num pounds water maximum num pounds b flowable fill for bridge end bent backfill .
proportion as follows per cubic yard batch cement num pounds fly ash class f or class c num pounds natural or crushed sand s.s.d .
num pounds water maximum num pounds alternate mixtures for flowable fill .
the department may approve other mixtures .
the mixtures may include other proportions of the above materials class c fly ash chemical admixtures or aggregate not conforming to the standard specifications .
when deviating from the above specified proportions and materials make and test a trial batch of at least num cubic yards to ensure that the mix will have flow and density characteristics suited for the intended use .
use the ingredients proportions and equipment intended for the project including batching mixing and delivery .
the department will observe all phases of the trial batching for approval .
ensure the proposed mixture is proportioned to obtain a minimum flow of num inches when tested with a num by num inch open ended cylinder modified flow test and meets applicable strength requirements .
num ensure additional requirements as stated below for time of bleeding and time to achieve firmness are met when appropriate for application .
submit the proposed mixture proportions and appropriate test results to the engineer for review and approval .
when the mixture is proprietary comply with subsection num .
the department will cast cure and break test cylinders from the flowable fill trial batch according to astm d num .
prior to completion of the num day curing period transport the test cylinders to the mcl for compressive strength testing .
obtain an average compressive strength of num to num psi at num days for application as pipe backfill or minimum compressive strength of num psi at num days for application as bridge end bent backfill .
for applications requiring early opening to traffic or placement of pavement as soon as possible provide a mixture that conforms to the following general guidelines num mixture bleeds freely within num minutes .
num require the mixture to support a numpound person within num hours .
the engineer will approve flowable fill delivered to the project based on certifications indicating proper proportions for the intended use .
num self consolidating concrete scc .
conform to km num with application limited to precast plants .
c mixtures using type ip is and ism cement or mineral admixtures .
the engineer will not consider any contract time extension requests for delays due to additional time necessary to attain specified strengths .
seasonal limitations on the use of type ip cement and fly ash in bridge decks are specified in subsection num d. num type ip is ism cement .
the department will allow the use when substituted for type i cement pound for pound .
to produce the necessary workability strength properties and expected durability of the concrete the department will allow adjustment of the proportioning air entraining agent and finishing requirements and acceptance procedures .
obtain the engineers approval for all such adjustments .
conform to all strength requirements for loading structures or removing falsework before applying loads or removing falsework .
if strength requirements are not met increase the minimum times specified in the required time in calendar days before removing forms and falsework table in subsection num and the required time in calendar days before applying significant loads on concrete structures table in subsection num by num percent .
ensure that the mixture contains the specified amount of entrained air .
num mineral admixtures .
the use of fly ash ground granulated blast furnace ggbf slag or microsilica in concrete is the contractors option .
reduction of the total cement content by a combination of mineral admixtures will be allowed up to a maximum of num percent .
when the ability to use ggbf slag or microsilica has not been demonstrated have the concrete producer provide trial batches in accordance with subsection num g num .
have the producer make the trial batches using the ingredients proportions and equipment including batching mixing and delivery time to be used on the project .
furnish all required materials and samples at no cost to the department .
a fly ash .
when added as a separate ingredient the department will allow the use of fly ash to reduce the quantity of cement except do not num use fly ash to reduce the quantity of type ip cement .
the department will allow the use of class f fly ash to reduce the quantity of cement up to a maximum of num percent of the minimum cement content .
for each num pound of cement reduced add at least num pound but no more than num pounds of class f fly ash .
the department will allow the use of class c fly ash to reduce the quantity of cement up to a maximum of num percent of the minimum cement content .
for each num pound of cement reduced add num pound of class c fly ash .
incorporate and uniformly distribute the fly ash into the mixture using methods and equipment that the engineer approves .
the department will allow weighing of fly ash cumulatively in the same weigh hopper with the cement but weigh the cement first .
conform to all strength requirements for loading structures or removing falsework before applying loads or removing falsework .
if strength requirements are not met increase the required times specified in the required time in calendar days before removing forms and falsework table in subsection num and the required time in calendar days before applying significant loads on concrete structures table in subsection num by num percent .
to produce the necessary workability strength properties and expected durability of the concrete the department will allow adjustment of the proportioning air entraining agent finishing requirements and acceptance procedures .
obtain the engineers approval for all such adjustments .
calculate the maximum free water based on the total cementitious material including fly ash .
do not change any of the slump requirements .
ensure that the mixture contains the specified amount of entrained air .
b ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbf slag .
when added as a separate ingredient use grade num ggbf or num ggbf slag to reduce the quantity of cement except do not use ggbf slag to reduce the quantity of type is or ism cement .
the department will allow the use of ggbf slag to reduce the quantity of cement up to a maximum of num percent of the minimum cement content .
for every num pound of cement reduced add num pound of ggbf slag .
the combined weight of the cement and ggbf slag will determine the minimum cement factor and water cement ratio .
due to the lower specific gravity of ggbf slag the concrete volume will increase .
unless directed by the engineer adjust the increased volume by reducing an equal volume of the fine and coarse aggregate in the mixture .
use type i cement unless otherwise specified .
use type ia and type ii cement only if requested and approved in writing .
when additional cements are approved store and handle the cement so intermixing does not occur .
work done with each cement shall be readily identifiable .
if test results are unsatisfactory complete the work using type i cement .
use only one brand of cement for each structure unless otherwise permitted by the engineer .
weigh the cement first when weighing ggbf slag cumulatively in the same weigh hopper .
incorporate the ggbf slag into the mixture by methods and equipment that ensure uniform distribution throughout the mixture .
c microsilica .
when added as a separate ingredient replace cement with microsilica as a percentage by weight specified elsewhere in the contract .
when not specified elsewhere replace num percent .
the department will allow the use of microsilica to reduce the quantity of num cement up to a maximum of num percent of the minimum cement content .
the combined weight of the cement and microsilica will determine the minimum cement factor and water cement ratio .
use a high range water reducer conforming to astm c num type f or type g. incorporate into the microsilica slurry or add at the time of batching for dry microsilica .
use type i cement unless otherwise specified .
use type ia is ism and type ii cement only if requested and approved in writing .
when additional cement types are approved store and handle the cement so intermixing does not occur .
work done with each cement shall be readily identifiable .
if test results are unsatisfactory complete the work using type i cement .
use only one brand of cement for each structure unless otherwise permitted by the engineer .
weigh the cement first when weighing microsilica in the dry or pellet form cumulatively in the same hopper .
when the microsilica is in a slurry form verify the dispenser or other means of measurement to the engineers satisfaction .
the percent of microsilica will be considered in the measurement determinations and in the proportioning calculations .
when the microsilica admixture is in a slurry form continuously recirculate by pumping .
begin recirculation at least four hours before batching and continue until batching operations cease .
when using a truck mixer limit the mixer charge to num of its rated capacity unless the engineer approves a larger size .
d department tests .
the department will test the work at the minimum frequencies indicated in the manual of field sampling and testing practices or as necessary to determine the quality .
the department will perform the tests according to procedures outlined by the applicable kentucky method .
the department will cast and test compressive strength specimens according to km num and astm c num respectively .
in cases of failures the department will evaluate cylinder results according to km num to determine whether inplace investigation may be necessary .
e measuring .
conform to the individual ingredient material batching tolerances in appendix a .
num cement .
measure cement by weight considering one bag equal to num pounds or weigh it in bulk on scales .
when the weight of an entire shipment of cement in bags varies more than num percent from num pounds per bag weigh the cement in bulk on scales .
do not produce batches from fractional bags unless the entire quantity of cement is batched by weight as required for handling bulk cement .
num aggregates .
measure fine and coarse aggregates by weight making corrections for moisture content .
when the fine and coarse aggregates used contain more than the maximum free water stipulated in the ingredient proportions and requirements for various classes of concrete table in subsection num increase the cement content according to the concrete proportioning requirements and ensure that the maximum watercement ratio is not exceeded .
num water .
measure water either by weight or by volume .
use an approved visible measuring device for measuring water .
use only water meter systems and other approved volumetric systems that can accurately deliver into the mixer to within num percent of the required amount of water per batch and are arranged to automatically stop flow of water when the required quantity has been delivered into the mixer .
when the water measuring device fails to deliver the quantity of water discharged into the mixer within the limits specified suspend operation of the mixer until num making repairs and proper adjustments .
assume water weighs num pounds per gallon .
each time the scales are checked check or obtain an approved scale company to check water meter systems for accuracy in the presence of the engineer .
ensure that all calculations are included in the scale companys report .
withhold a portion of the water until the last part of the batching process to wash any cement that is sticking to the sides of the mixer into the mix .
num measuring admixtures .
introduce liquid admixtures into the concrete batch along with or as part of the mixing water .
keep airentraining admixtures completely separate from all other admixtures until introduction into the batch .
maintain and equip dispensing equipment to ensure no chlorides are introduced into any department mix .
use approved dispensing equipment with a meter gauge or scale that can accurately be preset for the needed amount of admixture and can consistently deliver quantities of admixture to successive batches at any setting with satisfactory accuracy .
the dispensing equipment must be visible to the batch operator if the actual dispensed amounts are not recorded on the computer batch ticket .
ensure admixture dispensers are inspected calibrated and certified every num months .
the department may allow admixtures to be added to the truck at the project site provided the engineers approval is obtained first .
num classes and primary uses .
use the following classes of concrete in the types of construction designated .
a class a .
all reinforced concrete abutments below top of caps including pedestals retaining walls box culverts pipe culvert headwalls nonstructural concrete and all items for which the concrete class is not specified .
b class a modified .
all concrete deposited under water .
c class aa .
all reinforced concrete in bridge substructures and superstructures above the tops of caps excluding pedestals .
d class aaa .
bridge decks and other high strength uses .
e class b .
gravity retaining walls and all nonreinforced concrete deposited as fill for cavities or voids and mass footings .
f class d. prestressed i beams castinplace piles and precast piles .
g class d modified .
prestressed box slab and ibeams and prestressed concrete piles .
h class mnum .
high early strength for bridge joint repair and full or partial depth bridge deck patching .
type i cement i class mnum .
high early strength for bridge joint repair and full or partial depth bridge deck patching .
type iii cement j class p. jpc pavement .
k class s. bridge slabs or barrier walls when specified in the contract .
l mortar .
concrete pipe joint seals leveling drainage structure flowlines and filling around inlets or outlets of drainage structures .
m flowable fill .
backfill for pipe .
n grout .
patching filling spalled areas or other uses specified in the contract .
o latex grout .
bond coat between existing bridge surface and new overlays and joint sealing for centerline and other construction joints and minor cracking on overlays .
p nonshrink grout .
bonding and sealing for posttensioning tieback rods and bolts and box beams .
q selfconsolidating concrete scc .
precast units .
r dry cast .
precast units .
num num admixtures .
for all classes of concrete add at least a waterreducing admixture .
water reducing admixtures are not required when slip forming is used for concrete placement .
the department will allow the use of other admixtures when specified or approved by engineer .
the department will allow admixtures according to the ingredient proportions and requirements for various classes of concrete table in subsection num .
follow the manufacturers recommendations in determining the quantity of admixture to use .
ensure that the concrete producer establishes the quantity of airentraining admixture necessary to produce a mixture having the specified air content for the class of concrete being produced .
add airentraining admixtures separately from other admixtures and keep them separate until introducing them into the mixing water or concrete mixture .
the engineer will not require airentraining of mortar or grouts except when they are exposed to freezethaw conditions .
ensure that any type of admixture is uniform in properties throughout its use in the work .
only dispense of admixtures in liquid form unless the engineer approves prepackaged powdered water reducing admixtures .
when using more than one admixture ensure that the admixtures are compatible .
when using fly ash ensure that the concrete producer uses fly ash compatible admixtures .
clearly label admixture containers that indicate the exact brand name and type of admixture .
store products in containers with the correct label .
store admixtures where the liquid temperatures can be maintained between num and num f. when using waterreducing and retarding admixtures provide the engineer with manufacturers recommendations regarding the quantity of admixture used and expected retardation period for the job mixture and conditions .
num slump .
the department will measure the slump of the concrete as described in km num .
do not exceed the watercement ratio including the free water on the aggregates according to the ingredient proportions and requirements for various classes of concrete table in subsection num .
in general use a mixture which contains the minimum quantity of water required by these specifications and ensure that concrete mixtures are such that num mortar clings to the coarse aggregate num concrete is not sufficiently fluid to segregate when transported to the place of deposit num mortar shows no free water when removed from the mixer num concrete when transported in metal chutes at an angle of num degrees with the horizontal slides rather than flows into place and num upper layers of the hardened concrete show a cement film on the surface but are free from laitance .
num delivery .
mix the concrete in the quantities required for immediate use .
except for prestressed box beams do not allow an interval greater than num minutes between delivery of batches placed contiguously in the work .
when using concrete with a water reducing and retarding admixture the engineer will allow a numminute intervals between the delivery of batches except for bridge deck slabs .
for prestressed box beams the engineer will allow a numminute interval for delivery of batches between placement of the bottom slab and the remainder of the box beam when using concrete with a water reducing and retarding admixture .
after adding all water cement and aggregates to the mixer deliver and place concrete in its final position within the time limits listed in the following table .
do not use concrete that has developed initial set that has become segregated or that has not been delivered within the time limits listed .
num time of discharge limits num minutes normal concrete num retarded concrete num agitated num agitor num nonagitated agitated num agitor num nonagitated num num num num num num num all times begin when cement first enters the mixer .
num normal concrete is concrete without the addition of a waterreducing and retarding admixture .
num retarded concrete is concrete to which a waterreducing and retarding admixture has been added at the engineers direction or approval .
num agitated is defined as concrete that has been continuously agitated from the time of initial contact between cement and mixing water to the time of placement at the site of work .
num an agitor is a truck with paddles .
num num minutes for class b concrete placed in miscellaneous work such as fence post footings .
num mixing concrete .
a general .
the department will allow mixing of concrete at the site of work or the use of readymixed methods .
readymixed concrete includes centralmixed and truckmixed concrete .
site mixing includes batch mixing and continuous mixing .
the engineer may allow hand mixing .
b site mixing .
thoroughly mix concrete in a batch mixer or continuous mixer .
maintain the mixer whether batch or continuous type free of partially dried or hardened materials at all times .
consistently produce concrete to provide a uniform thoroughly blended mixture within the specified air content and slump limits .
num batch mixing .
mix all concrete for a period of no less than num seconds after all materials including water are in the mixer .
during the period of mixing operate the drum at the manufacturers recommended drum speed .
when necessary continue mixing until all aggregates are thoroughly coated with mortar .
remove the entire contents of the mixer from the drum before adding any materials for the succeeding batch .
deposit materials composing a batch simultaneously into the mixer .
do not operate any mixer above its rated capacity .
num continuous mixing .
the department will allow the use of continuous type mixers for class a or class b concrete except do not use them to place concrete in bridges or box culverts .
notify the engineer of any proposed changes in the proportioning of any of the ingredients .
maintain the free moisture content of the fine aggregate within the limits necessary to produce concrete conforming to these specifications .
perform slump tests on mixtures produced by continuous type mixers num to num minutes after depositing the concrete .
num c readymixed .
when electing to use readymixed concrete prevent delays in delivery and placing concrete .
provide a means of direct voice communication between the inspector at the job site and the inspector at the plant .
num truck mixing .
accurately measure and control the entire quantity of mixing water to within num percent accuracy .
mix each batch no less than num revolutions at the plant site at the rate of rotation the manufacturer specifies for a mixing speed .
the department will allow a reduction in mixing to num revolutions when the batch is charged so that all ingredients including water are uniformly blended during charging to produce a satisfactory mixture .
in this case mix the concrete an additional num revolutions at the specified mixing speed at the job site .
when the engineer allows additional water or admixtures at the job site mix the concrete an additional num revolutions at the specified mixing speed after addition .
perform any additional mixing at a lower speed as the mixer manufacturer specifies for agitation and continuously agitate until discharging the batch .
replace or repair any truck mixer that does not produce a uniform mixture .
num central plant mixing .
when using a centralmixing plant mix the concrete in an approved drum type mixer or pan type mixer .
for drum type mixers having a rated capacity of num cubic yards or less mix for a minimum of num seconds .
for mixers having capacities greater than num cubic yards mix for a minimum of num seconds .
the department will allow a reduction in the minimum mixing time for drum type mixers from num to num seconds when the concrete ingredients are uniformly blended during the charging of the mixer .
in order to attain uniform blending charge the batch so that the flows of water coarse aggregate fine aggregate and cement are started continued and ended simultaneously or nearly simultaneously .
for pan type mixers having a rated capacity of num cubic yards or less mix for a minimum of num seconds .
increase the mixing time for pan type mixers having rated capacities greater than num cubic yards by num seconds for each num cubic yards over that allowed for the numcubic yard mixer .
any fraction of num cubic yards is considered to be num cubic yards .
the engineer may increase the minimum mixing time for any type of mixer if the mixer does not produce the desirable quality with respect to uniformity of mixture slump and air content or upon proof by tests that concrete of an undesirable quality with regard to compressive strength would be prevented by additional mixing .
measure the mixing time from the time all cement and aggregates are charged into the mixer until the mixer is ready for discharging .
deliver concrete for use at points other than the central plant site in approved truck mixers .
start agitating immediately after introducing the batch into the mixer and continue without interruption until discharging the batch .
completely discharge each batch before introducing the succeeding batch .
the department will allow the delivery of centralmixed concrete without agitation to a structural unit having a volume not exceeding num cubic yards provided the time of delivery does not exceed the numminute limit listed in the time of discharge limits table in subsection num and the interval between delivery of batches does not exceed num minutes .
num placing concrete .
a general .
deliver concrete to its final position of placement within the time required for delivery after mixing and within the required time interval between delivery of batches as specified for the method of mixing and handling employed .
moisten forms and reinforcement with water immediately before num placing the concrete .
ensure that all equipment used for handling or placing concrete accommodates concrete of the proportions and consistencies as specified .
the engineer will make no adjustments in mixture proportions to accommodate equipment incapable of handling concrete of specified proportions and consistencies .
whenever possible completely remove water from all foundation excavations before depositing concrete .
when it is necessary to deposit concrete under water place concrete according to the requirements specified .
employ methods and manners of placing concrete that avoid segregation or separation of aggregates or displacement of reinforcement .
the department will allow the use of long chutes troughs belts and pipes for conveying concrete from the mixing plant or point of delivery to the forms only with the engineers written permission .
when the engineer allows such conveyers and the quality of concrete or methods of placing or working it are not satisfactory discontinue their use and reequip his plant or conveyance to place concrete in a satisfactory manner .
arrange and use troughs pipes or chutes used as aids in placing concrete so that ingredients of the concrete are not separated .
where steep slopes are required equip the chutes with baffle boards or provide the chutes in short lengths that change the direction of movement .
maintain all chutes troughs and pipes clean and free from coating of hardened concrete by thoroughly flushing with water after each run or when out of operation for more than num minutes .
discharge water used for flushing clear of inplace concrete .
use troughs pipes and chutes that are either metal or metal lined and extend as near as possible to the point of deposit .
do not use aluminum or aluminum alloy troughs pipes or chutes that have surface damage or for lengths greater than num feet .
do not drop concrete in excess of num feet without using pipe or tremies and do not deposit a large quantity at any point and run or work it along the forms .
when pumping equip the delivery pipe with a nozzle having a minimum of num right angles at the discharge end .
alternate nozzles or restriction devices may be allowed with prior approval by the engineer .
maintain the discharge end of the pipe as close to the point of deposit as feasible .
place concrete to entirely fill but not bulge or distort the forms or to disturb their alignment .
fill each part of the forms by depositing concrete as near its final position as possible to work the coarser aggregate back from the face and to force concrete under and around reinforcing bars without displacing them .
after concrete has taken its initial set avoid jarring the forms or placing any strain on ends of projecting reinforcement .
consolidate concrete in all bridges and box culverts with a mechanical vibrator operated within the mass of concrete .
consolidate concrete in all other concrete construction exclusive of pavement either by vibration as described herein or with approved spading tools .
when vibrating concrete the engineer will require spading in addition to vibrating to prevent formation of honeycomb voids and air pockets against the forms except for concrete placed in pavements bridge slabs footings and culvert slabs .
provide vibration of sufficient intensity and duration to cause flow or settlement of the concrete and complete consolidation but ensure that vibration is not used to cause concrete to flow over long distances in the forms or is unduly prolonged to cause segregation or undesirable laitance at the surface of the lift being consolidated .
use plastic coated vibrators when necessary to prevent damage to the epoxy coating of the steel .
provide and use a sufficient number of mechanical vibrators to ensure that consolidation can be started immediately after concrete has been deposited in the forms .
do not attach the mechanical vibrator to the forms or reinforcing steel or apply to the surface of the concrete .
apply the vibrator to the concrete immediately after depositing the concrete and move it throughout the mass thoroughly working the concrete around the reinforcement embedded fixtures and into angles and corners of the num forms .
design forms to provide for requirements of vibration .
place concrete in continuous horizontal layers not exceeding a thickness of one foot unless otherwise specified for different types of structures .
in any given layer place and consolidate consecutive batches before the preceding batch has taken its initial set .
ensure that each layer of concrete retains a rough surface to secure efficient bonding with the next layer .
consolidate a succeeding layer placed before the underlying layer has set in a manner that will entirely break up and eliminate the tendency to produce a cold joint between layers .
construct the bridge seats comprising the area of that portion of the pier or abutment tops receiving steel bridge bearings to an elevation of num inch greater than that specified in the plans for an area in excess of the bearing area occupied by masonry bearing plates .
construct this excess material for the bearing area with mortar of the same proportions as that in the concrete and cast it monolithic with the pier or abutment .
prevent the coarse aggregate from being placed within num inch of finished elevation specified in the plans .
immediately after depositing the mortar strike the surface off by means of a wooden float .
when the concrete has thoroughly hardened finish it to the true correct elevation specified in the plans by tooling and polishing .
test the finished surface with a spirit level and ensure that there is no variation in excess of num inch above or below a true level plane .
when temporarily discontinuing placing clean the concrete after it becomes firm enough to retain its form of laitance and other objectionable material to a sufficient depth to expose sound concrete .
to avoid visible joints as far as possible upon exposed faces make construction joints according to subsection num .
regulate the method and manner of placing concrete so as to place all construction joints across regions of low shearing stress and in locations that will be hidden from view the greatest possible extent .
use methods and sequences of placing concrete for various types of concrete bridge construction as specified for the particular type of construction involved .
deposit and consolidate concrete to form a compact dense and impervious mass of uniform texture having smooth faces on exposed surfaces .
when any section of concrete is defective remove and satisfactorily replace or repair it as directed .
b placing concrete under water .
do not expose concrete to the action of water before setting or deposit it in water except upon the engineers written permission .
mix all concrete deposited under water in proportions specified for class a modified .
place concrete deposited under water in its final position by means of a tremie or by other approved methods .
do not disturb it after depositing .
provide a sufficient number of tremies or other approved devices to ensure proper distribution of concrete to all portions of the seal .
maintain calm water at the point of deposit .
do not place any concrete in flowing water .
ensure that all form work such as interlocking sheeting designed to retain concrete under water is watertight .
regulate the consistency of the concrete to prevent segregation of materials .
maintain the surface of the concrete as nearly horizontal as practical at all times .
to ensure thorough bonding place each succeeding layer before the preceding layer has taken its initial set .
close the discharge end at the start of work to prevent water from entering the tube .
induce the flow of concrete by slightly raising the tremie but always keeping the discharge end in the deposited concrete .
stop the flow by lowering the tremie .
provide a continuous flow and unless unavoidable do not interrupt it until completing the work .
the department will allow dewatering when the concrete is sufficiently strong to withstand hydrostatic pressure but in no case in less than num calendar days after placing or such additional length of time as the engineer may direct .
remove all laitance or other unsatisfactory material from the exposed surfaces num by scraping chipping or other means which will not injure the concrete surface as the engineer directs .
when it is necessary to use a concrete seal in construction of a foundation construct it as hereinafter described .
a concrete seal in a foundation is that volume of concrete placed under water by means of a tremie or other approved means for sealing the entire bottom area of the excavated pit within the cofferdam against hydrostatic pressure to dewater the excavation and construct the remainder of the foundation in dewatered forms .
use class a modified concrete for the seal and in general make the thickness of the seal course num times the hydrostatic head exerting pressure on the bottom of the foundation or of a thickness as specified in the plans .
place the corners of the seal to an elevation lower than the remaining surface of the seal course for the purpose of dewatering .
in such cases do not exceed an elevation difference between the corners and the remaining surface of num inches .
c placing flowable fill .
to place flowable fill requires a minimum trench width of num inches clearance on each side of the pipe .
the engineer will allow standing water to be in the trench when backfilling with flowable fill .
deep trenches may require bleeder trenches or placement in layers to drain excess water .
because certain types of pipe may float backfill in lifts or anchor the pipe when necessary .
backfilling in lifts is more applicable to long lines of pipe allowing time for a substantial amount of the water to dissipate before applying the next lift .
the department will allow the use of adequately spaced anchors made of small lumber or metal straps to anchor the pipe .
for larger diameter pipe it may be possible to maintain a surge of flowable fill on top of the pipe to prevent floating .
floating usually does not occur after the level of the backfill is above the springline of the pipe .
ensure that the pipe remains in the correct horizontal position and elevation .
place flowable fill by discharging directly from truck chutes into the trench or place by means of conveyors buckets or pumps .
when pumping fill the voids adequately with solid particles to provide cohesion during the transport through the pump line under pressure to prevent segregation and line blockage .
maintain continuous flow through the pump line to prevent segregation and line blockage .
place the flowable fill from the top of the compacted bedding to the bottom of the pavement structure .
unless the engineer directs otherwise allow a minimum of num hours before adding and compacting any material above the flowable fill .
to expedite settling and hardening in cool weather drain or pump the bleed water from the surface or overfill the trench to allow bleed water to flow out .
when overfilling remove all excess material after hardening .
the flowable fill will bleed water within num to num minutes after placement .
the release of water by bleeding causes the solid particles to realign and become firm .
a delay in bleeding indicates there are too many fines in the mixture or insufficient water .
if the maximum water was added reduce the fly ash quantity in increments of num pounds until the mixture bleeds freely .
add approximately num pounds of sand to replace each numpound increment of fly ash to maintain the original yield .
when num increment reductions num pounds total do not promote free bleeding of the mixture evaluate other possible remedies .
the flowable fill is too dry when cracks develop as it flows into place .
d weather limitations and protection .
designate an employee for the engineer to contact in case of unexpected situations .
the department reserves the right to discontinue concrete placement when the means of protection or method of placement does not produce satisfactory results .
maintain the temperature of the mixture at or below num f during placement .
unless the engineer determines that safety concerns or other considerations prohibit a shutdown cease concrete production when the mixture exceeds num f until adequate methods are in place to reduce or maintain the num mixture temperature .
ensure that the temperature of the concrete mixture immediately before placing in bridges or box culverts is between num and num f. when the ambient air temperature is above num f cool the temperature of the forms reinforcing steel steel beam flanges and other surfaces that will come in contact with the mixture to below num f by means of a water spray or other approved methods .
allow excess water to drain or remove it from the forms before placing concrete .
do not place concrete in box culverts or bridges if the ambient temperature exceeds num f. maintain a minimum surface concrete temperature of num f for num calendar days after placement and at a minimum surface concrete temperature of num f for an additional num calendar days unless acceptable cylinder strength is achieved as determined by the engineer .
do not place concrete during times of the year that ambient temperatures may be expected to drop below the num f or num f limits unless there are adequate provisions at the job site for maintaining concrete at the specified temperature .
do not place concrete in contact with any material coated with frost or having a temperature of numf or lower .
submit a written plan detailing the methods to be used for protecting concrete for the engineers review .
when performing cold weather concrete work provide and install recording thermometers or other approved temperature measuring devices .
in cold weather heat all water andor aggregate so the temperature of the mixed concrete is no less than num f or more than num f at the time of placement .
to avoid the possibility of flash set when water or aggregate is heated to above num f mix the water and aggregate before adding the cement and do not exceed a temperature of num f for the mixture of water and aggregate when adding the cement .
when using artificial heat provide a means to maintain adequate moisture in the air within the enclosure .
maintain surfaces of all concrete in a moist condition as specified for curing during the entire curing period .
when using artificial heat do not exceed a temperature of num f for concrete near the source of heat and maintain the temperature of concrete remote from the source of heat higher than the designated num f or num f for the time of curing after placement .
when using stoves or salamanders make adequate provisions for fire protection .
assume all risk connected with placing concrete under these conditions and even with the engineers permission to do the work take responsibility for proper results .
should concrete placed under such conditions prove unsatisfactory remove and replace it with satisfactory concrete .
do not use fly ash or type nump cement in bridge decks jpc pavement jpc base or jpc shoulders between november num and march num if the item is to be opened to public traffic and exposed to deicing salts .
if the item will remain closed to public traffic until the following spring or later the department will allow the use of fly ash or type nump cement during this period .
num construction joints .
a general requirements for structures .
when work of placing concrete is delayed until the concrete attains its initial set deem the point of stopping to be a construction joint .
locate construction joints in the structure as specified in the contract for the different types of structures but when the volume of concrete is too great to be placed without the use of additional construction joints locate and construct the additional construction joints without impairing the strength or appearance of the structure as the engineer approves .
avoid construction joints through paneled wingwalls or other surfaces to be treated architecturally .
to avoid visible joints as far as possible upon exposed faces finish the top surface of concrete adjacent to the forms by smoothing with a masons plastering trowel .
where a featheredge might be produced at a construction joint as in the sloped top surface of a wingwall use an inset form work to produce a blocked out num portion in the preceding layer that produces an edge thickness of num inches or more in the succeeding layer .
do not stop or temporarily discontinue work on any section or layer within num inches below the top of any face unless details of the work provide for a coping having a thickness less than num inches .
when the details provide for a coping having a thickness less than num inches the engineer may allow placement of the construction joint at the underside of the coping .
whenever construction joints are required and in the opinion of the engineer an insufficient quantity of reinforcement is projecting to secure satisfactory bond accomplish bonding as specified in b below .
b bonding construction joints for structures .
in joining fresh concrete to concrete that has already set or to preceding layers thoroughly clean the surface of work already in place of all laitance loose and foreign material .
then wash and scrub this surface with wire brooms and thoroughly drench with water until saturated .
keep the surface saturated until placing new concrete .
immediately before placing new concrete draw all forms tight against concrete already in place .
after interrupting concrete placement and forming a construction joint interlock with the succeeding concrete by forming suitable keys in the concrete .
form these keys by inserting and subsequently removing beveled wood strips .
thoroughly saturate the wood strips with water before inserting them .
the department may allow the use of steel dowels instead of keys .
the engineer will determine the size and placement of keys and dowels .
c nonstructural concrete items .
when nonstructural concrete items are constructed on top of rigid pavement ensure that construction joints in the non structural items coincide with the pavement joints .
install expansion joint material num inch thick and cut it to conform to the cross section of the non structural item at all construction joints .
when a construction joint is within num feet of a break in alignment or a drainage structure treat the construction joint as a contraction joint .
num falsework .
design and construct falsework that provides the necessary rigidity supports the loads imposed and produces in the finished structure the lines and grades specified in the plans .
have a registered professional engineer design all falsework that is not a department standard design for structures with clear span lengths of num feet or more and all falsework where traffic openings are specified .
furnish the engineer detailed working drawings in triplicate and design calculations for falsework .
do not begin any falsework construction until the engineer has reviewed the falsework drawings .
take full responsibility for any falsework constructed prior to the engineers review of falsework drawings .
do not place any concrete until the engineer has completed the review of the falsework drawings .
provide time for the engineer to complete this review that is proportionate to the complexity of the falsework design however always provide at least num weeks .
for falsework over railroads or navigable streams the engineers review of the falsework drawings will be contingent upon the drawings being satisfactory to the railroad company involved us coast guard army corps of engineers or other agency having jurisdiction as applicable .
the department will allow the revision of falsework drawings at any time .
when requesting a revision allow sufficient time for the engineers review before starting construction on the revised portion .
when using footing type falsework foundations decide the bearing value of the soil and show the values assumed in the design of the falsework on the falsework drawings .
show assumed values for both wet and dry soil conditions .
construct slab forms between girders with no allowance for settlement relative to the girders .
ensure that the design load for falsework consists of the sum of dead and live vertical loads .
include the weight of concrete reinforcing steel forms and falsework in the dead loads .
assume the weight of concrete reinforcing steel and forms to be no less than num pounds per cubic foot of concrete .
in addition to the full dead load assume a live load of num num pounds per square foot for horizontal surfaces and finishing machine weight if necessary in the design of falsework and centering .
design the falsework so that horizontal loads are resisted in any direction by diagonal bracing blocking ties or other means the engineer approves to be no less than num percent of the total dead load .
design falsework footings to carry the load imposed upon them without exceeding the estimated soil bearing values and all anticipated settlements .
when posttensioning the concrete design the falsework to support any increased or readjusted loads caused by the posttensioning .
ensure that the design of all plywood form panels and studs supporting them is as specified for forms .
design all joists supporting slabs and overhangs as falsework .
when falsework is over or adjacent to roadways or railways install all details of the falsework system which contribute to horizontal stability and resistance to impact at the time each element of the falsework is erected and leave them in place until removing the falsework .
construct falsework to reasonably conform to falsework drawings .
use materials in the falsework construction of the quality necessary to sustain stresses required by the falsework design .
use workmanship in falsework construction of such quality that the falsework will support the loads imposed without excessive settlement or deformation .
use suitable jacks or oak wedges in connection with falsework to set the forms to the required grade and to take up any excessive settlement in the falsework either before or while placing concrete .
if unanticipated events occur including undue settlements which in the opinion of the engineer would prevent obtaining a structure conforming to the contract discontinue placing concrete and provide corrective measures satisfactory to the engineer .
in the event satisfactory measures are not provided before initial set of the concrete in the affected area discontinue placing concrete at a location the engineer determines .
remove all unacceptable concrete .
do not place temporary supports or shoring under prestressed concrete or structural steel girders when paving bridge slabs or when taking top of beam elevations .
when placing falsework installations over or adjacent to an open public road include design considerations and protection to ensure that the falsework system is not disturbed by errant highway vehicles or from vibration forces caused by passing vehicles .
include provisions to protect traffic from falling objects .
num forming .
a forms for structures .
clean the inside surfaces of forms of all dirt mortar and foreign material .
thoroughly coat forms which will later be removed with form oil before use .
do not deposit concrete in forms until completing all work connected with constructing the forms placing all materials required to be embedded in the concrete for the unit to be poured and the engineer has inspected forms and materials .
control the rate of depositing concrete in forms to prevent over stressing the forms due to fluid pressure .
provide forms for all concrete surfaces not completely enclosed or hidden below the permanent ground surface that conform to the requirements herein for forms for exposed surfaces .
the engineer will consider interior surfaces of underground drainage structures the same as to be completely enclosed surfaces .
prior to using the forming system for exposed surfaces and when the engineer requests furnish the engineer the form design and materials data so the engineer may verify compliance with this section .
design and construct forms for exposed concrete surfaces so the formed surfaces of concrete do not deflect excessively in any direction between studs joists form stiffeners form fasteners or wales .
place plywood with the face grain perpendicular to the studs or joists .
if placement of the plywood with the num grain parallel to the studs or joists is desired furnish the engineer calculations showing that excessive deflection or stresses will not occur .
provide a clear span between supporting studs or joists that is no more than num times the thickness of the form facing and that does not deflect more than num of the clear span .
should any form or forming system even though previously reviewed before use produce a surface with excessive bulges discontinue its use until making modifications satisfactory to the engineer .
form all exposed surfaces of each element in a concrete structure with the same forming material or with materials which produce similar surface textures color and appearance .
face forms for exposed surfaces with form panels .
only use form panels in good condition free of defects such as scars dents or delaminations for exposed surfaces .
in general furnish and place form panels for exposed surfaces in uniform widths of num feet or more and in uniform lengths of num feet or more except where the dimensions of the member formed are less than these dimensions .
arrange panels in symmetrical patterns conforming to the general lines of the structure .
precisely align form panels on each side of the panel joint using supports or fasteners common to both panels to obtain a continuous unbroken concrete plane surface .
construct forms for exposed surfaces with num inch chamfer strips attached to prevent mortar runs and to produce smooth straight chamfers at all sharp edges of the concrete .
grinding of chamfers is not allowed as a primary construction method .
grinding is only acceptable as a means of correction or repair as approved by the engineer .
use form fasteners consisting of form bolts clamps or other devices as necessary to prevent spreading of the forms during concrete placement .
do not use twisted wire loop ties to hold forms in position .
the department will allow casting of anchor devices into the concrete for later use in supporting forms or for lifting precast members when the engineer allows .
do not use driven types of anchorages for fastening forms or form supports to concrete on bridge decks .
construct all forms to allow removal without damaging the concrete .
frame forms for copings offsets railings and all ornamental work so there will be no damage to or marring of the concrete when removing the forms .
leave openings in forms at intervals no greater than num feet vertically .
ensure that the openings are adequate to allow free access to the forms for the purpose of inspection working and vibrating the concrete .
set and maintain all forms true to lines and grades designated until the concrete has hardened .
after placing concrete remove the forms according to subsection num .
for narrow walls where access to the bottom of forms is not readily attainable otherwise leave the lower form boards loose so they may be removed to remove all chips dirt sawdust or other extraneous material from inside the forms immediately before placing concrete .
construct metal ties or anchorages within the forms to allow their removal to a depth of at least one inch from the face without injury to the concrete .
design all fittings or metal ties such that upon their removal the cavities that remain will be the smallest possible size .
regardless of their position in the completed construction ram and fill cavities with mortar and ensure that the surface is sound smooth even and uniform in color .
when using ordinary tie wires within the forms for areas where concrete will be exposed and will receive surface finish cut back all wires at least num inch from the face of the concrete with chisels or nippers .
fill the resulting cavities with mortar and ensure that the surface is sound smooth even and uniform in color .
use nippers for cutting wires in fresh concrete .
cut the wires that are not included within the areas where the concrete will receive surface num finish flush with the concrete surface .
the engineer will not require grouting unless concrete is damaged in cutting wires .
maintain forms that are intended for reuse in good condition to ensure accuracy of shape strength rigidity mortar tightness and surface smoothness .
do not use forms that are unsatisfactory in any respect in the opinion of the engineer and remove them immediately from the job site .
use forms for circular section concrete columns that are plastic plastic lined metal or other approved material in order to provide a smooth and true surface free from fins joints and other irregularities .
apply the above wooden form specifications relative to design mortar tightness filleted corners beveled projections bracing alignment removal reuse and oiling to metal forms also .
countersink all bolt heads .
design clamps pins or other connecting devices to hold the forms rigidly together and to allow removal without injury to the concrete .
keep metal forms free from rust grease or other foreign matter that may discolor the concrete .
b forms for nonstructural construction .
provide forms used for non structural construction free from warps of sufficient strength to resist warping during construction and of a height approximately equal to the depth of the section to be constructed .
thoroughly clean oil well and securely stake brace and hold forms to the required line and grade before depositing any concrete .
use approved flexible forms for construction of circular sections where the radius is num feet or less .
c slip forming for nonstructural construction .
the department will allow the use of slip form or extruding machines for nonstructural concrete items whose design is compatible with the slip form or extrusion process .
for concrete placed by the slip form or extrusion process the engineer may waive the minimum slump requirements for the concrete being placed .
control the slump so that during each continuous run the maximum range of slump between the various batches or loads does not exceed one inch .
produce items by the slip form or extrusion process that are comparable in quality to those produced by use of side form methods .
when work is not satisfactory the engineer may require the use of side forms instead of the slip form or extrusion process as well as corrective work .
d slip forming for bridge barrier wall .
the department will allow slip form construction of bridge barrier wall when the engineer approves test sections .
test sections will be the first num feet in length and may be poured on the structure with the engineers prior approval .
if test sections are unacceptable the contractor will remove the entire test section at no expense to the department .
core or slice the test section as the engineer directs .
the engineer will review the cores or slices to ensure concrete consolidation around the horizontal steel reinforcement .
when concrete is not consolidated around the steel or the quality is not comparable to the side form methods the engineer may require the use of side forms and corrective work .
the engineer may waive the minimum slump requirements .
control the slump so that during each continuous run the maximum range of slump between the various batches of loads does not exceed one inch .
conform to the alignment tolerance requirements of subsection num .
construct joints and bevels according to the plans .
construct barrier wall to the dimensions specified on the plans .
num camber .
set falsework and forms to provide structural camber indicated or as directed .
num removal of falsework and forms .
in determination of time for removal of falsework and forms consider the location and character of the structure weather and other conditions influencing hardening of the concrete and materials used in the mixture .
do not remove falsework centering and falsework supporting any concrete work or loosen any wedges without obtaining the engineers permission .
even with the num engineers permission take full responsibility for the safety of the work .
the department will allow the removal of forms for ornamental work railing parapets and vertical surfaces that do not carry loads after num hours unless otherwise directed or approved .
column forms may be removed after num hours provided no significant structural loads will be placed before adequate concrete strength is reached .
num the department will allow the removal of supporting forms and falsework for structural units subjected to bending stresses num days after placing the last concrete in the unit upon conformance to the following conditions a advise the engineer in writing at least num hours in advance of placing concrete that early removal is necessary or desirable and request that additional cylinders for the required testing be made .
b submit for approval a written request for the intended use of any special procedures or modifications to the mixture such as increased cement content use of type iii cement use of high range water reducing admixture .
if supplying a high range water reducing admixture subject to the engineers approval the department will allow the use of a higher than specified slump .
c ensure that results of the compressive strength tests demonstrate a minimum of num the required numday compressive strength for the class of concrete specified .
the engineer will sample for compressive strength at the minimum frequencies indicated in the manual of field sampling and testing practices .
the department will cast and test compressive strength cylinders according to km num and astm c num respectively .
cure cylinders to be tested for early removal of forms and falsework as nearly as possible in the identical manner that the concrete in the structural unit is cured .
the engineer will allow early removal of forms and falsework when all of the cylinders achieve the specified minimum compressive strength .
upon conforming to the above conditions the department will allow the removal of supporting forms and falsework for structural units subjected to bending stresses to begin num days after placing the last concrete in the unit .
num if early release cylinders are not requested or have failed strength requirements do not remove the falsework centering and forms supporting any girder slab beam arch or member subject to direct bending stress or forms inside concrete barrels until the minimum curing time has elapsed as shown in the following table .
the engineer will take air temperature readings at approximately num am and num pm each day during the curing period and determine the average temperature from those readings .
the curing time will start after placing the last concrete in the member considered .
the engineer will add one day to the following calendar days shown in the table for each day the average ambient air temperature falls below num f. num required time in calendar days before removing forms and falseworknum item average ambient temperature during curing period num to num f num to num f num f or more box culverts spans num feet or less num num num box culverts spans num to num feet inclusive num num num slab and girder spans num feet or less including slab spans between steel girders num num num slab and girder spans num to num feet inclusive including slab spans between steel girders num num num slab and girder spans over num feet including slab spans between steel girders num num num caps of concrete pile bents open column abutments and piers num num num caps of piers with copings extending num feet or less beyond web walls num num num curbs or slabs overhanging num feet or less and rails in open handrails num num num falsework under web walls num num num curbs or slabs overhanging more than num feet num num num walls columns and vertical sides of beams and girders num hours min .
as the engineer directs numfor mixtures using type ip cement or fly ash see subsection num num remove falsework and centering in such a manner and sequence that allows concrete to uniformly and gradually take the stresses due to its own weight .
remove forms without defacing the structure .
always remove forms from the sides of columns and piers before removing falsework or centering beneath girders beams or other members that they will support so the engineer may inspect the quality of concrete .
the engineer will not grant any extension of time to complete work due to falsework remaining in place during curing .
num box culvert top slab forms may be removed earlier than num days .
submit special mix design and early release cylinder plan to the engineer for approval if removal of forms earlier than num days is desired .
num opening to traffic .
conform to the following requirements for the time of opening a completed structure to traffic or application of significant loads .
the engineer will consider construction equipment passing over a structure to be traffic .
num num the engineer will allow early opening to traffic or application of significant loads under the same criteria as early removal for forms and falsework with the following additional requirements a ensure that results of the compressive strength tests demonstrate a minimum of num the required num days compressive strength for the class of concrete specified .
b when possible continue to cure concrete for the time specified in the following table even when the specified strength requirements have been met .
num if early release cylinders are not requested or have failed strength requirements do not open the structure to traffic or subject it to significant loads until the minimum time has elapsed as specified in the required time in calendar days before removing forms and falsework table in subsection num and the required time in calendar days before applying significant loads on concrete structures table in this subsection .
the curing time will start after placing the last concrete in the structure with the exception of handrails not designed as load supporting members .
the engineer will add one day to the following calendar days shown in the table for each day the average ambient air temperature falls below num f. the engineer will take air temperature readings at approximately num am and num pm each day during the curing period and determine the average temperature from those readings .
num required time in calendar days before applying significant loads on concrete structures item average ambient temperature during curing period num to num f num to num f num f or more box culverts spans num feet or less num num num box culverts num to num feet inclusive num num num slab and girder spans num feet or less including slab spans between steel girders num num num slab and girder spans num to num feet inclusive including slab spans steel girders num num num slab and girder spans over num feet including slab spans between steel girders num num num overhanging slabs age before barrier walls are placednum num num num caps on concrete pile bents open column abutments and piers concentrated loads as produced by steel superstructures or precast concrete num num num distributed loads as produced by pouredin place concrete deck girder superstructures num num num class d piles moved or drivennum num num num class d hes piles moved or drivennum num num num class d modified piles moved or drivennum num num num backfill against abutments or retaining walls num num num pole and sign base foundations setting the poles or truss legs tensioning of messenger cables or installation of overhead trusswork .
num num num num num num num see subsection num .
num no strength requirements apply .
num the engineer will not apply time limits when falsework is designed to support barrier wall .
num joints .
a expansion and contraction joints for structures .
construct expansion joints to allow absolute freedom of movement .
after completing all work use a fine chisel to carefully remove all loose or thin shells or mortar likely to spall under movement from expansion joints .
provide and place expansion joints at locations specified in the plans and num standard drawings as follows num friction or sliding joints .
friction or sliding joints may be either metal neoprene rubber or premolded filler type as specified .
num open joints .
place at locations designated and form by insertion and subsequent removal of a template of timber metal or other suitable and approved material .
use a method of insertion and removal of joint templates that avoids the possibility of chipping or breaking the edges and construct the templates so removal is readily accomplished without injury to the work .
do not extend reinforcement across an open joint unless specified in the plans .
carefully set structural steel angles channels plates or other shapes used in connection with open joints to conform to the crown and grade of the bridge deck .
construct the joint with a uniform opening and to dimensions specified in the plans .
num special types .
use special types other than those listed when specified in the plans or when the engineer so orders in writing .
furnish special details for such joints .
b expansion joints for nonstructural items .
install expansion joints at all breaks in alignment and at all locations where one concrete construction abuts another concrete or other type construction .
install expansion joints at each num feet of continuous construction .
the engineer will not require steel reinforcement in expansion joints .
when another concrete item crosses an expansion joint in jpc pavements construct the expansion joint for the structural or nonstructural concrete item one inch wide and construct all other expansion joints num inch wide .
the engineer will not require expansion joints in paved ditches except at locations where the paved ditch abuts another structure .
cut the oneinch thick expansion joint material to conform to the cross section of the concrete .
c contraction joints for nonstructural concrete items .
either form numinch wide contraction joints for nonstructural concrete items or construct them according to requirements of this subsection at intervals not to exceed num feet except when items are constructed on or adjacent to a rigid pavement or shoulder .
for these exceptions make the joint spacing coincide with that of the pavement or shoulder .
space contraction joints for sidewalks as specified in section num .
the engineer will not require the sealing of contraction joints in nonstructural items .
the engineer will not require contraction joints for paved ditches .
construct sawed contraction joints to a minimum depth of num inches except that the engineer will allow one inch of depth for header curbs and integral curbs .
num curing concrete .
cure reinforced concrete bridge slabs according to subsection num .
wet cure all surfaces that are to receive a masonry coating finish unless using combination material .
when using combination material cure as specified in b below .
either wet cure all other concrete except pipe culvert headwalls as specified in a below or cure it by application of membrane forming compound as specified in b below .
the engineer will not require curing for castinplace pipe culvert headwalls .
at any time the engineer determines concrete on the project is not being properly cured the engineer may suspend all or any concreting operations on the project .
at any time during the curing period when the atmospheric temperature is num f or less protect the concrete to satisfy the temperature requirements according to subsection num d. a wet curing .
cure concrete for a period of at least num calendar days beginning immediately after placement and finishing by frequently applying water to all surfaces to keep them continuously damp during the full numcalendar day curing period or until the required strength is attained .
protect exposed concrete num surfaces from drying by application of a double thickness of wet burlap or similar approved material and keep the burlap or other approved material continuously wet for a period of num or more calendar days .
soak new burlap in water for at least num hours before the first use .
when the structure or any portion thereof is enclosed and artificial heat is provided for protection the engineer will not waive the moist curing requirement .
when using steamlines for heating leave the pipe loose so sufficient steam escapes into the housing to maintain a moist atmosphere at all times .
when using stoves or salamanders maintain vessels containing water on each stove or salamander to maintain a moist atmosphere at all times .
the department will allow the curing of flat horizontal surfaces with curing blankets .
b membrane curing .
do not dilute or alter the membrane forming curing compound .
thoroughly agitate the compound immediately before using it .
when the compound is too viscous to apply warm it in a water bath to approximately num f before applying .
uniformly apply the compound to a surface by use of an approved pressure sprayer .
the department will allow the placement of curing compound in one application .
when placing in one application achieve uniform and satisfactory coverage .
if the engineer directs that num applications are required because one application is not satisfactory then make each application at the rate of one gallon per num or less square feet .
start the first application as soon as practical after the final finish and as the engineer directs and start the second application after finishing the first application .
use a total actual application rate of at least one gallon per num square feet or less actual coverage .
do not apply curing compound to construction joints reinforcing steel or surfaces to receive a masonry coating except num the department will allow the use of materials conforming to the water retention requirements of aashto m num for liquid membrane forming curing compound and also conforming to section num for masonry coating on areas designated to receive masonry coating .
num when using combination materials follow wet curing procedures until completing all patching or other surface corrections and applying the compound .
keep the surface covered with wet burlap or other approved material and alternately expose small sections for surface corrections to avoid drying .
conform to surface preparation requirements for masonry coating in all respects .
when inadvertently applying curing compound or masonry coating to surfaces upon which the compound is not allowed for use remove it by sandblasting or highpressure water cleaning with or without abrasives added to water stream .
some compounds may require chemical removal .
when chemical cleaners are used neutralize compounds and fully rinse surface with clean water .
do not damage finished concrete .
correct any damage at no cost to the department .
allow surface to dry before proceeding .
protect the curing compound and maintain it in an acceptable condition for a period of at least num calendar days .
moisten and respray curing compound on surfaces on which the curing compound is damaged before the end of the numcalendar day curing period .
cover surfaces upon which curing compound has been applied and that will be used as work surfaces or otherwise subject to damage to the curing compound with planks boards or other protective material to protect the curing compound from damage .
c curing blankets .
only use curing blankets for curing bridge deck slabs and other flat horizontal surfaces .
keep the concrete continuously damp for the period of time specified for the item being constructed beginning immediately after placing and finishing .
as num soon as possible without damaging the concrete surface moisten the concrete by applying water and immediately cover the surface with the curing blankets .
place the blankets so that adjoining blankets overlap at least num inches .
weight all laps and outside edges to prevent displacement of the blankets before completing curing .
ensure intimate contact between the blankets and the concrete surface .
if the blankets are disturbed before the curing time expires immediately replace them .
apply water at any time drying of the concrete is evident .
immediately repair torn places in the blankets by cementing an additional thickness of the same material over the torn area .
at the end of each curing period inspect the blankets repair all tears or holes before reusing the blankets .
num surface finish .
apply the following surface finishes to various parts of concrete structures num ordinary surface finish num masonry coating finish or num floated surface finish .
apply ordinary surface finish to all concrete surfaces not required to have masonry coating finish or a floated surface finish .
consider ordinary surface finish as a final finish on all surfaces not required to have masonry coating .
ensure that exposed finished concrete surfaces do not vary more than num inch in num feet as measured from a straightedge .
a ordinary surface finish .
immediately following removal of forms remove all fins and irregular projections from all surfaces except those not to be exposed in the completed work .
on all surfaces that have cavities and depressions resulting from removal of form ties and all other holes honeycomb spots broken corners or edges and other defects thoroughly clean the defects saturate them with water and carefully point them .
use a mortar of the same cement and fine aggregates mixed in the same proportions as used in the class of concrete being finished .
do not use a mortar that is more than num minutes old and cure the mortar patches as specified for the structures .
after the mortar has thoroughly hardened finish it to obtain a uniform and smooth surface that is the same color and texture as in the surrounding concrete .
when required chip out honeycomb areas before pointing .
carefully tool all open and filled contraction and expansion joints in the completed work and keep them free of all mortar and concrete .
expose the joint filler for its full length with clean true edges .
obtain smooth and even surfaces of uniform color and texture without unsightly bulges patched areas depressions and other imperfections .
the engineer will consider individual surfaces satisfactory and in compliance with requirements for ordinary surface finish when the surfaces have been formed and finished as specified and the engineer has approved the resultant surface as to uniformity color texture and smoothness .
the engineer will consider each face of a column wing girder or parapet separately in determining if the finish is satisfactory .
protect all exposed surfaces from subsequent construction operations and from drip and disfigurement .
clean and finish any surface disfigured as a result of construction or other operations as the engineer may require to give a satisfactory surface finish .
b masonry coating finish .
after the engineer has inspected and accepted the concrete surfaces of bridges and median barriers as having a satisfactory ordinary surface finish clean the concrete surfaces specified hereinafter of all dust foreign matter and form oil and apply a department approved masonry coating finish .
coat the following surfaces including all beveled edges num num bridge end bents abutments retaining walls and headwalls for box or long span underpasses every exposed surface including wingwalls above a point num inches below ground or fill line .
num bridge pier caps the tops including exposed surfaces of pads pedestals and keys sides and ends .
do not apply the coating to bearing areas .
num bridge superstructure the tops inside and outside faces and ends of all barrier walls parapets curbs and plinths that will be exposed .
do not apply the coating to the riding surface of the bridge deck .
num median barriers all exposed surfaces of concrete median barriers and concrete terminal sections appurtenant to the barriers .
num exposed surfaces of substructure and the superstructure of highway railway and pedestrian bridges over a highway all surfaces identified in num num and num above and the underneath surfaces of slab overhangs that are outside of exterior girders and the exterior side and bottom of exterior beams girders and box beams and all exposed surfaces of piers abutments and walls that are within num feet of a public road or street .
extend the masonry coating from a point num inches below ground line to the top of the exposed surface .
thoroughly clean all surfaces to receive a masonry coating and keep them free of oil form oil grease dust dirt mud curing compound release agents loose patching mortar or any other substance that may prevent bonding .
before applying the masonry coating material fill all air holes flush with the surface with the masonry coating material or an approved mortar to provide a uniform surface .
surfaces that will receive masonry coating finish must have a roughened surface that meets manufacturers recommendations for product performance .
check all surfaces to receive a masonry coating for the presence of dust by wiping a dark cloth across the surface of the concrete .
if a white powder can be seen on the dark cloth clean the concrete by wire brushing grinding or water blasting and then allow it to thoroughly dry before applying the masonry coating .
the engineer will recheck the surface for the presence of dust after cleaning .
check all surfaces to receive a masonry coating for the presence of oily conditions by sprinkling or fogging water on the surface of the concrete .
if the water stands in droplets without spreading out immediately this indicates the surface is contaminated with an oily substance and the engineer will require cleaning using a detergent and water followed by thorough rinsing with water .
the engineer will recheck the surface for the presence of oily conditions after cleaning .
thoroughly dry all surfaces to receive a masonry coating before applying the coating unless the coating manufacturer specifically recommends the surface to be wet .
the departments list of approved materials contains each manufacturers recommendation .
the engineer will not consider surfaces to be dry unless an absorbent paper pressed tightly against the surface does not show any trace of moisture .
suspend coating application any time the ambient temperature or the temperature of the concrete does not comply with the coating manufacturers recommendations .
prior to application of the materials furnish the engineer with copies of the coating material manufacturers brochures or booklets .
apply masonry coating materials in strict conformity with the manufacturers written instructions and apply the material at a uniform rate of at least num num square feet per gallon .
satisfactorily repair or remove any portions of the coating that are not clean uniform in color texture thickness tightly bonded or that are damaged before final acceptance of the project and replace them with an acceptable finish and coating .
provide a neat uniform appearance and prevent the coating from being num dripped sprayed or otherwise deposited upon concrete or steel surfaces not designated to receive the coating .
remove any objectionable deposits or material and repair the surfaces to the engineers satisfaction .
c floated surface finish .
finish horizontal surfaces not subject to wear and those that do not receive the masonry coating finish such as back walls and headwalls by placing an excess of materials in the form and removing or striking off such excess with a wooden template forcing coarse aggregate below the mortar surface .
do not use mortar topping for surfaces falling under this classification .
after strikingoff the concrete as described thoroughly work the surface and float it by hand with a wooden float leaving a fine grained smooth sanded surface .
finish concrete bridge floors as specified in section num .
finish sidewalks on structures as specified in section num .
num construction date and identification .
on all concrete bridges and box culverts stencil the year the contract was executed and the structure drawing number on the concrete at the locations designated .
make the figures on the stencil according to details specified in the plans .
for bridges having a clear span of num feet or more stencil the year the contract was executed and load capacity of the structure on the outside face of the plinth or barrier wall as shown on the standard drawing or as directed .
on all box culverts place stenciled figures giving the year in which the contract is executed on the inlet end of the culvert on the outside face and center of the parapet or headwall .
do not use permanent plates or markers of any kind other than those shown on any structure .
on all bridges imprint the names of the prime contractor and the subcontractor when applicable in the concrete at the location shown or designated .
furnish stencils all equipment tools labor materials and other incidentals necessary .
num measurement .
num concrete .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards according to the dimensions specified in the plans .
the department will not measure the volume of concrete displaced by pile heads except when using concrete piles for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
the department will measure the volume of concrete displaced by concrete pile heads in cubic yards .
the department will not measure forming including permanent steel forms for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num steel reinforcement .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num masonry coating .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
num mass concrete .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards actually placed .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num pay unit num concrete class cubic yard num steel reinforcement see subsection num num masonry coating square yard num mass concretenum cubic yard num the department will pay for mass concrete at a unit price of num times the num delivered cost of the concrete .
when mixing concrete on site the department will pay for mass concrete at onehalf the contract unit price for that class concrete .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num steel reinforcement num description .
furnish and place steel for reinforcement of concrete .
furnish bars spirals welded wire fabric bar mat or other specified reinforcement of the quality type size and quantity designated by the contract .
num materials .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num epoxy coating material .
conform to section num .
num welded steel wire fabric wwf .
conform to section num .
num construction .
num protection of material .
handle and store steel reinforcement to prevent bending excessive rusting or contamination with objectionable substances .
num straightening .
before placing in the work straighten reinforcement bent during shipment or handling without injuring the steel .
do not heat the steel or use steel with sharp kinks .
num bending .
bend reinforcement cold to the dimensions and shapes specified in the plans and to within tolerances designated in the crsi manual of standard practice .
in bending do not injure the steel .
bend bars in the shop before shipment not in the field .
num placing and fastening .
accurately place all steel reinforcement as shown and firmly hold in position while placing and during hardening of concrete .
hold in position to within a tolerance of num inch and place to within a tolerance of num inch of specified clearance from the face of concrete except for bridge deck reinforcement steel .
place steel reinforcement for bridge slabs to within the tolerances specified in subsection num .
dimensions shown from the face of concrete to bars are clear distances .
bar spacings are from center to center of bars .
tie bars at all intersections except where spacing is less than one foot in both directions then tie alternate intersections .
always pass vertical stirrups around the main tension members and securely attach them to the members .
use engineer approved supports to maintain distances from forms .
use precast blocks composed of mortar or engineer approved metal chairs as supports for holding reinforcement from contact with the forms .
ensure that the tips of metal chair supports in contact with the surface of the concrete are plastic coated steel .
when using plastic coated steel supports provide a minimum of num inch thickness of the plastic material between the metal tips and the exposed surface of the concrete .
the engineer will accept metal supports as specified for epoxy coated bars .
securely tie down the steel placed in reinforced concrete slabs to prevent any possibility of steel rising above the specified elevation during placing vibrating and finishing the concrete as required by subsection num .
ensure that metal supports have a shape that will be easily enveloped by the concrete .
separate the top and bottom mats of bars with precast mortar blocks or by other equally suitable devices .
do not use pebbles pieces of broken stone or brick metal pipe and wooden blocks as separators .
securely place reinforcement in any member and then obtain the engineers approval before placing concrete .
the engineer may reject concrete placed in violation of this provision .
when using grout to install steel bars into existing concrete conform to section num .
num special requirements for the installation of epoxy coated bars .
num either coat all tie wires clips chair and bar supports and other metallic materials used for the installation of the epoxy coated reinforcing bars with fusion bonded epoxy resin or with an approved vinyl type material or make them of an approved nonmetallic material .
use an epoxy material that provides a uniform continuous coating having a film thickness of num num mils .
use vinyltype material that is pliable and provides a uniform continuous coating having a thickness of num num mils .
test installation devices coated with either material according to km num .
allow the engineer to check the installation devices for flaking chipping or any other defects during the prepour inspection of the epoxy coated reinforcing bars and repair or replace the devices as the engineer deems necessary .
coat tie wires with a flexible plastic or vinyl material to a thickness of num num mils .
the engineer will test the coating according to km num .
provide all systems for handling coated bars with padded contact areas for the bars whenever possible .
pad all bundling bands and lift all bundles with a strong back multiple supports or a platform bridge so as to prevent bartobar abrasion from sags in the bar bundle .
use nylon slings for direct epoxy bar contact .
use loading and unloading procedures and equipment that does not damage the coating .
unload and store the epoxy coated steel bars on the project site in a manner to avoid damage or contamination .
avoid extended outdoor storage of coated bars of over num months .
if expecting the outdoor storage to exceed num months cover the bars for protection against the elements and to prevent condensation from forming on the bars .
install the bars in the bridge deck according to applicable requirements of section num except as provided in this section and as the engineer deems necessary in order to protect and preserve the epoxy coating .
repair all cuts nicks and abrasions that exceed num percent of the surface area and the bar end with the epoxy repair material supplied by the powdered epoxy resin manufacturer .
if the total surface area covered with patching material exceeds num percent in a one foot section sheared ends not included remove and replace them with acceptable bars .
also repair any damaged metallic accessories with a suitable material .
make every reasonable effort to repair all damaged areas of the reinforcing steel and accessories before any rusting occurs .
if infrequent and small damaged areas do rust thoroughly remove the rust by sandblasting or other engineer approved methods before repairing the areas .
ensure that the coated bars when incorporated into the work are reasonably free from dirt paint oil grease or other foreign substance and when deemed necessary clean the bars to the satisfaction of the engineer .
place concrete in the deck using methods and equipment that will not damage the coated materials .
since the epoxy coating is flammable do not expose the coated bars to any fire or flame .
do not cut coated bars by burning .
num splicing .
do not splice any reinforcement that is not of the type and at the locations specified in the plans without the engineers written permission .
the department will allow the use of lapped splices welded splices mechanical couplers or other positive connection splices specified in the plans or designated by engineer .
do not weld rail steel bar reinforcement used for bridges castinplace culverts and castinplace walls .
make all splices added in the field and not specified in the plans as far from the point of maximum tensile stress in the member as practical and stagger splice points num feet or more in adjacent bars when possible .
do not use any splices which reduce the clear distance between the splice and the closest bar to less than the minimum clear distance required by the design specifications .
do not use mechanical couplers having a diameter of greater than num percent of the nominal diameter of the reinforcing bar in the top bars in beams slabs or girders in which the concrete under the top bars is num inches or more in depth .
make all splices with clean sound materials properly affixed to the members being spliced and free of any substances that would weaken or contaminate the splice or concrete surrounding the splice .
num provide lapped splices that have a length no less than that specified in the plans .
when using lapped splices in areas not specified in the plans obtain the engineers approval .
splice bars by rigidly clamping or to otherwise wire together in a manner the engineer approves .
make splices for spirals where necessary with a minimum lap of num turns of spiral .
when welding splices conform to the aws reinforcing steel welding code .
butt together and weld bars to develop in tension at least num percent of the specified yield strength of the bars .
do not use welded splices unless specified in the plans or as the engineer approves .
use mechanical couplers primarily for bars required for compression only .
use only mechanical couplers or bars designed to carry critical tension or compression that are equivalent in strength to approved welded splices num percent of the specified bar yield strength .
when the engineer allows welded splices or mechanical couplers prepare num test specimens of the spliced reinforcement for submittal to the division of materials for testing before incorporating the splices into the work and submit one additional test specimen for each num splices made .
ensure that only personnel who are qualified in conformance with the aws reinforcing steel welding code make the welded splices .
num welded steel wire fabric wwf .
overlap sheets of wwf by num or more times the nominal diameter of the longitudinal wires to maintain a uniform strength and securely fasten the sheets at the ends and edges .
num measurement .
num steel reinforcement .
the department will measure the quantity including bars used to replace test specimens by the pound in the final work based on the theoretical number of pounds .
the department will not measure clips wire chairs or other material used for fastening reinforcement in place for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure welded splicing for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
the department will base quantities of materials furnished and placed on the calculated weights of the reinforcing steel actually placed .
the department will calculate the weights based upon the following table num steel reinforcement epoxy coated .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
the department will not measure the epoxy astm standard reinforcing bars bar size nominal mass nominal dimensions round sections english and metric pounds per foot diameter inches cross section area sq .
inches perimeter inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num coating or its application for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num mechanical couplers .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num steel reinforcement pound pay unit num steel reinforcement epoxy coated pound num mechanical reinforced couplers size each num num mechanical reinforced couplers epoxy coated size each the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num foundation preparation and backfill num description .
excavate and backfill or dispose of all materials required for the construction of bridges box culverts and other structures for which excavation is not otherwise provided .
num materials and equipment .
use fabric wrapped backfill drains conforming to section num .
num construction .
remove and dispose of all materials excavated for the construction of the foundations for all structures including the removal of existing structures .
place backfill to the original ground level and perform final cleaning up .
num classification .
perform structure excavation necessary for all bridge foundations and culverts except pipe culverts as structure excavation solid rock or structure excavation common .
perform structure excavation necessary in the construction of cribwalls and retaining walls as structure excavation unclassified .
a structure excavation solid rock .
the department considers all of the following structure excavation solid rock num all rock in solid beds detached masses or ledge formations which can not be removed without blasting or quarrying .
hoerams and jackhammers may be required for solid rock removal .
num detached rocks or boulders having a volume of num cubic yards or more each .
num shale slate or coal which can not be removed without blasting or quarrying .
num rock layers interspersed with strata of earth or all conglomerate boulder formations when rock strata or boulders constitute num percent or more of the volume to be removed .
b structure excavation common .
the department considers structure excavation common as all material not classified as solid rock structure excavation .
c structure excavation unclassified .
the department considers structure excavation unclassified as all excavation regardless of the materials encountered .
num channel preservation .
when any excavation or dredging is done at the site of the structure do not excavate outside of caissons cofferdams steel piling or sheeting and do not disturb the natural stream bed adjacent to the structure without the engineers written permission .
num footing excavation .
notify the engineer at least num hours in advance of beginning structure excavation .
excavate the foundation pits to allow placing of the full width and length of footings specified in the plans with full horizontal beds .
do not use rounded or undercut corners and edges of footings .
ensure that all rock and other hard foundation material is free from all loose material cleaned and cut to a firm surface either level stepped or roughened as directed .
clean all seams and fill with concrete mortar crushed stone or sand .
when masonry is to rest on an excavated surface other than durable rock or durable shale sdi equal to or greater than num according to km num do not disturb the bottom of the excavation and do not make the final removal of the foundation material to grade until just before the masonry is to be placed .
when unsuitable foundation material is encountered excavate and replace with acceptable material as the engineer directs .
maintain the excavation free of standing water insofar as is practical .
num when the plans require the foundation for a bridge or culvert to be solid rock or shale drill into the foundation material to confirm its suitability .
drill according to the division of constructions guidance manual .
num backfilling .
use only approved materials that will provide a dense well compacted backfill .
ensure that the backfill material is free of frozen lumps vegetation debris and rock fragments larger than num inches in any dimension .
before starting backfill clear the excavated pits of all form material and rubbish and when practical dewater the pits .
place and compact backfill material in uniform horizontal lifts not exceeding one foot for stone and num inches for soil and rocksoil combination material .
for backfill that will be beneath or within a proposed embankment backfill according to subsection num .
when backfilling piers constructed in a stream bed or flood plain the department will allow material removed from the excavation as backfill material provided no large rock or broken concrete fragments are placed in contact with the structure and provided no logs stumps or rubbish are used .
backfill below normal low water elevation will not require compaction .
shape the backfilled areas lying outside the limits of roadway embankment to a uniform finish .
as a precaution against introducing unbalanced stresses in masonry walls or columns place and compact the backfill to the same elevation on both sides of culverts wingwalls piers and abutments before proceeding to the next layer .
for structures over which rock fills will be constructed first cover the structures to a minimum depth of num feet with materials placed and compacted as required for backfill .
obtain the engineers permission before backfilling against any concrete masonry structure .
num drainage .
at locations where depth to weep hole flowline is num feet or less drain backfill by installing a fabricwrapped drain .
center a fabricwrapped drain over the inlet end of each weep hole with a wide side against the concrete and glue the drain in place .
use a glue recommended by the drain manufacturer .
ensure that glue is not placed over the portion of the drain covering the weep hole .
place drains vertically at each weep hole .
when using type num drains the weak or cleat side shall face the structure unless otherwise noted in the manufacturers recommendations and the appropriate product accessories are used .
extend the drain from top of footing or from num inches below the inlet end of weep holes to num inches below subgrade elevation or in the case of box culverts to the top of the top slab .
avoid damaging or compressing the drain during backfilling .
when splices are required provide a numinch lap of fabric to be glued to the adjacent piece so the spliced drain is completely covered by fabric .
provide flaps or separate pieces of fabric to cover the top and bottom of the drain and overlap the fabric on all sides of the drain at least num inches .
at the weep hole if necessary puncture the plastic core to provide free drainage from the drain to the weep hole .
if puncturing of the core is necessary do not puncture the geotextile fabric on the outside face of the drain .
place a piece of plastic at least num inches by num inches by num inches on the outside face of the drain over the weep hole as reinforcement .
when depth to weep hole flow line is greater than num feet cover the inlet ends of weep holes with at least num cubic feet of no .
num coarse aggregate .
place the aggregate to allow free drainage but at the same time prevent the fill from washing .
from approximately num inches below the bottom of the inlet ends of the weep holes place a column of clean crushed stone or gravel at least one square foot up against the back of the wall to the upper limits of the backfill .
at the time of placing the remainder of embankment adjacent to the structure continue placing the column of stone up to subgrade elevation or in the case of box culverts to the top of the top slab .
num num cofferdams .
for foundation construction drive sheet piles for cofferdams to an elevation well below the bottom of the footings .
brace walls to ensure against collapse .
provide interior dimensions that allow sufficient clearance for the construction of forms and the inspection of their exteriors and to permit pumping outside the forms .
right reset or enlarge cofferdams that are tilted or moved laterally during the process of sinking to provide the necessary clearance .
construct cofferdams sufficiently watertight to prevent water from coming in contact with fresh concrete .
do not allow bracing to extend into the substructure masonry unless the engineer permits in writing .
submit drawings prepared by a registered professional engineer showing the design and construction methods of proposed cofferdams .
include in the drawings all necessary details and design calculations .
the type and clearance of cofferdams details that affect the character of the finished work and the safety of the installation are subject to department approval .
the department will review design details of cofferdams bracing shoring or other work .
remove all cofferdams including all sheeting and bracing after completion of the substructure without disturbing or causing damage to the finished masonry .
num foundation seals .
when conditions are encountered which in the judgment of the engineer render it impracticable to remove water from the cofferdam before placing masonry the engineer may require construction of a concrete foundation seal according to subsection num b .
do not dewater cofferdam until the concrete seal has set sufficiently to withstand the hydrostatic pressure and in no case less than num hours after placement .
the engineer may require longer than num hours .
num measurement .
the department will not measure the removal of existing structures or portions thereof in structure excavation when listed in the contract as a bid item .
the department will measure removing masonry necessary in the building of extensions to or the rebuilding of an existing structure according to section num .
the department will consider removal of existing pipe incidental to structure excavation and will deduct the interior volume of the pipe from the structure excavation quantity .
when the plans require the foundation to be solid rock or shale drilling to confirm suitability is incidental to the structure excavation .
num all structures .
when it is necessary to backfill in excess of the material excavated the department will measure the quantity of the additional material necessary for such backfill in cubic yards in its original position under borrow excavation or roadway excavation unless it is paid for as extra work .
the department will not measure dewatering excavated pits and placing and compacting backfill for payment and will consider them incidental to the structure excavation bid items .
when not listed as a bid item the department will not measure furnishing and placing fabric wrapped drains or coarse aggregate at weep holes for payment and will consider them incidental to the structure excavation bid items .
when it is necessary to construct any footing more than num feet below the elevation specified in the plans for structures except pipe culverts sewers and underdrains the department will pay for all excavation below plan elevation as extra work .
the department will not measure excavation or backfill in excess of the limits described in this section for payment .
num bridges culverts and retaining walls .
the department will measure the quantity of all excavation in its original position as that actually excavated within the limits bounded by vertical planes num inches outside the footings and parallel thereto except as follows .
the department will measure between the original ground surface and the bottom of the excavated pit except in cuts where the finished cross section will govern num and except when structures are removed the bottom of the excavation for removal shall govern .
the department will not include in the quantity the volume of the waterway of existing culverts and bridges the volume of materials removed as remove existing structure nor materials removed as incidental .
the department will not measure structure excavation for pipe culverts and pipe culvert headwalls sewer pipe or combination sewer and storm pipe .
where tie beams struts web walls overhangs or similar construction are required on the substructure above the bottom of the footings and extend beyond the area bounded by vertical planes num inches outside the footings the department will measure the excavation except that the department will measure the area bounded by vertical planes num inches outside the footings and num inches outside the neat lines of the tie beams struts web walls and other similar construction .
the department will measure between the original ground surface and a plane num inches below the bottom of the tie beams struts web walls and other similar construction .
the department will not measure excavation necessary to construct concrete encasement for an individual steel pile for payment and will consider it incidental to the pile .
the department will not measure structure excavation in the construction of timber bents or backing planks or for excavation incidental to splicing piling for payment .
num foundation preparation .
when listed as a bid item the department will measure all work performed as part of foundation preparation as a lump sum for each structure .
the department will not measure cofferdams shoring dewatering common excavation or backfill for payment and will consider them incidental to this bid item .
the department will measure structure excavation solid rock and removal of unsuitable foundation material and refill separately for payment .
the cabinet will pay structure excavation common when conditions are such that excavation is required two num feet beyond bottom of foundation elevations .
num structure excavation common .
when foundation preparation is not listed as a bid item the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards .
the department will not measure any material removed or excavated before the engineer takes measurements .
num structure excavation solid rock .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards .
the department will not measure any material removed or excavated before the engineer takes measurements .
num structure excavation unclassified .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards .
the department will not measure any material removed or excavated before the engineer takes measurements .
num foundation undercut .
when foundation preparation is not a bid item and the engineer directs that unsuitable foundation material is be excavated and replaced the department will measure the quantity of excavation as structure excavation common structure excavation solid rock or structure excavation unclassified in cubic yards as applicable which will be complete compensation for all excavation disposal backfill and all other incidentals necessary to prepare a suitable foundation .
when foundation preparation is a bid item the department will pay for foundation undercut as extra work .
num cofferdams .
the department will not measure the quantity unless it is listed as a separate bid item and will consider it incidental to the bid item structure excavation or foundation preparation .
num foundation seals .
the department will not measure the quantity unless it is listed as a separate bid item or the work is directed by the engineer .
num num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num structure excavation solid rock cubic yard pay unit num structure excavation common cubic yard num structure excavation unclassified cubic yard num borrow excavation see section num num roadway excavation see section num num foundation preparation lump sum the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num bearing piles num description .
furnish and drive prestressed concrete precast concrete cast inplace concrete or hp shape structural steel bearing piles .
num materials and equipment .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num structural steel .
conform to section num .
num welded steel pipe piles castinplace pile shells .
conform to astm a num grade num .
num miscellaneous metals .
conform to section num .
num polypropylene sleeves .
conform to the manufacturers recommendations .
num pile points .
conform to aashto m num grade num or astm a num .
furnish pile points from a supplier on the departments list of approved materials .
num equipment for driving .
a hammers .
provide hammers for driving precast or prestressed concrete piles that develop a minimum energy per blow at each full stroke of the piston of more than one footpound per each pound weight of pile being driven .
use num pounds per cubic foot as the weight of concrete in the pile being driven .
use a hammer that develops a total energy of num or more footpounds per blow .
provide hammers for driving steel piles or steel shells for castinplace piles that develop a minimum energy of num footpound for each ton of steel in the pile or shell being driven and in no case develop less than num footpounds of total energy .
use diesel powered pile hammers with a ram weighing at least num pounds to drive steel piles concrete piles and steel shells for castinplace piles .
for hammers that do not restrict the rebound of the ram use a ram num pounds or more .
if hammers with an enclosed ram are used they will have a rated equivalent energy of no less than num footpounds per blow per ton of the required bearing .
for driving concrete piles use hammers that have a rated equivalent energy of num footpounds or more per blow .
equip hammers of this type with a gage and charts that will evaluate the equivalent energy actually produced under any driving conditions .
when the engineer determines the size of the hammer to be unsatisfactory correct or replace it to produce satisfactory results .
provide the engineer with the manufacturers specifications regarding hammers on request .
b leads .
use pile driver leads that allow freedom of movement to the hammer and ensure proper distribution of hammer blows on the head of piles .
hold leads in position with guys stiff braces templates or other engineer approved means for supporting the pile during driving .
c followers .
avoid driving piles with followers if possible .
use followers only with the engineers written permission or when driving piles through water .
if using followers drive one long pile from every group of num without a follower and use this pile to determine the average bearing power of the group .
d water jets .
the department will allow the use of water jets alone or in combination with a hammer .
provide sufficient water volume and pressure at the jet nozzles and number of jets to freely erode materials adjacent to the pile .
num when using water jets and a hammer for driving withdraw external jets or stop jetting and drive the piles with the hammer to secure final penetration .
consider the difficulties encountered in driving when determining the time of withdrawal of jets .
vary this procedure until obtaining the desired results .
num construction .
num general .
a precast and prestressed concrete piles .
construct according to section num .
b castinplace piles .
construct according to section num .
use class d or d modified concrete according to the contract .
use welded steel pipe pile shells of the design and dimensions specified in the plans .
select a wall thickness for steel shells that is sufficient to withstand driving without injury and to resist harmful distortion and buckling due to soil pressure after driving .
use only watertight shells to exclude water during the placement of the concrete .
for pile shells with a fluted or corrugated section measure the diameter of the shells from crest to crest of flutes or corrugations .
use only shells equipped with heavy steel ends and with welded joints .
c steel piles .
use hp shape piles .
num limitations of use .
penetrate num feet or more into original ground and num feet or more below stream bed or to rock .
in all cases develop the required bearing value with the pile penetration .
for foundation work do not penetrate a very soft upper stratum overlying a hard stratum unless the piles penetrate the hard material a sufficient distance to rigidly fix the ends .
the department will allow the driving of precast concrete piles and prestressed concrete piles num calendar days after casting or any time thereafter provided that samples of concrete taken from the respective mixture indicate a compressive strength of at least num psi for class d concrete or num psi for class d modified concrete .
num storage and handling .
store and handle piles in a manner that avoids injury to the piles .
num preparation for driving .
a excavation .
do not drive piles until after completing excavation except for test piles and for piles that extend above the ground in the completed structure .
sufficiently excavate the area in the vicinity of the test piles before driving them to ensure that the test piles are driven only through material that will not be excavated later in constructing the footing .
ensure that the department allows driving test piles before excavating for the entire footing .
remove all material forced up between the piles to the correct elevation before placing concrete for the foundation .
b caps .
protect the heads of all precast concrete piles and prestressed concrete piles with caps of approved design having suitable cushion next to the pile head and fitting into a casting which in turn supports a timber shock block .
cut the heads of steel piles squarely .
provide a driving cap or head that has been properly grooved or made in some manner to fit and hold firmly the head of the pile being driven so that the axis of the pile is in line with the axis of the hammer .
protect tops of steel shells for castinplace piles with driving heads mandrels or other devices properly sized for the hammer according to the hammer manufacturers recommendations to properly distribute the hammer blow and to prevent damage to the shell during driving .
c pointing .
for steel piles provide cast steel points when specified or directed in num order to obtain penetration .
use pile points of the type specified in the contract or by the engineer .
weld pile points to the pile with a minimum num inch groove weld along the full outside width of each flange on the pile .
install pile points in the shop or in the field .
furnish a mill test report according to subsection num c. furnish the engineer with the manufacturers specifications .
d extensions buildups and splices .
the engineer may allow extensions splices or build ups when necessary as follows num precast and prestressed concrete piles .
perform extension or buildups according to the standard drawings .
if alternate methods for extensions or buildup are desired submit proposal to the engineer for consideration .
num castinplace piles .
make extensions splices or buildups on steel shells as specified in the plans or as directed .
num steel piles .
make extensions or splices according to the standard drawings or the division of constructions guidance manual .
weld according to subsection num .
never begin driving with a spliced pile .
when splicing is necessary use a length that will reasonably assure that bearing will be attained without additional splicing .
num methods of driving and placing .
with the engineers written permission water jet or core holes for prestressed precast or castinplace concrete piles and then place piles in the holes and drive them to secure the last few feet of their penetration .
do not jet or core holes for steel piles unless the engineer directs .
unless otherwise specified in the plans or directed prepare jetted or cored holes in compacted fills as necessary to secure the required penetration .
core holes to a maximum diameter equal to the least cross sectional dimension of the piles driven .
fill all voids that occur around a driven pile with free flowing sand .
do not drive piles in the vicinity of recently placed concrete until the concrete is sufficiently cured to prevent damage in the judgment of the engineer .
for castinplace piles drive the shells using steel heads having a projecting ring fitting inside the shell .
provide a num inch clearance between the ring and the shell .
the department will allow the use of other types of driving heads if the engineer approves .
the department will not require painting the steel shells .
provide an inspection light before and during the shell filling operation .
remove and replace improperly driven broken or otherwise defective shells or otherwise correct them to the engineers satisfaction by driving an additional pile .
the engineer will inspect all driven shells .
when the engineer approves the driven shells cut them off to a horizontal plane at the required elevation .
before placing concrete remove all water or debris from the shell .
place concrete in an approved manner that will ensure against segregation .
do not place concrete until completely driving all piles within a radius of num feet of the shell to be filled or until completely driving all the shells for any one bent or foundation .
continuously place the concrete in each pile and exercise proper care to fill every part of the shell and to ensure a dense homogeneous mixture .
the engineer will not require steel reinforcement in castinplace piles unless specified in the plans .
when specified use the type and design of reinforcement specified in the plans .
ensure that the finished tops of piles are at the elevation specified in the contract or directed by the engineer and that they project no less than num inches into pier footings and no less than num feet into end bents .
num test piles .
drive test piles of a length and at the location designated on the plans or determined by the engineer .
these piles shall be of greater length than the length assumed in the design in order to provide for any variation in soil conditions .
test piles are for the engineers use in determining capability of the contractors equipment and adequacy of design .
the engineer will determine when an adequate num bearing value has been obtained .
the contractor shall be responsible for determining pile lengths that may be necessary to obtain the required bearing values .
no claim shall be made against the department for costs of construction delays or any materials labor or equipment that may be necessary due to the contractors failure to furnish piles of a length sufficient to obtain the required bearing values or for variations in length due to subsurface conditions that may be encountered .
the same model and size pile hammer shall be used to drive the remaining piles in the structure as the one used to drive the test pile .
the same type of piles shall be used in the remainder of the group as the type tested for the group .
soundings boring logs soil profiles or other subsurface data included in the contract documents are used by the department for making preliminary estimates of quantities and should not be used for determining equipment materials or labor necessary for driving piles as required by the contract .
all test piles shall be accurately located so they may be used in the finished structure .
num determination of bearing values .
the engineer will determine when each pile in the structure has obtained an adequate bearing value .
determine the pile lengths necessary to obtain the required bearing values .
the department will determine bearing values by the specified formulas .
when specified in the contract or directed by the engineer the department will determine the bearing values by static load test .
drive piles to develop a bearing value of no less than that specified in the plans directed by the engineer or determined by static load testing .
when using water jets or cored holes in connection with driving withdraw the jets or drive the piles in the cored holes then the department will determine the bearing value .
a static load tests .
when specified in the contract or required by the engineer the department will determine the size number and bearing value of piles by actual loading tests .
perform load test according to plans or proposal notes .
b formula .
in the absence of load tests the department will determine the allowable bearing values for piles by the following formulas p num wh s num for gravity hammers p num wh s num steamair hammers for single acting p num e s num steamair hammers for double acting p num wh s num having unrestricted rebound of ram for diesel hammers p num e s num having enclosed ram for diesel hammers where p allowable bearing capacity in pounds w weight in pounds of striking parts of hammer h height of fall in feet s the penetration in inches per blow for the last num to num blows for gravity hammers and the last num to num blows for steam air or diesel hammers and e num percent of the average equivalent energy in footpounds as determined by gage attached to pile hammer and recorded during the period when the penetration per blow is being observed .
num the department will use the preceding formulas only when num the hammer has a free fall num the head of the pile is not broomed or crushed num the penetration is reasonably quick and uniform and num there is no observed appreciable bounce after the blow .
num allowable variation in driving .
use templates when specified or directed .
a exposed piles .
the engineer will not accept exposed piles in the finished structure when num during driving the pile varies more than num inch per foot from vertical or the batter position specified in the plans num the driven pile varies more than num inches from plan position at the pile cut off elevation or num the driven pile varies more than num inches from a stringline stretched between exterior piles in the exposed portion of the pile bent or group .
b unexposed piles .
the engineer will not accept unexposed piles in the finished structure when num during driving the pile varies more than num inch per foot from vertical or the batter position specified in the plans or num the driven pile varies more than num inches from plan position at the pile cut off elevation .
for either case the engineer will reference the plan position of the pile cut off elevation to determine the variation of num inch per foot .
for all piling that is unacceptable because of variations remove and replace or redrive them in an acceptable position or correct them in a manner the engineer directs .
furnish and place all additional concrete and steel reinforcement required to meet plan clearance and dimensions in footings caps or bridge seats due to variations in driving even when variations are within allowable tolerances .
num design modifications .
when it is not possible to obtain the capacity required by the plans the department will redesign the structure based on the actual bearings obtained by test piles or pile load tests .
the redesign will be at department expense and time will not accrue during redesign .
num ordering piles .
order piles of the number and lengths necessary to complete the work .
num pile protection .
when specified in the contract provide protection from negative skin friction as the contract specifies .
num unused pile lengths .
take ownership of unused lengths of piles and pile cutoffs and remove such lengths and cutoffs from the project .
num measurement .
num piles .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet for the total lengths of the various types and sizes .
splices are incidental to this item of work .
for precast or prestressed concrete piles having concrete removed in order to expose the reinforcing steel the department will consider the end of the exposed reinforcing steel num as the pile end for purposes of measurement .
the department will not measure unused lengths of piles or pile cutoffs for payment .
the department will not measure corrective work or redriven piles .
the department will not measure any additional concrete or steel reinforcement required to meet plan clearance and dimensions in footings caps or bridge seats due to variations in driving even when variations are within allowable tolerances .
num pile points .
when included as a bid item the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num test piles .
for test piles actually used as a pile in the structure the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num except that the minimum measured length for test piles will be the length specified in the plans or directed by the engineer .
the department will not measure unsatisfactory test piles that are not used as a pile in the structure .
length of test piles specified in the plans are approximate only .
the department will not measure necessary splices for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num loading tests .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
the department will not measure for payment load tests made at the option of the contractor .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num num num piles prestressed concrete size linear foot pay unit num piles castinplace size linear foot num piles steel size linear foot num pile points each num test piles linear foot num loading tests each num pilesprecast concrete size linear foot the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num prestressed and precast concrete products num description .
construct precast prestressed concrete members .
provide complete members including all steel and other materials .
members include ibeams box beams barrier walls deck units box beams and slab box culverts and piling and other structural items .
fabricate according to the departments precast and prestressed concrete products inspectors manual .
num materials and equipment .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num prestressing strands .
conform to section num .
num nonshrink grout .
conform to subsection num .
num forms .
conform to subsection num .
only use metal forms for prestressed sections except that wooden bulkheads are acceptable .
ensure that all forms are accessible for vibrating tamping and consolidating the concrete .
num styrofoam .
use material the engineer approves .
num cardboard .
use material the engineer approves .
num batching plant equipment .
conform to subsection num .
num plant certification .
ensure that all prestressed and precast concrete products supplied to department of highways projects are manufactured in a certified plant .
a requirements .
for a plant to become a certified plant ensure that the producer has the following num a production facility and other necessary equipment that conform to the contract requirements .
num a quality control program conforming to division num of the departments precast and prestressed concrete products inspectors manual .
num an acceptable record of production of quality products .
num concrete technicians responsible for design of the concrete mixture and for performing quality control and process control testing as required in subsection num and division num of the departments precast and prestressed concrete products inspectors manual .
ensure that the concrete technicians are certified as aci level i and krmca level ii as awarded by the krmca .
a level i concrete technician is responsible for quality control tests such as air content slump and molding cylinders .
a level ii concrete technician is responsible for supervising this testing .
the engineer may require retesting or recertification as deemed necessary .
b application for certification .
each year ensure that the plant submits a written application for plant certification before january num to the division of materials .
ensure that the plant submits an application for recertification when num transferring plant ownership .
ensure that the plant includes the following items with the application num company name plant address the principle officers of the company plant manager production superintendent and quality control supervisor .
num the names and certification levels of the concrete technicians responsible for design of the concrete mixture and for performing the required quality control and process control testing .
the department will place any plant that has not previously manufactured products for the department on a oneyear probationary period before qualifying it as a certified plant .
c additional prestressed concrete certification .
ensure that all prestressed concrete members supplied to the department are manufactured in a plant that is certified under the appropriate prestressed concrete institute quality control program and is designated as a pci certified plant .
num concrete production .
during production of concrete products ensure that the producer conforms to all requirements of the contract and ensure that the concrete technicians perform all quality control and process control testing required by the precast and prestressed concrete products inspectors manual .
the inspector will perform the inspection duties established by the department for the item being produced including but not limited to the duties in the departments precast and prestressed concrete products inspectors manual .
if at any time the producer is not abiding by the certification requirements the inspector will reject or accept those products not manufactured according to the contract requirements as specified in subsection num .
when production problems occur which may affect the structural integrity such as holes in webs and flanges cracks reinforcement displacement submit proposed corrective procedures to the engineer .
the department will evaluate the product and determine if it will be rejected or if corrective actions are reasonable .
if a plant consistently produces products not conforming to the requirements as set forth in this agreement the department will revoke its certification and the plant may not longer produce products for department projects until the plant corrects all deficiencies and regains certification .
num construction .
for prestressed concrete deck units use class d modified concrete of either type i or type iii cement except do not allow the cement factor to exceed num pounds per cubic yard .
ensure all noncomposite box beam concrete contains an approved corrosion inhibitor from the list of approved materials .
construct prestressed members other than concrete deck units of class d concrete that uses either type i or type iii cement except do not allow the cement content to exceed num pounds per cubic yard .
when the ambient temperature is num f or higher add a water reducing and retarding admixture to the concrete mixture for prestressed concrete products .
the engineer may direct or allow the use of water reducing and retarding or waterreducing admixture .
num mixing and batching .
conform to subsection num .
num forming .
construct formwork according to subsection num .
when the ambient temperature is above num f fog spray forms exposed to direct sunlight with water in order to cool the forms before placing the concrete mixture .
when the ambient temperature is below num f heat forms left unprotected from the weather with steam or other engineer approved methods unless the temperature of the concrete mixture to be placed is maintained at num f or greater .
fabricate voids of styrofoam or from cardboard that has been treated with a waterproofing agent .
glue and band all voids made by stacking more than one piece of num material to prevent separation during concreting operations .
the engineer will regard any evidence of separation as cause for rejection .
num casting .
accurately place all steel when required as shown or directed .
dimensions shown from the face of concrete to steel are clear distances .
spacings are from center to center of steel .
place and securely tie all steel reinforcement before placing concrete unless the engineer requires or allows otherwise .
for concrete batching equipment and procedures conform to section num .
do not begin concreting operations when the wind chill factor at the site is consistently num f or less .
place concrete continuously in each section vibrating internally or externally or both to consolidate the concrete .
do not vibrate selfconsolidating concrete scc .
overfill the forms screed off the surplus concrete and finish the top surfaces to a uniform even texture comparable to the finish produced by the forms .
give the top surfaces to be bonded to other concrete a rough finish .
initially float finish the surfaces .
perform further finishing before the concrete takes its initial set by scoring the tops of the members transversely at approximately numinch centers with a pointed tool .
remove any laitance present during the finishing operations .
vibrate in a manner that avoids displacement of any steel or enclosures and segregation of the concrete .
properly embed steel and enclosures in the concrete .
the department will allow casting of members at the job site or at any location away from the job site .
the engineer will inspect members at the site of the casting but will make final acceptance according to subsection num .
determine the compressive strength of the concrete from cylinders cast from concrete placed in the members and cured in the same manner as the concrete represented by the cylinders .
cast and test cylinders according to km num and astm c num respectively .
imprint the name or trademark of the fabricator of i beams box beams or deck units in the concrete near the abutment end of the right fascia beam or deck unit on the beginning end of each bridge .
cast the name or trademark into the concrete according to subsection num for the plate used to imprint the construction date .
the department will inspect sample and test precast units to determine their acceptability .
the fabricator is responsible for providing quality control personnel as necessary to ensure the work performed complies with all requirements of the contract .
ensure that fabricators of prestressed concrete members furnish as part of their quality control equipment a pachometer for determining the depth of concrete cover over steel reinforcement .
furnish a meter that is acceptable to the engineer .
make the pachometer available for use by both the fabricators quality control personnel and by the inspectors .
instead of tying the department will allow tack welding steel reinforcement in prestressed or precast concrete members except for prestressing steel .
num special requirements for prestress plants .
a hot weather production .
in addition to the requirements of subsection num ensure that the producer applies the following requirements to outdoor prestress operations num when the ambient temperature is above num f sprinkle or fog spray coarse aggregates .
num discontinue concreting operations when ambient temperatures are between num and num f if the producer can not effectively maintain form and concrete temperatures below num f. num discontinue concreting operations when ambient temperatures are above num f. b drawings .
have the producer submit drawings conforming to applicable requirements of subsection num for prestressed girders .
include with the shop drawings a detailed drawing including the total number of stirrups for each num different mark number and a diagram of the detensioning procedure .
the department will not require reproducible drawings .
obtain the departments completed drawing review prior to releasing fabrication .
c safety measures .
ensure that the producer takes effective safety measures to prevent injuries to personnel due to the breakage of strands or failure of anchorage devices during the tensioning operations .
ensure that the producer provides adequate protection that allows the inspector to perform his normal duties .
the inspector will report any safety precautions deemed inadequate to the division of materials .
the inspector will abide by the safety rules established by the producer provided that they do not interfere with his normal duties .
d prestressing .
ensure that the producer performs prestressing by pretensioning and provides a skilled technician knowledgeable of the pretensioning system used .
ensure that the producer conforms to the following num uses approved jacking equipment to perform prestressing .
num when using hydraulic jacks equips them with calibrated pressure gages .
calibrates the combination of jack and gage to an accuracy of num percent and furnishes a graph or table showing the calibration to the engineer .
if using other types of jacks furnishes calibrated proving rings or other devices to accurately determine jacking forces .
num accurately holds prestressing elements in position to stress by jacks .
num applies an initial force to each strand in beams or girders such as to develop a stress of num psi or such other stress as specified in the plans .
num maintains a record of the jacking force and elongations produced thereby .
num if desired cast several units for precast sections in one continuous line but stress them one at a time .
num does not transfer prestressing forces to any member or release end anchors before the concrete has attained a minimum compressive strength of num psi as determined by tests of standard cylinders cured identically as the member .
the department may require a higher strength .
num removes forms and detensions prestressed members immediately after discontinuing steam curing or heat curing while the concrete is still warm and moist when using either of these methods for curing .
num cuts or releases the elements in an order that minimizes the lateral eccentricity of the prestressing .
num the engineer will reject beams or girders having honeycomb of such extent to affect their strength or resistance to deterioration .
num makes an allowance of num times the length for shortening of beams and girders as a result of shrinkage and elastic change .
e curing .
cure according to subsection num except the producer may discontinue curing after the concrete reaches the detensioning strength .
f removal from forms .
the producer may remove and store precast prestressed members from the casting beds after the prestress force has been applied provided the engineer approves arrangements for curing and protecting .
ensure that the producer conforms to the following num fills all air voids in the inclined surfaces of all i beams with grout .
num ensures that strand holddown devices that remain in place are either a minimum of num inch from the surface of the concrete or are galvanized .
num patches all cavities .
num the producer may use other type devices when the engineer approves them .
complete all finishing operations on prestressed bridge beams within num hours of detensioning except masonry coating curbs and damage repair as the engineer directs .
num num curing .
cure members either by water curing according to subsection num or by rapid curing with low pressure steam or radiant heat .
perform low pressure steam curing or radiant heat curing under an enclosure capable of adequately containing the live steam or radiant heat .
use enclosures that allow free circulation of steam or heat about the sides ends and tops of members and are constructed to contain the live steam with a minimum moisture loss .
the department will allow the use of tarpaulins or similar flexible covers that remain in good repair .
secure the tarpaulins in a manner that prevents the loss of significant steam and moisture .
allow concrete to attain its initial set before applying the steam or heat .
after placing the concrete allow an initial set period of not less than num hours before applying the steam or heat .
when using water reducing and retarding admixtures increase the initial set period to num hours .
the department will allow determination of the time of initial set using astm c num and waive the time limits specified herein when the initial set has been reached as determined by the referenced test .
prevent surface drying during the period between placing the concrete and applying the steam or heat by covering the members after casting or by keeping the exposed surfaces wet with a fog spray or a double layer of wet burlap .
during the waiting period do not allow the temperature within the curing chamber to fall below num f. use live steam or radiant heat to maintain the curing chamber at the proper minimum temperature .
during the initial application of live steam or radiant heat allow the ambient temperature within the curing enclosure to increase at an average rate not exceeding num f per hour until reaching the curing temperature within the enclosure .
do not allow the maximum curing temperature within the enclosure to exceed num f. apply live steam on the concrete forms in a manner that does not cause localized high temperatures .
apply radiant heat using pipes circulating steam hot oil or hot water .
perform radiant heat curing under a suitable enclosure to contain the heat and minimize moisture loss by covering all exposed concrete surfaces with a plastic sheeting .
provide a method of maintaining moisture satisfactory to the engineer .
water cure precast nonprestressed nonposttensioned items for num days or rapid cure them with steam or heat overnight .
the department will allow curing to cease when the acceptance strength is reached as shown by test cylinders .
num removal of forms and surface finish .
the department will allow the removal of side forms at any time when no distortion slump or misalignment of the concrete will result .
ensure that all surfaces are free from rough open or honeycombed areas and appreciable depressions or projections .
finish or chamfer edges as directed .
when removing the forms avoid spalling or otherwise damaging the concrete .
finish members that will be exposed in the finished work according to subsection num .
finish dry cast products according to the precastprestressed concrete manual .
repair vents opened to relieve air pressure in box beams during curing using nonshrink grout .
num dimensional tolerances .
ensure that the producer furnishes members within the tolerances of the following tables .
the engineer will condition final acceptance upon satisfactory placement of the units in the structure .
num ibeams box beams with castinplace slab and precast barrier units depth flanges web and fillets num inch depth overall num inch to num inch width flanges and fillets num inch to num inch width web num inch to num inch length of beam num inch per num feet or num inch whichever is greater exposed beam ends deviation from square or designated skew horizontal num inch vertical num inch per foot of beam height side inserts spacing between centers of inserts and from the centers of inserts to the ends of the beams num inch bearing plate spacing between the centers of bearing plates num inch per num feet or num inch whichever is greater bearing plate spacing from the centers of bearing plates to the ends of the beams num inch bearing plate or bearing area deviation from a level plane num inch stirrup bars projection above top of beam when design projection is more than num inches num inch stirrup bars projection above top of beam when design projection is num inches or less num inch stirrup bars long spacing anchorage zone num inch stirrup bars long spacing num inch end stirrup bars not more than num inches from the end of the beam horizontal alignment deviation from a straight line parallel to the centerline of beam num inch per num feet camber of precast barrier units num inch per num feet camber differential between adjacent beams num inch per num feet of span to num inch max .
center of gravity of strand group num inch strand positioning num inch center of gravity of depressed stand group at the end of beam num inch position of holddown points for depressed standslongitudinal num inches position of handling deviceslongitudinal num inches position of material for debonding of strands num inch num deck units box beams and slabs depth top slab box beam num inch depth bottom slab box beam num inch depth overall num inch width web box beam num inch width overall num inch length num inch per num feet or num inch whichever is greater void positionlongitudinal flat slab num inch from end of void to center tie hole num inch adjacent to end block void positiontransverse and vertical flat slab num inch square ends deviation from square num inch skew ends deviation from designated skew skew angle equal to or less than num skew angle greater than num num inch bearing plate or bearing area plane deviation from level plane bearing plate or bearing area plane must be an evenly distributed num percent of true plane when tested with a straightedge .
num inch horizontal alignment deviation from a line parallel to the centerline of member num inch up to num feet length num inch over num feet and up to num feet in length num inch over num feet in length dowel tubes spacing between the centers of tubes and from the centers of tubes to the ends and sides of the member num inch tie rod tubes spacing between the centers of tubes and from the centers of tubes to the ends of the member num inch tie rod tubes spacing between the centers of tubes to the bottom of the beam num inch total width of deck theoretical width num inch per joint camber differential between adjacent units num inch per num feet num inch max .
camber differential between high and low members in the same span num inch max .
side inserts positioning num inch stirrup bar positioning num inch stirrup bar long spacing anchorage zone num inch strand positioning num inch handling device positioning num inches center of gravity of stand group num inch curbs placed separately on prestressed box beams applies to any portion num feet in length over the entire length of the beam num inch per num feet position of material for debonding of strands num inch num num transportation storage handling and erection .
transport precast girders in an upright position and keep the points of support and directions of the reactions with respect to the girder approximately the same during transportation and storage as when the girder is in its final position .
prevent cracking or damage during storage hoisting and handling of precast units .
replace units damaged by improper storing or handling .
do not ship precast units to the project prior to attaining the specified acceptance strength .
during erection of members keep the bridge seats and tops of bearing devices free of foreign materials .
while shifting members lift members completely away from bearings .
temporarily brace and tie each prestressed concrete ibeam after erection in a manner that will prevent sliding tipping or other movement that may result from high winds creeping down grade or other causes until casting the diaphragms .
erect and brace at least num adjacent members in any one span before suspending operations for any one day .
begin erecting deck units at the location designated or approved by the engineer and proceed one member at a time across the roadway .
after placing and fastening the units by transverse tie assemblies fill longitudinal keys between the units with nonshrink grout and seal as specified in the plans .
cure the nonshrink grout keys with num layers of wet burlap or other approved covering placed on the slab .
keep the nonshrink grout continuously moist for num or more calendar days except cure commercial mixtures according to the manufacturers instructions .
d o not place equipment used to lift deck units into place on a portion of the bridge which has been erected without obtaining the engineers approval .
num measurement .
the department will not measure the work required to qualify the tack welders and tack welding procedures for payment and will consider it incidental to the pay item for prestressed or precast members except the department will test the specimens at no expense to the fabricator .
num precast ibeams .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
the department will not measure bearing devices for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num precast panels .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num precast box beams .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
the department will not measure bearing devices for payment and will consider piling width or diameter num num inch head out of square num inch per num inches of width length of pile num num inch horizontal alignment deviation from a straight line parallel to the centerline of the pile num inch per num feet void positionlongitudinal num inches void positiontransverse num inch void positionvertical num inch stirrup bars or spiral position num inch tendon positioning num inch center of gravity of strand group num inch handling device positioning num inches num them incidental to this item of work .
num precast concrete median barrier .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num precast piles .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num prestressed piles .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num masonry coating .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num precast pc ibeam type linear foot pay unit num precast pc ibeam modified size linear foot num precast pc panels see subsection num num precast pc box beam designation linear foot num num num concrete median barrier type linear foot num num num num num pilesprecast concrete size see subsection num num num num pilesprestressed concrete size see subsection num num num masonry coating see subsection num the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num bridge restoration and waterproofing with concrete overlays num description .
this work shall consist of bridge deck restoration and waterproofing with latex concrete overlays .
num materials and equipment .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num latex admixture .
conform to subsection num .
num epoxy for epoxysand slurry .
conform to section num .
num sand for epoxysand slurry .
conform to subsection num .
num mortar sand .
conform to subsection num for groutbond coat .
num latex grout .
conform to section num .
num joint materials .
conform to section num .
a filler .
use preformed expansion joint filler type ii cork .
b sealers .
use rapid cure silicone with closedcell polyethylene foam backup rod compatible with silicone sealant .
num concrete curing material .
conform to section num .
num structural steel .
conform to subsection num for expansion dams and joint build up .
num equipment .
conform to subsection num with the following exceptions and additions a mechanical scarifiers or grinders .
furnish mechanical scarifiers or grinders designed specifically for scarifying bridge decks that the engineer approves .
ensure that the scarifier or grinder is capable of producing a surface matching the existing slab cross section and that each pass of the machine matches the previous pass in elevation .
b hammers .
provide power driven hammers lighter than nominal num lb .
class .
c sawing equipment .
sawing equipment shall be a concrete saw capable of sawingconcrete to the specified depth .
d hydraulic impactskid steer type equipment with a maximum rated striking energy of num ftlbs are permitted only in areas of concrete removal more than num inches away from boundaries of surface areas to remain in service .
the contractor is to provide data information to the engineer on the equipment they wish to utilize to ensure compliance with this note .
e mixers .
in addition to the requirements of subsection num furnish continuous mixers having a latex admixture supply portion equipped with a cumulativetype meter that can be read to the nearest num gallon .
furnish continuous mixers having a water supply portion equipped with a flow meter or other suitable device for calibrating the water supply and a cumulative type water meter that can be read to the nearest num gallon .
ensure that the latex and water meters are readily accessible accurate to within one percent and legible .
f hand tools .
in addition to the requirements of subsection num furnish sufficient hand tools for placement of stiff plastic concrete capable of working num the concrete down to approximately the correct elevation for striking off with a screed .
g finishing machine .
conform to the requirements of subsection num .
f brooms .
furnish brooms having bristles of sufficient stiffness to treat the surface after finishing .
g air compressors .
furnish air compressors equipped with separators and traps .
num coarse aggregate .
conform to section num size no .
num or numm .
num construction .
num scheduling .
notify the engineer at least num hours before placing concrete for the overlay .
the department will not grant a time extension for delay in placing concrete resulting from the engineer receiving less than the numhour notice .
num weather limitations .
construct the overlay during the night time hours when the ambient temperature will remain below num f the wind velocity is low and hot conditions or rain are not expected .
during hot weather place the concrete when the ambient temperature falls to num f or below .
complete placement of concrete before the ambient air temperature reaches num f. do not place concrete when the ambient temperature away from artificial heat is less that num f and falling except when using type iii cement .
keep all concrete at a temperature above num f for at least num hours after placing .
make provisions for the uniform distribution of heat and do not allow any area of the concrete surface to be heated to a temperature above num f. to accomplish uniform distribution of heat during cold weather provide housing heating or insulation methods that the engineer approves .
do not place concrete during rain or drizzle .
if it begins to rain or drizzle during placement cease placement and finish and protect the material already in place .
num removal of concrete restoration of reinforcement and cleaning .
treat the entire area of the deck between the curbs roadway and the ends of the structure num percent of the deck area by machine preparation consisting of removal of concrete to a depth of at least num inch below the existing concrete surface .
machine prepare with mechanical scarifiers or grinders .
if satisfactory results are not achieved the engineer may direct that the work be performed with other equipment .
the department will not require machine preparation on endwalls .
remove epoxy asphalt foreign surfaces and unsound patches in a manner approved by the engineer .
sound concrete patches are to be left in place as determined by the engineer .
do not use equipment that may cause damage to the underlying concrete .
remove all other concrete that the engineer deems unsound .
remove concrete within areas where the depth of removal exceeds num inch with hammers or other small equipment .
steel reinforcement damaged by the contractor shall be replaced to the size type and lap lengths determined by the engineer .
remove concrete to a depth of num inch below any reinforcing bar which is more than num percent exposed or that appears not to be bonded to the existing concrete .
protect any underlying sound concrete and steel reinforcement .
ensure that the periphery of routed areas is as nearly vertical as possible .
if the removal of unsound concrete extends through two thirds of the concrete slab or more remove and replace the remaining sound concrete for full depth patching .
ensure that all exposed steel reinforcement is tied according to subsection num .
remove all inferior concrete in the deteriorated and spalled areas near joints and all joint filler .
reform the joints to exact width and true alignment according to subsection num for open joints except when a timber template is used cover it with polyethylene sheeting .
blast clean all exposed steel reinforcement and structural steel according to subsection num to remove scale rust grease oil and other material that would prevent adhesion of the concrete .
before placing concrete replace or supplement deteriorated or damaged reinforcement as the engineer directs .
remove all dust and chips num of asphalt materials concrete or other debris and clean the entire area with compressed air .
ensure that the compressed air is free of detrimental quantities of water oil grease or any other injurious substances .
do not allow leakage of oil grease gasoline or other substances from the compressor or other equipment on the deck .
suspend protective sheeting such as plastic or tarpaulins under all equipment that leaks .
remove all spalled or deteriorated concrete in curbs sidewalks and plinths to a minimum depth of one inch .
blast clean coat with a groutbond coat and restore to the original section with overlay material .
seal with epoxysand slurry .
surface preparation partial depth andor full depth removal of unsound concrete may be accomplished using hydrodemolition .
prior to any hydrodemolition operation submit a hydrodemolition plan in writing for approval by the engineer .
in the hydrodemolition plan state water source type of machine water pressure settings and methods to collect and strain waste water and protect the public structural steel paint and structural steel .
calibrate the hydrodemolition machine to remove only unsound concrete .
test the machine on an area of concrete as directed by the engineer .
use clean water with a rust inhibitor .
collect and strain all waste water from the hydrodemolition operation .
the contractor at a minimum shall block all drains on the deck and install aggregate dams or other department approved devices as necessary to strain runoff .
the deck shall be used as a settlement basin within itself unless the engineer or requirements of any associated regulatory agencies state otherwise .
after hydrodemolition operation sound deck to ensure that all unsound concrete has been removed .
final sounding shall consist of as many successive resoundings as required to ensure that all unsatisfactory concrete has been removed .
additional removal shall be performed with num pound maximum weight hammers .
when hydrodemolition is used cleaning shall be performed with a vacuum system capable of removing wet debris and water all in the same pass .
the vacuum equipment shall be capable of washing the deck with pressurized water prior to the vacuum operation to dislodge all debris and slurry from the deck surface .
cleaning shall be done in a timely manner before debris and water is allowed to dry on the deck surface .
full depth repair shall be paid per cubic yard of concrete used and may not be done in the same operation as the deck overlay .
the contractor shall comply with all federal state regional and local government agencies that have requirements regarding the control of fugitive dust generated by concrete removal and blasting operations .
num blast cleaning .
blast clean the entire area of the deck surface and vertical faces of curbs barrier walls and plinths up to a height of one inch above the top elevation of the overlay and areas to receive epoxysand slurry to a bright clean appearance that is free from curing compound laitance dust dirt oil grease asphalt material paint and all foreign matter .
perform blast cleaning of an area of the deck within the numhour period preceding placement of the overlay on the area .
if the project is done under traffic perform all blast cleaning within num hours prior to placement of the overlay .
perform blast cleaning according to the regulations specified in subsection num .
protect the blast cleaned areas with white plastic before placement of the overlay .
blast clean contaminated areas and areas exposed more than num hours num hours when under traffic again as the engineer directs .
remove or roll the white plastic between the mixer truck rear wheels and the overlay placement .
hydro blasting may be used in lieu blast cleaning .
use hand held high pressure wands with potable water .
water blast the entire area of the deck .
prevent steel reinforcement from rusting .
num full depth patching .
fill full depth holes with class mnum or mnum concrete .
immediately before placing concrete dampen and surface dry the contact surface .
then apply a groutbond coat by vigorously scrubbing or brushing into the num vertical surface of full depth routed areas .
proportion the grout mixture according to subsection num using type i cement .
carefully place the class mnum or mnum concrete and tamp or vibrate into place .
roughfinish the full depth patched areas to an elevation corresponding to the scarified grade and cure for a period of no less than num calendar days or until the overlay is placed by means of a double layer of wetted burlap or similar material .
if the full depth patch area is encompassed by an area of partial depth patching finish the full depth concrete patch to an elevation corresponding to the bottom of the partial depth routed areas instead of the elevation of the scarified deck .
after the concrete has hardened sufficiently to maintain the proper shape remove all joint templates .
avoid chipping or breaking down the edges of the repaired joint .
remove all forming material before completion of the project .
provide temporary support for existing concrete handrails while removing and replacing full depth concrete .
submit the proposed method of supporting the handrails to the engineer for approval before beginning work .
blast clean the surfaces of all patched areas and remove sand before constructing the overlay .
complete all full depth patching in each lane before beginning overlay operations on that lane .
place latex concrete overlays only when full depth patches have been placed for num hours or longer .
do not allow construction equipment on the full depth patches until they have attained a compressive strength of num psi .
num partialdepth patching .
the department may allow monolithic placement of the partial depth patches with the overlay .
num prohibited field welding .
do not perform welding on load carrying members of the bridge without the engineers written consent and then only in the manner and at the locations designated .
num mixing and placing .
mix concrete at the site by either batch or continuous mixers as the engineer approves .
mix and deliver according to subsections num and num except discharge within num minutes .
submit to the engineer for approval proposed methods for anchoring the finishing machine supporting rails to the deck .
hold the formation of longitudinal joints and transverse joints to a minimum .
when constructing longitudinal or transverse joints thoroughly blast clean and coat with grout bond coat material before placing plastic concrete against the hardened sides of the joints .
form longitudinal joints using a longitudinal header secured to the deck num inch less in thickness than the overlay .
locate longitudinal joints along lane lines .
after removal of the header saw the overlay longitudinally num inches or more inside the formed edge and remove the portion of the overlay outside the saw cut before placing the adjacent portion of the overlay .
the department may allow alternate methods of constructing joints on latex overlays .
produce the mixture at a uniform rate and perform finishing immediately after mixing .
num brooming .
immediately after finishing broom the surface of the overlay transversely across the bridge deck from curb to curb .
texture the surface according to subsection num immediately after finishing on new structure overlays when specified in the contract and on federal aid projects .
num epoxysand slurry .
after the overlay has been completed and cured apply a thin coat approximately num inch of an epoxysand slurry to the num inches of the overlay adjacent to the curbs concrete barrier walls or other vertical walls .
extend the epoxysand slurry up the faces of the curbs and walls or other vertical walls and extend the epoxysand slurry up the faces and tops of the curbs and plinth according to the standard drawings .
thoroughly blast clean to a bright appearance and dry the areas to receive the epoxysand slurry before applying the slurry .
apply the slurry only after the deck has num been dry for num hours .
place strips of masking tape along the joints to prevent the slurry from entering the joints and to ensure a straight line of slurry .
proportion the slurry as follows one gallon of component a one gallon of component b num gallons of dry silica sand the engineer may allow minor adjustments in the quantity of sand in order to produce a more workable mixture .
thoroughly mix the ingredient materials for num to num minutes .
then spread the slurry and use a squeegee to completely fill the blast cleaned pitted areas cracks and rough surfaces .
finish the slurry to a thickness of no more than num inch .
sprinkle silica sand very lightly over the slurry to provide skid resistance .
the department will allow placement of thoroughly mixed neat epoxy according to subsection num .
num cleaning and sealing joints .
rework each joint according to the standard drawings and as follows a joint preparation .
remove any old sealant and joint filler .
use tools and techniques as approved by the engineer .
when joint is dry sandblast to remove all contaminants .
sandblast each joint a minimum of num passes one for each face with nozzle held at an angle to the joint face and within num to num inches of the pavement .
after sandblasting air blast each joint to remove sand and other contaminants .
air blast in only one direction to prevent recontamination of the joint .
compressed air used for air blasting will be at a pressure of at least num psi .
the air compressor used will be equipped with traps capable of removing moisture and oil from the air .
apply primer as recommended by the sealants manufacturer .
b sealant filler and installation .
seal joints on same day that preparation occurs .
when joints are prepared but not sealed on the same day sandblasting removal of sand and debris and primer application will be repeated as directed by the engineer .
also any joint that has become contaminated will be recleaned as directed by the engineer .
prior to installation of sealant each joint will be inspected by the engineer for proper depth width alignment and cleanliness .
install sealant at a minimum of num inch below the pavement face and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num bridge end transitions .
overlay the end sections of the bridge and finish as follows a rigid approach .
set the finishing machine rails to provide a numfoot transition on the ends of the bridge to match the finished grade of the overlay with the existing grade of the adjacent pavement .
remove the existing concrete as necessary to maintain the minimum specified thickness of the overlay .
b nonrigid approach or a rigid approach with asphalt overlay .
the department will not require a transition .
num expansion dam treatment .
treat the existing expansion dams according to the standard drawings .
the department will not require painting of structural steel .
num material hauling .
haul all material for latex concrete overlays with vehicles which do not exceed the regulation for either the legal axle weights or axle spacing contained in num kar num .
prior to doing any overlay work on a structure furnish to the engineer a certified statement listing the empty weight of each hauling num vehicle axle weights when empty axle weights when fully loaded gross weight of each vehicle when loaded with a specific number of cubic yards and the spacing of axles .
the engineer will use this information for the purpose of determining the allowable quantity of materials to be hauled .
the engineer will determine the allowable quantity of materials to be hauled based on the capacity and condition of the bridge after the removal of unsound concrete and prior to the placement of the overlay .
under no circumstances will the department allow loads which exceed legal gross or axle load limits .
num damage to structures .
take responsibility for all damage to the structure during construction until all work is completed including the replacement of entire spans that fail as a result of this construction .
num unacceptable work .
when the engineer deems necessary the department will core any areas of the overlay that display extensive cracking or other characteristics indicating the waterproofing effectiveness or expected life of the overlay may be reduced or that the overlay may not be intimately bonded to the underlying deck .
remove and replace with acceptable concrete all areas shown by the cores to either have cracks exceeding a depth of num inch or to not be intimately bonded to the underlying deck the engineer may require removal and replacement without coring when significant cracking or lack of bond are apparent .
seal all cracks that are not significant enough to require removal of the overlay with a latex grout as the engineer directs .
correct all individual areas of hardened grooved concrete of num square feet or larger in which the texture is unsatisfactory using methods the engineer approves .
num special requirements for latex concrete overlays .
a existing bridges and new structures .
num prewetting and groutbond coat .
thoroughly and continuously wet the blast cleaned areas to receive the overlay with water at least one hour before placing the overlay is started .
keep the areas wet and cooled with water until placing the overlay .
disperse or remove all accumulations of water before applying the groutbond coat .
immediately ahead of placing the overlay mixture thoroughly brush and scrub a thin coating of the latex concrete mixture to be used for the overlay onto the wetted surface as a groutbond coat .
do not allow accumulations of coarser particles of the mixture which can not be scrubbed into intimate contact with the surface .
apply the groutbond coat only for a short distance in advance of placing the overlay .
do not allow the groutbond coat to show any signs of drying before placing the overlay .
thoroughly recoat all areas showing signs of drying with fresh grout .
num proportioning and requirements .
proportion as follows when adjusting ensure the mixture contains no less than num pounds per cubic yard of cement nor less than num gallons per cubic yard of latex admixture .
material type i or type iii cement num lbs quantity latex admixture num gal fine aggregate num to num lbsnum coarse aggregate num to num lbsnum waternum num lbsnum num determine actual quantities and submit to the engineer for approval .
num includes free moisture on the fine and coarse aggregates .
num furnish latex concrete with the following properties property slumpnum num num in km num value maximum air content num km num maximum wc rationum num num day compressive strengthnum num psi num the department will perform the slump test num to num minutes after discharging from continuous type mixers .
num consider all the nonsolids in the latex admixture as part of the total water .
num attain a numday compressive strength of num psi when compressive strength is tested at num days or later due to unusual circumstances .
num placing consolidating and finishing the overlay .
place the latex concrete overlay on the blast cleaned and prewetted deck immediately after applying the groutbond coat .
the department will require a minimum latex concrete overlay thickness of one inch except on textured finishes .
on textured finishes the department will require a minimum latex concrete overlay thickness of num num inches .
ensure that the surface of the overlay conforms to the existing deck section while maintaining the minimum thickness .
the engineer will determine the deck section in the field including the cross slope or crown .
pass the finishing machine over the existing deck prior to placing the overlay so that the engineer can make measurements to ensure the proper cross slope and thickness .
construct a transverse construction joint whenever placing is interrupted for any reason for num minutes or longer .
ensure that the top surface of the overlay is uniform smooth and eventextured after finishing with a finishing machine .
thoroughly consolidate the concrete by vibration during the finishing operations .
ensure that the finished surface does not vary more than num inch in num feet as measured from a straightedge .
num curing .
immediately following the brooming operation or texturing when texturing is required cover the overlay with a thoroughly wetted layer of burlap immediately followed by a layer of polyethylene film num mils or more in thickness .
place sections or strips of burlap transversely so that the overlay can be covered immediately after finishing or texturing .
leave the burlap and polyethylene film in place for at least num hours and rewet the burlap if any signs of drying appear .
soak new burlap in water for at least num hours before the first use .
after the numhour period has ended remove the burlap and polyethylene and allow the overlay to aircure .
continue the aircure for an additional num hours when using type i cement or an additional num hours when using type iii cement at an ambient air temperature of num f or more .
when the overlay has cured give the tops of all longitudinal and transverse construction joints a thorough coating of grout of the same proportions as the latex concrete mixture used for the groutbond coat material .
neatly and uniformly apply a numinch wide or wider coating to seal any minute cracks at these locations .
do not use epoxysand slurry to seal construction joints in lieu of grout .
the department will allow the overlay to be opened to traffic as soon as curing is completed all full depth patches are at least num days old or have attained a compressive strength of num psi all construction joints are num sealed and gutterline and curb slurry is applied .
b special requirements for new structures .
construct according to a above with the following exceptions and additions num the department will not require machine preparation of the top num inch of the deck .
num construct an overlay having a thickness of num num inch .
num texture the overlay surface according to subsection num .
num perform operations in the following sequence blast clean the existing deck apply the groutbond coat mix place and consolidate the overlay mixture finish texture cure seal joints and cracks then apply the epoxysand slurry .
num do not overlay the deck until it is at least num calendar days old .
num when longitudinal construction joints are necessary completely cure each section of the overlay before placing the adjacent section of the overlay .
num measurement .
num removal of epoxy asphalt and foreign overlay .
when listed as a bid item the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
num machine preparation of existing slab .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
the department will not deduct parts of the deck that are not concrete such as deck drains castings expansion dams and patches of foreign material for payment .
num concrete class m for fulldepth patching .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards .
the department will not measure removal of epoxy asphalt or foreign overlays for payment unless listed as a bid item and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num structural steel .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num blast cleaning .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
before placement of the overlay the department will measure the area of the deck and the vertical part of the curb which will be in direct contact with the overlay distance equal to the thickness of the overlay plus one inch for payment .
after placement of the overlay and before placement of the epoxysand slurry the department will measure the numinch width of the overlay and the sides and tops of curbs that are to receive the epoxy sand slurry for payment .
the department will not measure any repeated blast cleaning for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num latex concrete overlay concrete overlay .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards as metered from an accurately calibrated mixing unit .
the department will measure the overlay partial depth patches and material used to patch spalled or deteriorated sections of curbs sidewalks or plinths for payment .
the department will not measure the volume of material wasted or not incorporated in the work grout used for the bond coat crack sealing or sand blast cleaning of reinforcing steel longitudinal or transverse construction joints areas of curbs sidewalks plinths and other areas to be patched or temporary supports for existing concrete handrails while removing and replacing full depth concrete for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num epoxysand slurry .
the department will measure the quantity in square num yards .
the department will measure the entire area covered including the numinch width of the overlay and the sides and tops of curbs barrier walls and plinths for payment .
num joint sealing .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
num hydrodemolition .
when listed as a bid item the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
otherwise the department will not measure hyrodemolition for payment and will consider it incidental to the overlay .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num removal of epoxy asphalt or foreign overlay square yard pay unit num machine preparation of slab square yard num concrete class m for full depth patchingnum cubic yard num structural steel see subsection num num blast cleaning square yard num concrete overlay latexnum cubic yard num epoxysand slurry square yard num joint sealing linear foot num hydrodemolition square yard num the department will establish an adjusted unit price according to the supplemental formulas established for excessive overruns and underruns in subsection num when this pay item is a major item and either an overrun or an underrun of more than num percent occurs .
num the department will adjust the contract unit price of overlays on new structures by the schedule for adjusted payment for thickness deficiency .
the adjusted quantity is equal to the measured quantity of the pay item multiplied by the contract unit price for the pay item and the price adjustment .
as an option remove and replace overlays with an average deficiency in thickness of no more than num inch with an overlay of the specified thickness at no cost to the department .
the department will not make additional payment for average thicknesses of overlay in excess of the specified thickness .
schedule for adjusted payment for thickness deficiency average thickness deficiency price adjustment inches num num percent of contract unit bid price num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num greater than num a a remove and replace with an overlay of the specified thickness at no expense to the department .
num when placing concrete on overlays is not begun within num hours after the scheduled num time the department will deduct all engineering costs from the scheduled time until the time placing begins or is canceled from the contract amount .
the department will not deduct engineering costs for uncontrollable circumstances such as inclement weather or equipment failure after placing begins .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num structural steel bridges num description .
build steel bridges and perform other structural steel and miscellaneous metal construction .
the dimensions specified in the plans are for a normal temperature of num f with dead load on the structure .
num materials and equipment .
num paint .
conform to section num .
num structural steels .
conform to section num .
num miscellaneous metals .
conform to section num for pins and rollers bearing and expansion plates rockers and expansion dams aluminum highstrength steel bolts nuts and washers and welding .
use flat and smooth circular washers and square or rectangular beveled washers .
ensure that bolt dimensions conform to the heavy hexagon structural bolt requirements of ansi bnum and section num .
ensure that nut dimensions conform to the heavy hexagon nut requirements of ansi bnum and section num .
identify heavy hexagonal structural bolts manufactured according to astm a num on the top of the head by num radial lines the legend a num and the manufacturers mark .
identify grade numh nuts on at least one face by the marking numh or numhb and grade dh by the marking dh .
ensure that all nuts bear the manufacturers identification mark .
heavy hexagonal structural bolts have shorter thread lengths than other standard bolts .
depending on the amount of bolt length added to adjust for incremental stock lengths the full thread may extend into the grip as much as num inch for the following bolt sizes num inch num inch num inch num inch num num inch and num num inch and as much as num inch for the following bolt sizes one inch num num inch and num num inch .
the fabricator may include some of the thread runout into the plane of the shear .
when the thickness of an outside part adjacent to the nut is less than these values the fabricator may use the next increment of bolt length together with a sufficient number of flat circular washers to ensure full seating of the nut .
num wrenches .
use manual or power torque wrenches .
use power wrenches of adequate capacity and of sufficient air supply to perform the required tightening of bolts in approximately num seconds .
num direct tension indicators .
when specified on the plans use direct tension indicators conforming to astm f num .
determine correct bolt tension by examining the gap between the washer and bolt head remaining after tightening .
include with each shipment of direct tension indicators reports of actual tests showing the bolt tension achieved when the indicators are loaded .
ensure that the bolt tension is num percent greater than the tension specified in the bolt tension table in subsection num .
furnish test reports for representative samples of each lot or heat and each size tension indicator in the shipment and provide packaging that easily identifies individual lots or heats .
the department may perform any additional sampling or testing the engineer deems necessary .
mark the tension indicators with the correct grade a num or a num to ensure ready verification on the job .
num tapes .
use only tapes that are correctly calibrated with nist to ensure correct fit of the work .
num num construction .
num shop drawings and welding procedures .
submit to the division of structural design detailed shop drawings and welding procedures .
the department will furnish plans showing sufficient details to prepare detailed shop drawings .
include welding procedures and details when required as part of the shop drawings .
the department will not consider the shop drawing review process to be complete without the submittal of welding procedures .
make all initial drawing submittals on sheets of paper num inches by num inches .
ensure that all drawings provide clear sharp lines on prints .
submit initially to the division of structural design num sets num for railroad bridges of prints of the detailed shop drawings and welding procedures .
the division of structural design will return one set of reviewed shop drawings with all required corrections noted .
when corrections are necessary submit num sets of prints of the corrected drawings .
after final review furnish to the division of structural design num sets of correct shop drawing prints for distribution .
after fabrication is complete and the engineer has approved the structural steel for shipment furnish to the engineer one electronic set of the reviewed shop drawings including the welding procedures in a num inch by num inch portable document format pdf which will produce clear prints .
do not make any changes to any drawing after the engineer has reviewed it without the engineers written approval or written direction .
allow at minimum num days for review of shop drawings of welded plate girders or rolled steel sections and per panel of steel trusses after receipt in the division of structural design .
special designs may require longer .
partial submittals are allowed for trusses and special designs but reviews may not be complete until full submittals are received .
only make substitutions of sections different from those shown on the drawings when the engineer approves in writing .
although the drawings may have been reviewed take responsibility for the correctness of the drawings and for shop fits and field connections .
take responsibility for any material ordered or work done before the engineer reviews the drawings and welding procedures .
when design drawings differ from the shop drawings the design drawings govern .
when the requirements of this section differ from the shop drawings the requirements of this section govern .
when the design drawings differ from the requirements of this section the design drawings govern .
num workmanship .
a quality of workmanship .
ensure that workmanship and finish are equal to the aisc best general practices in modern bridge shops .
b storage of materials .
store structural material either plain or fabricated at the fabricating shop above ground upon platforms skids or other supports .
keep it free from dirt grease and other foreign matter and protect it from corrosion .
c straightening materials .
before measuring or working rolled material ensure that it is straight .
when straightening is necessary use methods that will not injure the metal .
if sharp kinks and bends are evident the engineer will reject the material .
d finish .
blast clean all structural steel prior to beginning any fabrication .
provide a neat finish to the work .
shear flame cut grind and chip carefully and accurately .
remove all burrs resulting from reaming or drilling .
num bolt holes .
either punch or drill all holes for connections .
a punched work .
punch all holes fullsize except num when there are more than num thicknesses or when any of the main material is thicker than num inch in structural carbon steel num inch in highstrength low num alloy steel or num inch in quenched and tempered alloy steel subpunch all holes and ream them after assembling according to the requirements of c below .
num when the metal is thicker than the size of the bolts drill the holes according to the requirements of d below .
num subpunch and ream punched holes for stringer and floor beam field connections according to the requirements c below or subpunch and ream to a metal template no less than one inch thick without assembling .
num subpunch and ream punched holes in field connections of main truss or arch members skew portals skew portal bracing plate girder spans continuous ibeam spans and rigid frames .
punch holes in connection plates or other parts of such members according to the requirements of c below .
main truss members are the top and bottom chords end posts and web members forming the truss .
b punched holes .
punch fullsize holes num inch larger than the nominal diameter of the bolt .
do not allow the diameter of the die to exceed the diameter of the punch by more than num inch .
ensure that holes are cut cleanly without torn or ragged edges .
punch holes so that after assembling the component parts of a member and before reaming a cylindrical pin num inch smaller than the nominal diameter of the punched hole may be passed through at least num of any group of num contiguous holes or in like proportion for any smaller group of holes .
when num percent or more of any group of num or fewer holes will not pass a pin num inch smaller than the nominal diameter of the punched hole the engineer will reject the mispunched pieces .
ream any holes that must be enlarged to admit bolts .
c subpunched and reamed holes .
punch subpunched and reamed holes for bolts num inch smaller than the nominal diameter of the bolts .
ensure that the punch and die have the same relative sizes as specified for full size punched holes .
after assembling ream subpunched holes to a diameter of num inch larger than the nominal diameter of the bolt .
after assembling and firmly bolting pieces forming a built member perform reaming .
do not interchange reamed parts .
ream holes with twist drills or with short taper reamers .
do not direct reamers by hand unless the engineer approves .
use solvents detergents or other engineer approved means before cleaning and painting to thoroughly remove any oil or grease used as a reaming lubricant .
d drilled holes .
ensure that drilled holes are num inch larger than the nominal diameter of the bolt .
however do not allow drilled holes for turned bolts to be more than num inch larger than the diameter of the finished bolt .
hold parts securely together while drilling assembled members .
do not use numerical tape or electronic computer controlled drills unless the fabricator can provide a history showing defect free work of this type .
this means that previous work was free of misdrilled holes caused by human errors or machine errors .
drill holes according to the requirements of e below .
submit to the engineer for review with the shop drawings the proposed procedure for drilling holes and assuring correct fit of members .
when using numerical tape or electronic computer controlled drills the department will require shop assembly of at least num percent of the splices and at least num percent of floor beam and bracket main member connections as proof of accurate fit .
in the event holes do not match as prescribed for the assembled pieces assemble and ream all splices to fit and use metal templates to ream all other floor beam connections .
e accuracy of reamed and drilled holes .
ensure that reamed or drilled holes are cylindrical and perpendicular to the member .
after reaming or drilling do not allow num of any group of num contiguous holes or in like proportion for any num smaller group of holes to show an offset greater than num inch between adjacent thicknesses of metal .
f edge distance of bolts .
maintain a minimum distance from the center of any bolt to a sheared or flame cut edge of for one inch diameters num num inch .
for num inch diameters num num inch .
for num inch diameters num num inch .
for num inch diameters num num inch .
ensure that the minimum distance from a rolled or planed edge except in flanges of beams and channels is for one inch diameters num num inch .
for num inch diameters num num inch .
for num inch diameters num inch .
for num inch diameters one inch .
in the flanges of beams and channels ensure that the distance is for one inch fasteners num num inch .
for num inch fasteners num num inch .
for num inch fasteners one inch .
for num inch fasteners num inch .
ensure that the maximum distance from any edge is num times the thickness of the thinnest outside plate but does not exceed num inches .
if the design drawings or the engineer approves in writing the department will allow the use of oversize shortslotted and longslotted holes according to the applicable structural steel design sections of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
num shop assembly and material traceability .
conform to the requirements of a through d below when not using numerical tape or electronic controlled drills conform to e below for all structural steel fabrication .
a assembling trusses and other supports .
assemble trusses arches skew portals skew portal bracing girder spans continuous ibeam spans and rigid frames in the shop and adjust the parts to line camber and fit for drilling or reaming of field connections .
b assembling members .
thoroughly clean surfaces of metal in contact before assembly .
before reaming assemble well pin and firmly draw together the parts of a member with bolts .
when necessary take apart assembled pieces to remove burrs and shavings produced by the reaming operation .
ensure that members are free from twists bends and other deformation .
progressively shop assemble each longitudinal girder unit in no less than num contiguous sections adjusted to line elevation camber and fit for drilling or reaming .
add at least one section at the rear end of the assembly when removing any section from the advancing end to ensure that the assembled portion of the structure is never less than num contiguous sections .
with connected parts assembled either drill or ream other major bolted connections to the longitudinal girders in the shop or drill or ream to a metal template without assembly .
keep girder sections assembled until match marked and the engineer has inspected and approved them .
do not apply the assembly requirement for drilling or punching to connections for cross frames diaphragms lateral bracing expansion dams and other minor members .
c drifting of holes .
only allow drifting during assembly to the extent that it num brings the parts into position but does not enlarge holes or distort the metal .
ream all holes that must be enlarged .
do not allow reaming to exceed the allowable tolerances .
d match marking and identification .
match mark connecting parts assembled in the shop for the purpose of reaming holes in field connections according to the diagram shown on reviewed shop drawings .
match mark with num inch steel low stress riser dies .
e material traceability .
ensure that the fabricator can demonstrate by a written procedure and by actual practice a method of material application and traceability visible at least through the fit up operation of all elements of a shipping piece .
ensure that the traceability method is capable of verifying proper material application as it relates to material specification designation heat number and manufacturer and material test reports for special requirements where required .
in addition upon completion of fabrication furnish the department with a list of each component of each major loadcarrying member and the heat number and manufacturer applicable to the material used for each including sketches or diagrams when necessary .
provide this list as part of the final shop drawings .
num bolted connections using highstrength steel bolts .
a general .
use friction type joint for all connections made with highstrength steel bolts .
to determine the required bolt length add the grip the adjustment for bolt size specified in the following table num inch for each hardened flat washer and num inch for each beveled washer .
grip is the total thickness of all connected materials exclusive of washers .
then round up to the next num inch length .
the adjustment in the above table allows for manufacturing tolerances and for the use of a heavy hexagon nut and provides adequate stick through at the end of the bolt .
provide adequate bolt length to allow for the exposure of at least num complete threads beyond the face of the nut after tightening .
where necessary clip washers on one side and no closer than num of the bolt diameter from the center of the washer .
install bolts with a hardened washer under the nut or bolt head whichever is the element turned in tightening .
the department will allow the use of a flat washer when the abutting surface adjacent to the bolt head or nut does not have a slope of more than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
where outer faces of the bolted parts have a slope of more than num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis use a smooth beveled washer to compensate for bolt size adjustment nominal bolt size adjustment for bolt size inch inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num lack of parallelism .
ensure that bolted parts fit solidly together when assembled and are not separated by gaskets or any other interposed compressible material .
keep all joint surfaces free of dirt burrs and other defects that would prevent solid seating of the parts .
maintain contact surfaces free of oil excess primer and any other foreign matter .
tighten all bolts with properly calibrated wrenches to provide at least the required minimum bolt tension values shown in the following table on completion of the joint .
set the calibrated wrenches used to provide the bolt tension specified in the table above so as to induce a bolt tension at least num percent in excess of this value .
calibrate the wrenches twice daily by tightening in a device capable of indicating actual bolt tension no less than num typical bolts from the lot to be installed .
adjust power wrenches to stall or cutout at the selected tension .
when using manual torque wrenches note the torque indication corresponding to the calibrating tension and use it in the installation of all bolts of the tested lot .
when measuring torque keep nuts in tightening motion .
for shortgrip bolts the department will allow calibration of wrenches by using directtension indicating washers with solid plates in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
when using calibrated wrenches to install several bolts in a single joint use the wrench to touch up bolts previously tightened which may have been loosened by tightening of the subsequent bolts until all are tightened to the prescribed amount .
when required because of bolt entering and wrench operation clearances tighten by turning the bolt while preventing the nut from rotating .
furnish all tension machines and torque wrenches .
the engineer will approve the procedure for calibration of wrenches .
operate a manual torque wrench as the engineer spot inspects installed bolts by observing the indicated torque .
use a torque wrench that has been calibrated as previously described in this subsection .
when the engineer is inspecting bolts apply the inspecting wrench and its required torque to num percent of the bolts but not less than num bolts selected at random in a connection .
the engineer will accept the connection as properly tightened if the nut or bolt head does not turn when applying the required torque .
when applying the required torque and a nut or bolt turns the engineer will test all bolts in the connection .
tighten all bolts whose nut or bolt head is turned by the required torque .
the engineer will reinspect all connections whose nut or bolt head is turned by the required torque .
alternatively the department will allow retightening of all of the bolts bolt tension nominal bolt size inch minimum bolt tension astm a num bolts kips astm a num bolts kips num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num in the connection and then resubmit the connection for the engineer to inspect .
store bolts and nuts in a dry location until use to protect them from contamination by foreign substances and the formation of rust .
only open shipping containers when needed for the work or for inspection purposes .
properly cover and store partially used containers to avoid contamination or exposure to moisture .
only install bolts and nuts that are clean and free of excessive rust .
do not consider a thin tightly adhering rust as cause to require cleaning however apply a dry lubricant to the threads and bearing surface of all nuts to be used when either bolts or nuts show evidence of rust on the threads .
in lieu of using calibrated wrenches the department will allow the use of the turnofnut method to install bolts .
during installation regardless of the tightening method used install bolts in all holes of the connection and bring them to a snug tight condition .
snug tight is the tightness that exists when the plies of the joint are in firm contact .
attain this condition either by a few impacts of an impact wrench or by the full effort of an ordinary spud wrench .
when snug tightening progress systematically from the most rigid part of the connection to the free edges and then retighten the bolts of the connection in a similar systematic manner as necessary until all bolts are simultaneously snug tight and the connection is fully connected .
when using turnofnut tightening check a representative sample of not less than three bolt and nut assemblies of each diameter length and grade at the start of work in a device capable of indicating bolt tension .
use the test to demonstrate that the method for estimating the snug tight condition and controlling the turns from snug tight to be used by the bolting crew to develop a tension not less than num percent greater than the required tension specified in table above .
after bringing to a snug tight condition further tighten all bolts in the connection by the applicable amount of rotation specified in the following table .
during the tightening operation do not allow any rotation of the part not turned by the wrench .
when tightening progress systematically from the most rigid part of the joint to its free edges .
num nut rotation is relative to bolt regardless whether turning the element nut or bolt .
for installing bolts by half turn and less the tolerance is num for installing bolts by twothirds turn and more the tolerance is num .
num applicable only to connections in which all material within the turn grip of the bolt is steel .
num there is no research available to establish the turnofnut procedure for bolt lengths exceeding num diameters .
therefore determine the required rotation by nut rotation from snug tight conditionsnum bolt length disposition of outer faces of bolted parts under side of head to end of bolt .
both faces normal to bolt axis one face normal to bolt axis and other sloped not more than num beveled washer not used both faces sloped not more than num from normal to the bolt axis beveled washer not used up to and including num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters num turn num turn num turn over num diameters but not exceeding num diameters num turn num turn num turn num actual test in a suitable tension measuring device that simulates conditions of solidly fitted steel .
perform the rotationalcapacity test described in section num on each rotationalcapacity lot prior to the start of bolt installation .
use hardened steel washers for the test even if they are not required in the actual installation procedures .
verify that a visible lubricant is on the threads of galvanized nuts .
ensure that black bolts are oily to the touch when delivered and installed .
before installing clean and relubricate weathered or rusted bolts or nuts not conforming to the requirements of the rotationalcapacity test .
retreat recleaned or relubricated nut and washer assemblies to conform to rotationalcapacity test requirements before installing .
use bolt nut and washer when required combinations from the same lot used for the rotationalcapacity test .
b direct tension indicators .
when specified in the plans the department will allow tightening all highstrength bolts in diameters of num inch through num num inch inclusive using direct tension indicators .
before work begins furnish the engineer with the manufacturers written installation instructions .
install direct tension indicators and tighten the bolts according to these instructions .
under normal conditions install the tension indicator under the nonturned element of the fastening system .
obtain the engineers permission before installing tension indicators under the turned element .
if the engineer determines that it is necessary to install the tension indicator under the turned element install additional hardened washers according to the manufacturers instructions .
use bolt lengths sufficient to accommodate the tension indicators and any additional washers required .
do not reuse tension indicators .
if it becomes necessary to loosen a previously tensioned bolt discard and replace the tension indicator .
the fastener assembly may also need to be replaced .
furnish a device capable of measuring actual bolt tension .
before work begins tighten at least num typical bolts and direct tension indicators in the device to the correct bolt tension .
keep the tension device available thereafter for additional checks when the engineer deems necessary .
the engineer will inspect bolt installation by inserting a feeler gage into the opening between adjacent flattened protrusions .
the engineer will examine at least num percent but no less than num of the bolts in each connection .
the engineer will consider the installation acceptable if the gage will not enter the opening .
the engineer will not consider a zero gap as cause for rejection .
if the gap is not uniform around the bolt the engineer will base acceptance on the average gap .
that is the engineer will check the gap at several points around the bolt and if the gage will not enter the gap on at least half the tries the installation will be acceptable .
seal the gap behind the indicator completely with paint .
if necessary use moisture cure aluminum polyurethane intermediate coat at that location .
furnish tension indicators in addition to washers when specified in the contract .
num reuse of astm a num bolts .
the department will allow the use of non galvanized astm a num highstrength bolts one additional time after initially tightening them to specification tension provided a close visual inspection indicates no distress in the bolt .
this allows nongalvanized astm a num bolts to remain installed when tightened to specification tension twice one time at original installation and one time at reuse .
do not consider touching up or retightening previously tightened bolts which may have been loosened by the tightening of adjacent bolts as reuse providing the snugging up continues from the initial position .
when removing and loosening a bolt after it has num been tightened to specification tension twice discard the bolt and substitute a new bolt .
reuse of galvanized astm a num bolts is not allowed .
reuse of any type of astm a num bolt is not allowed .
num welds .
perform all welding when authorized according to requirements specified in ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code current edition with interims .
do not field weld except as specified in the plans without the engineers written permission .
ensure that in all cases welders welding operators and tackers have been qualified by testing according to km num within the previous num months of the time of actual weld performance .
fabricate main members including welded plate girders welded boxes components for bridge trusses rigid frames and bridge arches in a structural steel fabrication shop which participates in the aisc fabrication shop certification program and is certified for fabrication category major steel bridge cbr .
proof of this qualification and certification shall be submitted to the director division of structural design with the first submission of shop drawings .
shop drawings will not be reviewed until this proof has been received .
secondary or incidental bridge components shall be fabricated in a steel fabrication shop which uses procedures and practices conforming to aisc certification category standard for bridge and highway metal component manufacturers bcmp .
repair or replace welds shown by visual inspection or by nondestructive testing to be defective in accordance with the bridge welding code .
all repairs replacements and re inspection costs shall be at the contractors sole expense .
num planing and finishing .
a edge planing .
plane to a depth of num inch all sheared edges of plates that are more than num inch thick and carry calculated stress .
the department will allow fillet reentranting cuts before cutting .
b flame cutting .
obtain a smooth surface free from cracks and notches and an accurate profile using a mechanical guide and the department will allow flame cutting of steel .
only perform flame cutting by hand where the engineer approves .
smooth the surface by planing chipping or grinding .
adjust and manipulate the cutting flame to avoid cutting beyond the prescribed lines .
fillet reentrant cuts to a radius of no less than num inch .
do not allow the surface roughness value of oxygen cut surfaces to be greater than that specified in ansiasme bnum as follows material thickness less than num inchnum num mu inch surface roughness value num to num inches num mu inch num for ends of members not subject to calculated stress at the ends conform to the surface roughness value of num mu inches .
remove roughness exceeding these values and occasional notches or gouges no more than num inch deep on otherwise satisfactory surfaces by machining or grinding .
leave cut surfaces and edges free of slag .
remove irregularity or unevenness from defects to the oxygen cut surfaces with a slope not exceeding one in num .
do not repair defects in oxygencut edges by welding except with the engineers approval .
perform such weld repairs by suitably preparing the defect welding with lowhydrogen electrodes not exceeding num inch in diameter and grinding the completed weld smooth and flush with the adjacent surface to produce a workmanlike finish .
preheat members in the area to be cut to a minimum temperature of num f to prevent edge cracks .
allow sufficient additional width to permit planing chipping or grinding to remove rough burned cracked or otherwise defective num edges .
grind corners at flame cut edges to a radius of at least num inch and remove any evidence of edge cracking by planing chipping or grinding to a depth not exceeding num inch .
c heat curving .
the fabricator may either fabricate welded girders by flame cutting the flanges to the required curvature from rectangular plates before fitting and welding to the web or fabricate welded girders or rolled beams by fabricating straight units and then through the application of heat to the flange edges induce the required curvature .
do not perform heat curving in beams or girders fabricated from steels that are manufactured to a specified minimum yield point greater than num psi or in beams or girders having a radius shorter than the minimum radius of curvature as determined by the procedures outlined in the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
when the contract requires heat curving rolled beams or welded girders ensure that the work conforms to the following requirements .
curve beams and girders by either continuous or vtype heating .
for the continuous method simultaneously heat a strip along the edge of the top and bottom flanges .
ensure that the strip is of sufficient width and temperature to obtain the required curvature .
for the vtype heating heat the top and bottom flanges in truncated triangular areas having their bases along the flange edge and spaced at regular intervals along each flange .
determine the spacing and temperature of the areas necessary to obtain the specified curvature .
apply heat along the top and bottom flanges at approximately the same rate .
for vtype heating terminate the apex of each truncated triangular area applied to the inside of a flange surface just before reaching the juncture of the web and the flange .
to avoid unnecessary web distortion carefully heat the inside flange surfaces the surfaces that intersect the web to avoid applying heat directly to the web .
when the radius of curvature is num feet or more extend the apex of each truncated triangular heating area applied to the outside of a flange surface to the juncture of the flange and web .
when the radius of curvature is less than num feet extend the apex of each truncated triangular heating area applied to the outside of a flange surface past the web for a distance equal to num of the flange width or num inches whichever is less .
ensure that each truncated triangular area has an included angle of approximately num to num degrees however do not allow the length of the base of each triangle to exceed num inches .
obtain the engineers approval before making any variation in the patterns as prescribed in this subsection .
for both types of heating heat the flange areas that will be on the inside of the horizontal curve .
concurrently heat both surfaces of flanges when the flange thickness is num num inch or greater .
space the heating patterns uniformly along the full length of each flange to produce a uniform arc of a circular curve in the member .
when heating causes a chording effect that the engineer judges not aesthetically pleasing ensure that the fabricator reheats the member using additional heating patterns as required to obtain the desired results .
conduct the heatcurving operation so that temperature of the steel does not exceed num f. confine heating to the patterns or areas specified in this section and apply heat to bring the steel within the patterns or areas to the required temperature as rapidly as possible without overheating the steel .
consider any heating procedure which causes a portion of the steel to be heated to a temperature greater than num f as destructive heating and as a possible cause for rejection of the steel .
the fabricator may propose to the engineer various means to reaccept repair or replace the steel rejected for overheating .
the engineer will review the fabricators proposal .
do not artificially cool the steel until it has cooled naturally to num f. never quench the steel with water or water and air .
when appropriate cool the steel with dry compressed air only after it has cooled to num f. the fabricator shall maintain temperature controls using temperature indicating crayons or other suitable means during heating and cooling of the steel .
num the department will allow heat curving of beams and girders with the web in either a vertical or horizontal position .
when heat curving beams and girders in the vertical position brace or support them in such a manner that the tendency to deflect laterally during the heatcurving process will not cause them to overturn .
when heat curving beams and girders in the horizontal position support them near the ends and at intermediate points as required to obtain a uniform curvature .
do not allow the bending stress in the flanges due to the dead weight of a beam or girder to exceed num psi .
when a beam or girder is positioned horizontally for heating maintain intermediate safety catch blocks at the midlength within num inches of the flanges at all times during the heating process to guard against a sudden sag due to plastic flange buckling .
heat curve beams and girders in the fabrication shop before painting .
the department will allow performing of the heatcurving operation either before or after completing all required welding of transverse intermediate stiffeners .
however unless provisions are made for girder shrinkage locate and attach all connection plates and bearing stiffeners after heat curving .
when the engineer requires longitudinal stiffeners heat curve or flame cut them to the required radius and then weld them to the curved girder .
when attaching cover plates to rolled beams attach them before heat curving when the total thickness of one flange and cover plates is less than num num inches and the radius of curvature is greater than num feet .
for other rolled beams with cover plates heat curve the beams before attaching the cover plates either heat curve or oxygen cut cover plates separately and then weld them to the curved beams .
camber girders before heat curving .
obtain camber for rolled beams by heatcambering or coldcambering methods approved by the engineer .
for welded plate or builtup girders cut the web to the prescribed camber with suitable allowance for shrinkage due to cutting welding and heat curving .
the curving process may tend to change the existing vertical camber .
this change will be most pronounced when the top and bottom flanges are of unequal widths on a given transverse cross section .
however subject to approval of the engineer correct moderate deviations from the specified camber by a carefully supervised application of heat .
the engineer will not measure horizontal curvature and vertical camber for final acceptance until after the fabricator has completed all welding and heating operations and the flanges have cooled to a uniform temperature .
the engineer will check the horizontal curvature in each edge of each flange with the beam or girder in the vertical position by measuring offsets from a stringline or wire or by using other suitable means .
the engineer will check camber by similar means .
d facing of bearing surfaces .
ensure that the surface finish of bearing and base plates and other bearing surfaces that are to come in contact with each other or with concrete conforms to the surface roughness requirements as defined in ansiasme bnum part i steel slabs ansi num heavy plates in contact in shoes to be welded ansi num milled ends of compression members stiffeners and fillers ansi num bridge rollers and rockers ansi num pins and pin holes ansi num sliding bearings ansi num with the exception of abutting joints and base plates coat machinefinished surfaces with waterproof grease or other approved coating as soon as practical after the engineer has accepted the structural steel and before removing it from the shop .
apply one coat of an approved rust inhibiting primer compatible with the finished coat instead of zinc rich primer to machine finished surfaces that are to be painted .
num e abutting joints .
face abutting ends of compression members and girder flanges accurately to secure an even bearing when assembled in the structure .
rough finish ends of tension members at splices to secure close and neat but not contact fitting joints .
where joints are not faced do not allow the opening to exceed num inch .
f end connection angles .
build floor beams stringers and girders having end connection angles to the exact length specified in the plans measured between the heels of the connection angles with a permissible tolerance of num to num inch .
where the contract requires continuity face end connections .
do not allow the thickness of the connection angles to be less than num inch or less than that shown on the detailed drawings .
g finished members .
ensure that finished members are true to line and free from twists bends and open joints .
h web plates .
cut web plates to provide for camber of the girder .
at bolted web splices do not allow clearance between ends of web plates to exceed num inch .
i fit of stiffeners .
mill or grind bearing stiffeners of girders and stiffeners intended as supports for concentrated loads to secure an even bearing against the flanges .
ensure that intermediate stiffeners fit sufficiently tight to exclude water after being painted .
ensure that clearance between the ends of horizontal stiffeners and the sides of vertical stiffeners is one inch .
place bearing stiffeners plumb .
place intermediate stiffeners perpendicular to flanges .
j bent plates .
ensure that unwelded coldbent loadcarrying rolledsteel plates conform to the following num take them from stock plates so the bend line will be at right angles to the direction of rolling .
num the radius of bends measured to the concave face shall not be less and preferably shall be greater than shown as follows where t is the thickness of the plate angle of bend num to num numt minimum radius num to num numt num to num numt when a shorter radius is essential bend the plates while hot at a temperature not to exceed num f except for astm a num or astm a num steel in which case bend at a temperature not to exceed num f and requench and temper them .
ensure that hotbent plates conform to the requirements of num above .
num before bending round corners of the plate to a radius of num inch through that portion of the plate where bending is to occur .
num pins and rollers .
a general .
accurately turn pins and rollers to the dimensions shown on the drawings .
furnish pins and rollers that are straight smooth and free from flaws .
produce the final surface by a finishing cut and provide a smooth finished surface with an ansi num standard finish .
forge and anneal pins and rollers more than num inches in diameter .
in pins larger than num inches in diameter bore a hole num inches or more in diameter full length along the axis after the forging has cooled to a temperature below the critical range .
bore under suitable conditions to prevent injury by too rapid cooling and before being annealed .
furnish num pilot nuts and num driving nuts for each size of pin .
b boring pin holes .
bore pin holes true to the specified diameter smooth and straight at right angles with the axis of the member and parallel with each other .
num produce the final surface by a finishing cut and leave the finished surface smooth and polished .
do not allow the outsidetooutside distance of holes in tension members and insidetoinside distance of holes in compression members to vary from that specified by more than num inch .
bore holes in builtup members after completing connections .
c pin clearances .
do not allow the diameter of the pin hole to exceed that of the pin by more than num inch for pins num inches or less in diameter or num inch for larger pins .
num threads for bolts and pins .
furnish threads for bolts and pins that conform to the united states standard series uncansi bnum class numa for external threads and class numb for internal threads except that pin ends having a diameter of num num inches or more shall be threaded num threads to the one inch and except as required for highstrength steel bolts .
num annealing and stress relieving .
for structural members indicated in the contract to be annealed or normalized finish machining boring and straightening after heat treatment .
normalize and anneal full annealing as specified in astm e num .
maintain temperatures uniformly throughout the furnace during heating and cooling so that temperatures at points on the members will not differ by more than num f at any one time .
maintain a record of each furnace charge that identifies pieces in the charge and lists temperatures and schedule actually used .
provide proper instruments including recording pyrometers for determining temperatures of members in the furnace at any time .
make records of the treatment operation available to the engineer .
stress relieve members such as bridge shoes pedestals or other parts built up by welding sections of plates together according to the requirements of aws dnum when required by the contract .
num forgings .
furnish forgings that are free from internal and external cracks and other harmful defects .
the engineer will determine the method of inspection .
num mill and shop inspection and shipping .
a notice of beginning work .
designate to the engineer within num days subsequent to the award of the contract the locations of fabricating shops and estimated quantities of steel to be fabricated at each .
the department will not allow structural steel to be fabricated in more than num fabricating locations a location will be considered all shops within one city unless approved in writing by the engineer .
the engineer will not allow any work to be done in the shop before granting authorization to proceed .
furnish the department copies of mill tests and analyses reports of such structural shapes bearing the manufacturers name and heat number .
when such identification does not exist the engineer may require samples for test purposes be cut from the materials .
when mill tests and analyses or subsequent tests of samples indicate material does not comply with this section the engineer will reject such materials .
when the engineer rejects materials furnish suitable material .
b facilities for inspection .
furnish all facilities for inspection of material and workmanship in the mill and shop and allow the inspector free access to necessary parts of the premises .
notify the engineer when material is ready for shop inspection .
furnish power and utilities for operating inspection equipment provide shop space for inspection work handle material as necessary and enforce required safety precautions for radioactive exposure .
num c mill orders change orders shipping statements mill test reports and shop bills .
furnish num copies of mill orders change orders mill shipping statements mill test reports fabricators shop bills when not attached to drawings and shipping statements to the engineer for all structural steel materials .
ensure that mill test reports show that all materials conform to this section and are signed by a responsible representative of the company .
include the weights of individual members on shipping statements .
d facilities for testing .
furnish test specimens and all labor testing machines and tools necessary to prepare specimens and make full size tests .
e rejections .
the inspectors initial acceptance of any material or finished members will not prevent the engineer from subsequently rejecting material or finished members when he determines that they do not conform to the contract .
f weighing of members .
when the contract specifies that the department will pay for any part of the material by weight weigh the finished work in the presence of the inspector .
supply accurate scales and perform all work involved in handling and weighing various parts .
g marking and shipping .
paint or mark each member with an erection mark for identification and furnish an erection diagram with erection marks shown thereon .
mark the weights of members weighing more than num tons on the member .
load structural members on trucks or cars so that they may be transported and unloaded at their destination without being excessively stressed deformed or otherwise damaged .
ship girders and store them with the web vertical unless the engineer allows in writing .
the cabinets shop inspector will not stamp for acceptance until the members are loaded on cars or trucks just prior to shipping .
pack bolts of one length and diameter and loose nuts and washers of each size separately .
mark a list and description of contents on the outside of each container .
h handling material .
conduct loading transporting unloading and storing of structural material to maintain it clean and free from injury .
num field inspection .
when the substructure is constructed under a separate contract establish lines and elevations for setting steel from the completed substructure .
obtain the engineers approval of the existing lines and elevations prior to submitting shop details for review .
the engineers approval of the established lines and elevations does not relieve the substructure contractor from the responsibility for constructing the substructure to the lines and elevations shown .
provide inspection facilities to inspect erection of structural steel .
when the contract does not require shop inspection of the structural steel the engineer will inspect the material and workmanship upon site delivery .
num field storing and handling materials .
place material to be stored on blocking above ground .
maintain it clean and properly drained .
place uniform depth girders and beams upright .
support long members such as columns and chords on skids placed to prevent injury from deflection .
use extreme care in handling the steel at all times to prevent damage of any parts .
insulate the steel from binding chains with approved softeners .
pad the hooks and slings used to hoist steel .
place the steel so that rubbing will not occur during shipment .
store the steel at the job site on pallets or other means approved by the engineer so that it does not rest on the ground and so that its components do not fall or rest on each other .
num falsework erection methods and equipment .
ensure falsework is properly designed by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in kentucky .
construct and maintain falsework for the loads that will be placed thereon .
when required prepare and submit for review plans for falsework or for changes in an existing structure necessary for maintaining traffic .
although the engineer has reviewed these plans take responsibility for the falsework design .
num before starting work present for the engineers review the proposed method of erection and the proposed amount and character of equipment to use for erection .
although the engineer has reviewed this method take responsibility for safety and erection .
provide the engineer with a certification by a registered professional engineer licensed to practice in kentucky that falsework towers have been assembled according to the approved falsework drawings before placing loads on the falsework .
when placing falsework installations adjacent to an open public road design and protect the falsework system from errant highway vehicles or from vibration forces caused by passing vehicles .
num bearings and anchorages .
set all bearing assemblies level and to the elevations specified in the plans .
make adjustments in the horizontal positions of bearing assemblies for temperature as the engineer directs .
obtain full bearing on the concrete under bearing assemblies regardless of tolerances .
set masonry plates and the bearing plates of bearing assemblies on ground concrete surfaces or elastomeric bearing pads or on lead plates in conformance with the details specified in the plans .
immediately before setting bearing assemblies or masonry plates thoroughly clean the surfaces of concrete and metal to be in contact .
drill the anchor bolt holes to the depth and dimensions specified in the plans after properly setting the base plates .
keep the holes dry during freezing weather .
do not lead or grout anchor bolts until after assembly of each continuous unit or span .
after placing the anchor bolts pour molten lead into the holes and pack them so the holes will be completely filled flush to the top of the base plates .
heat anchor bolts prior to pouring the lead to ensure the lead reaches the bottom and to prevent premature cooling .
ensure that the final adjustment and setting of expansion rockers rollers and anchor bolts take into consideration dead load elongation in the span and temperature at the time of setting .
normal temperature is considered num f. set rockers so as to be vertical at num f after applying all dead load .
adjust nuts on anchor bolts at the expansion ends of spans to allow free movement of the span .
when expansion devices such as rockers and expansion dams have been rigidly fixed to hold them in correct alignment release them immediately upon completing concrete placement in the portion of the structure they are installed .
num straightening bent material .
straighten bent plates and angles or other shapes by methods that will not produce fracture or other injury .
do not heat the metal unless the engineer allows in which case do not heat to a higher temperature than num f as determined by a temperature stick or crayon .
after heating and straightening cool the metal as slowly as possible .
following straightening carefully inspect the surface of the metal for evidence of fracture .
the department will reject metal with sharp kinks and bends .
do not straighten material by direct hammering .
num field assembling .
assemble parts accurately as shown and follow all match marks .
handle material so no part will be bent broken or otherwise damaged .
do not injure or distort the members by hammering them .
clean bearing surfaces and surfaces to be in permanent contact before assembling the members .
unless erected by the cantilever method erect truss spans on blocking that is placed to provide proper camber .
leave blocking in place until tension chord splices and all other truss connections are pinned and bolted and then release it sufficiently from the falsework to bring compression chord joints into full bearing .
num pin connections .
use pilot and driving nuts in driving pins .
drive pins so that members will take full bearing .
screw pin nuts tight and burr the threads at the face of the nut with a pointed tool .
num misfits .
the engineer will allow the correction of minor misfits using num small amounts of reaming cutting and chipping .
however immediately report to the engineer any error in shop fabrication or deformation resulting from handling and transportation that prevents proper assembly and fitting of parts by moderate use of drift pins or by a moderate amount of reaming and slight chipping or cutting .
obtain the engineers approval of the proposed method for correction .
make the correction in the engineers presence .
for beams or girders that do not conform to the plan camber and grade in the erected position either adjust the depth of the concrete slab haunch over the steel supporting members or rework the girder camber to meet the plan grade and slab thickness .
do not allow shear connectors to penetrate the slab less than num inches .
num removal of falsework .
upon completion of erection and before final acceptance remove all falsework excavated or useless materials rubbish and temporary buildings .
replace or renew any fences damaged and restore in an acceptable manner all property both public and private which may have been damaged during prosecution of work .
leave the bridge site and adjacent highway in a neat and presentable condition satisfactory to the engineer .
remove all excavated material or falsework placed in the stream channel during construction before final acceptance .
num cleaning and painting .
a general .
furnish a coating system from the departments list of approved materials for bridge coatings class i. furnish a coating system in which all coats are produced by the same manufacturer .
follow the manufacturers recommendations for all mixing and application conditions and methods .
apply the prime coat in the shop .
field apply the remaining coatings of the selected coating system .
when using thinners mix according to the manufacturers written recommendation in the presence of the engineer .
furnish copies of the manufacturers technical data sheets material safety data sheets and application procedures to the engineer for review and approval before beginning painting .
submit written procedures for compliance with this subsection for cleaning and painting in both the shop and the field to the engineer for approval before beginning work .
include at least the following num surface preparation methods and equipment .
detail all equipment and operational procedures intended to be utilized in any process which prepares a surface to receive a coating .
num painting methods and equipment .
detail all equipment and operational procedures intended to be utilized in the application of coatings .
num containment .
detail all equipment and operational procedures to be utilized in the erection maintenance and dismantling of containments .
include provisions for safety precautions traffic control and access .
address responsibility for damage to public property and the environment due to any cleaning or painting operation .
num storage and handling .
detail all equipment and operational procedures to be utilized in handling storing and transporting painted members .
num coating manufacturers special instructions .
detail all recommendations and special instructions provided from the coatings manufacturer to be utilized for surface preparation or coatings application .
submit the coating manufacturers written approval for application of the coating system to surfaces prepared in accordance to the detailed operational procedures .
num quality control plan .
detail all equipment and operational procedures to be utilized to ensure the quality of the completed coating system .
include the following num a name and qualifications of painting supervisors and inspection personnel .
b assurance of authority and responsibility for painting supervisors to halt operations and make corrections upon discovery of non conforming work .
c methods of informing painting personnel of the written approved painting procedures and their responsibility to comply .
d equipment and operational procedures for inspection acceptance or rejection and documentation of surface preparation and coatings application operations .
e procedures and documentation for calibration and field verification of calibration of equipment utilized for inspection of surface preparation and coatings application .
f process for control of project related documentation .
the department requires acceptance testing of coatings on a perlot basis pershipment .
the division of materials will perform acceptance testing .
at his option the engineer may elect to conduct more frequent sampling and testing .
the engineer will obtain test samples of coatings to be applied at the shop and the field .
allow num working days for testing and approval of the sampled coating .
apply coating only after it has been approved by the department .
it is the contractors responsibility to maintain an adequate inventory of approved coating .
the department assumes no responsibility for lost work due to rejection of coating or approved coating subsequently found to be defective during the application process .
store the coating according to section num .
the department will reject the coating when test results indicate that the material does not conform to the requirements of this section .
remove all rejected coating materials from the job before beginning any painting .
mix coatings with a high shear mixer according to the manufacturers instructions to obtain a smooth lumpfree consistency .
do not use paddle mixers or paint shakers .
mix in the original containers unless the engineer approves otherwise .
ensure that all of the solids that may have settled to the bottom of the container are thoroughly dispersed .
when specified by the manufacturers product data sheet or application instructions continuously agitate the mixed coating throughout the application process .
apply coatings smoothly and uniformly allowing no excess coating to collect at any point .
paint the contacting surfaces of joints or connections with primer only .
when deemed unsatisfactory by the engineer remove clean and prepare again all paint work at any stage of its completion .
when necessary or requested by the engineer and at no additional cost to the cabinet furnish a technical representative from the coating manufacturer to observe the initial application of all coatings used to advise as to proper application techniques and to determine that proper results are being obtained .
ensure that the technical representative is also available to visit the project at all times during the work if the engineer requests or deems a visit is necessary .
obtain and record ambient conditions air temperature steel temperature relative humidity and dew point to verify compliance to this subsection .
apply coatings using methods recommended by the manufacture of the coating system to attain the manufacturers recommended dry film thickness as stated on the applicable technical data sheet .
all coating thickness measurements are dry film thickness .
determine dry film thicknesses with a type ii nondestructive dry film thickness gage .
at a minimum verify calibration of the type ii gage in accordance with sspc pa num by placing a plastic shim representing the expected dry film thickness of the num coating over a representatively blasted surface before and after obtaining dry film thickness measurements for any surfaces painted in a shift .
obtain dry film thickness measurements in accordance with sspc pa num per shift for each coating application .
use of a tooke gage or other destructive film thickness gage to assess the coating thickness on all coats may be used at the engineers discretion .
the engineer will reject the total coating system when any coating is determined to be less than the specified minimum thickness even when the total dry film thickness exceeds the total of the minimum for all coats .
provide osha compliant safe and adequate access for proper inspection of the cleaning and painting at both the fabrication plant and the construction site during all phases of work and for a period of at least num working days after completing each painting section .
furnish erect and move scaffolding or appropriate equipment approved by the engineer to allow the inspector to closely inspect all surfaces .
use rubber rollers or other protective devices on scaffold fasteners .
do not use metal rollers or other types of fasteners that may mar or damage the freshly surfaces .
comply with all federal state and local regulations relative to environmental contamination safety and protection of persons and property .
b preparation for shop coating .
after fabrication and immediately before painting remove all areas of oil grease or other deleterious material by solvent cleaning in accordance with sspc sp num .
perform blotter tests in accordance with astm d num standard test method for indicating oil or water in compressed air daily per compressor in the presence of the engineer .
use compressed air only when there is no evidence of moisture or oil .
abrasive blast clean all exposed surfaces of the metal to a minimum of sspc sp numnace num near white metal blast cleaning .
use abrasive media that produces an angular profile and conforms to sspc ab num ab num or ab num as applicable .
ensure that the depth of the anchor profile of the abrasive blast cleaned surfaces meets the coatings manufacturers recommended anchor profile range as stated on the applicable technical data sheet .
if no range is recommended produce an anchor profile within the range of num mils to num mils .
measure anchor profile on metal surfaces in accordance with astm d num method c. take at a minimum num randomly distributed anchor profile measurements for each numsquare foot area of prepared surface .
remove all fins tears slivers and burred or sharp edges that are present on steel members and that appear during the blasting operation by grinding and reblasting the area to achieve the required anchor profile .
apply coating only after the engineer inspects and approves the surfaces .
c application of shop coating .
apply one full coat of primer to all metal surfaces prior to shipping steel from the plant .
include surfaces that are to be field bolted in contact .
apply primer only to clean dry metal surfaces that meet the surface preparation standard .
ensure that the application and curing of the primer coat to surfaces that are to be field bolted in contact is in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations as stated on the certificate of analysis certifying class b slip coefficient of the primer .
apply coating only when ambient conditions are in accordance with the coating manufacturers recommended ambient condition ranges for application .
maintain the manufacturers recommended ambient conditions for curing through full cure of the applied prime coat .
in the location where application and curing of coatings is to be performed record and verify ambient conditions through the use of a numhour data logger system .
ensure that the dry film thickness of the prime coat is within the manufacturers recommended dry film thickness application range on all surfaces except those that are to be field bolted in contact .
ensure that the dry film thickness on surfaces to be field bolted in contact does not exceed the maximum num dry film thickness as stated on the certificate of analysis certifying class b slip coefficient of the primer .
if the prime coat is deficient in thickness follow the coating manufacturers recommendation to achieve acceptable full prime coat thickness .
protect freshly coated primed surfaces from subsequent blast cleaning operations .
when damage occurs thoroughly wire brush or if visible rust occurs reblast to the specified surface preparation condition .
vacuum and re prime these surfaces .
do not apply successive coats of the system over the prime coat until it is fully cured .
apply the remaining coatings of the coating system in the shop before assembly or erection in areas that will be inaccessible when assembled in the field .
apply the shop primer to interior surfaces of box sections that are to be sealed by welding .
paint structural steel that is to be welded only after completing welding .
when welding the steel in the shop and subsequently erected by bolting apply one coat of primer after finishing the shop welding and blast cleaning .
paint surfaces of iron and steel castings only when directed according to subsection num d. transfer or preserve field identification erection marks and weight marks .
load the steel for shipment only after the shop coating has fully cured and the engineer has inspected it .
d preparation for field coatings .
clean by sections bays or other readily identifiable portions of the structure .
apply coating only after the engineer has inspected and accepted each section bay or portion .
after erection including all bolting and remedial work prepare the shop applied prime coating for field applied coatings as follows .
remove all grease oil lubricants or other deleterious material from all surfaces to be painted including lubricant or residuals from the surfaces of all galvanized nuts bolts and washers by solvent cleaning according to sspc sp num .
when dry overspray from the shop applied primer exists remove by sanding .
high pressure water wash all structural steel at num to num psi using clean potable water .
as needed use a nonsudsing biodegradable detergent to remove all surface contaminants not removed by high pressure water washing .
rinse all areas where a detergent or solvent was applied by high pressure water washing with clean potable water .
repair all damaged prime coating in accordance with the coating manufactures recommendations .
apply a field coat of approved prime coating to all areas not possessing an acceptable shop applied prime coating .
completely remove all dirt dry spray and other foreign material before applying field coatings .
assume sole responsible for any damage resulting from field surface preparation operations .
when application of any coating will exceed the recoat window of the previously applied coating abrade the surface of the previously applied coating according to the coating manufacturers recommendations before applying additional coatings .
e application of field coatings .
apply field coatings between april numst and november numth .
the department may allow painting at other times when the engineer approves in writing .
apply coatings only to clean and dry surfaces when the ambient air temperature is num f or greater the surface temperature of the steel members to be painted is at least num f above the dew point and the relative humidity is less than num percent or in accordance with the coating manufactures recommended ambient condition ranges whichever is more stringent .
record and verify ambient conditions are in compliance at the location where painting is to be performed prior to beginning coating application and at a minimum of every num hours throughout the application and curing process for each applied coating .
additional monitoring and recording of ambient conditions may be required at the engineers discretion .
num totally enclose each section bay or portion of the structure with containment meeting at a minimum the requirements of sspc guide num class numw during all coating applications including repair of coatings defects and deficiencies .
protect pedestrian vehicular and other traffic on or underneath the bridge and all portions of the bridge superstructure and substructure against damage or disfigurement by spatters splashes and smirches of coating or coating materials .
maintain the containment materials to prevent releases of coating materials .
monitor the containment a minimum of num minutes for each num hours of coating application operations in accordance with sspc guide num method a and visible emissions monitoring general surveillance level num emissions .
assume sole responsibility for all damages resulting from coating application operations .
submit a detailed written outline to the engineer for approval before field painting .
include sketches if necessary of methods to prevent overspray drift .
include protection of vehicular traffic boats and marinas beneath the bridge and buildings or other property in the vicinity of the bridge .
apply field coatings only after satisfactorily completing field cleaning and ensuring that the coating applied for retouching the shop coat is thoroughly dry .
do not apply succeeding coats until the previous coats have dried throughout the full thickness of the coating film and the coating application has been accepted by the engineer .
paint from the top of the structure toward the bottom and proceed by sections bays or other readily identifiable portions of the structure unless the contract or engineer directs otherwise .
apply successive coats of the coating system to all exposed surfaces of the completed structure .
stencil the completion date of painting including the year and month on the structure as the engineer directs .
f repair of shop and field coatings .
repair according to the manufacturers recommendations and as otherwise specified in this section .
when spot repair will not produce a uniform and durable coating repaint the entire member as the engineer directs .
repair surfaces before erection that will be inaccessible after erection .
num name plates .
when shown furnish and install name plates including fastening devices .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity by the lump sum .
the department will not measure miscellaneous metals shop inspections inspection facilities and equipment material samples for mill authorization enforcement of required safety precaution for radioactive exposure furnishing of technical representatives for paint extra paint required when bolting nameplates or direct tension indicators for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num structural steel lump sum pay unit the department will adjust the contract unit price for structural steel by the following formula when the engineer makes plan changes that result in an increase of the estimated plan weight of steel adjusted contract original contract x unit price unit price original estimated plan weight revised estimated plan weight num bear all shop inspection costs incurred at locations other than the num original designated locations .
the department will initially pay for the inspection cost .
reimburse the department subsequently .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
the department will make partial payment for structural steel plate stored at the fabrication shop when requested .
this applies to structural steel quantities of num pounds or more .
num section num concrete bridges num description .
construct concrete bridges and parts of other bridges that are concrete .
num materials .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num bearing and expansion plates .
conform to section num .
when the contract requires selflubricating plates furnish machine surfaces with trepanned recesses .
num rockers .
conform to section num .
num elastomeric bearing pads .
conform to section num .
num preformed cork expansion joint filler type ii .
conform to section num .
use with bearing pads .
num forms .
conform to subsection num .
num structural steel .
conform to section num .
num masonry coating .
conform to section num .
num anchor bolts .
conform to section num .
num precast and prestressed members .
conform to subsection num .
num concrete curing materials .
conform to section num .
num construction .
num foundation .
begin work after structure excavation sheet piling and all bearing piles have been prepared according to sections num and num .
num falsework and forms .
construct all falsework and forms according to subsections num and num .
num classes of concrete for substructure .
use class aa concrete in portions of the substructure above the top of caps except pedestals .
use class a concrete in portions of the substructure below the top of caps and in pedestals .
when placing concrete under water use class a modified concrete .
num placing steel reinforcement in substructure .
place steel reinforcement according to subsection num .
num placing concrete in substructure .
proportion mix and place concrete according to subsection num .
construct construction joints according to subsection num .
place concrete for footings to the full depth in one continuous operation and allow them to set at least num hours before placing forms thereon for other parts of the substructure unit .
place concrete in columns in one continuous operation between construction joints .
allow concrete in columns to set at least num hours before placing forms for caps .
place concrete for bridge seats according to subsection num .
finish all exposed surfaces according to subsection num .
bevel all exposed num edges num inch .
cure according to subsection num .
num placing anchor bolts .
place anchor bolts in piers and abutments according to subsection num .
num setting expansion devices .
install bearing and expansion plates bearing pads rockers and other expansion devices except friction or sliding type according to subsection num .
for friction or sliding expansion devices furnish either structural steel plates elastomeric bearing pads or preformed cork .
firmly anchor expansion devices in correct position as specified in the plans .
thoroughly coat all sliding surfaces of expansion devices with graphite lubricant just before placing them in position .
do not place concrete in a manner that will interfere with free movement of the expansion devices .
when preformed cork expansion devices are specified for sliding joints furnish preformed cork material that is the full width and depth of each contact surface and is not built up with several pieces or strips .
num protection .
protect the structure during construction .
protect concrete parapet walls of abutments and end bents or ends of concrete spans from damage by equipment or traffic by methods specified in the plans or as directed .
do not allow any traffic over the structure from the time it is completed until the pavement is completed without protecting the ends of the bridge .
num placing superstructure .
do not place any superstructure on finished piers or abutments until attaining the required concrete strength or the table in subsection num for applying significant loads .
with the exception of rigid frame structures do not start the erecting or placing of the superstructure until removing the forms and determining the character of concrete in the substructure .
construct the concrete deck according to subsection num .
construct the concrete beams according to subsection num .
num concrete pile piers steel pile piers and abutments .
construct all precast or castinplace concrete pile piers and abutments and steel pile piers and abutments according to the lines grades dimensions and design specified in the plans and according to sections num num and num .
remove falsework under pier caps according to subsection num .
num construction date and identification .
stencil the construction date and identification according to subsection num .
num inspection facilities .
provide facilities for inspection of work as it progresses and for final inspection of completed work .
provide ladders or other satisfactory means to enable the engineer to examine and inspect pier and abutment caps and bearings .
remove them after final inspection and the engineers approval of work .
num general requirements for superstructure .
give all exposed surfaces a finish according to subsection num .
construct bridge slabs according to subsection num .
construct precast and prestressed beams according to subsection num .
num steel reinforcement for superstructures .
place all steel according to subsection num .
num concrete bridge layout .
dimensions specified in the plans are for a normal temperature of num f. layout dimensions are horizontal measurements .
num permissible finish variations .
do not allow lines of the finished num concrete except bridge slabs and precast piles to vary more than num inch per num feet or vary from plan lines more than num percent of the distance between extremities of the unit considered .
the engineer will decide whether any variations in excess of those stated are cause either for removal and replacement of the work according to subsection num or for a reduction in payment .
num measurement .
num concrete .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
the department will not measure furnishing inspection facilities or stenciling for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num steel reinforcement .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num structural steel .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num masonry coating .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num quality control .
measure and pay according to section num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num concrete class see subsection num pay unit num steel reinforcement see subsection num num structural steel see subsection num num masonry coating see subsection num num when the variation is not within the permissible limits and the engineer does not require removal and replacement the department will deduct from the total contract price the product of the volume of concrete not within the permissible limits multiplied by the contract unit price for the concrete .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num reinforced concrete bridge slabs num description .
construct reinforced concrete slabs on bridges .
num materials and equipment .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num joint materials .
conform to section num .
num structural steel joints .
conform to section num .
num forms .
conform to subsection num .
num concrete curing materials .
conform to section num .
num welded and seamless steel pipe for bridge floor drains .
conform to section num .
num zinc oxidezinc dust primer .
conform to federal specification ttp num type ii .
num finishing machines .
provide each finishing machine with at least num movable footbridges from which to perform finishing and curing .
furnish a selfpropelled finishing machine equipped with num one or more augers or other equally effective device to move and position the concrete num a cylinder to compact and finish the concrete and num a pan float .
provide a machine that is readily adjustable so all its devices may be easily operated to satisfactorily position consolidate and finish the concrete .
use machines that span the full width of the bridge are adjustable to grades paralleling the roadway crown and are of rigid construction to ensure a surface finish true to the lines grades and cross sections specified in the plans or established by the engineer .
give consideration to setting finishing machine on skew if angle exceeds num degrees .
support the machine by rails or tracks of sufficient section modulus to withstand the imposed loads and deflect no more than num inch between the rail supports .
provide rails or track that are sufficiently rigid to prevent the machine from riding up when finishing concrete of the specified slump .
install the rails outside the limits of the roadway slab set and maintain them true to grades paralleling the bridge grade throughout the entire finishing operation .
num hand operated internal vibrators .
conform to subsection num .
num construction .
num swinging the spans .
before placing concrete slabs on steel spans or precast concrete release the temporary erection supports under the bridge and swing the span free on its supports .
num forming .
form according to subsection num .
construct falsework according to subsection num .
construct falsework and forms for multiple slab spans num to provide the camber required in the finished structure .
department will allow the use of permanent steel bridge deck forms as follows a design .
conform to the following criteria for designing permanent steel bridge deck forms num design the steel forms on the basis of dead load of form reinforcement and plastic concrete plus num pounds per square foot for construction loads .
do not allow the unit working stress in the steel sheet to exceed num of the specified minimum yield strength of the furnished material or to exceed num psi .
num do not allow deflection under the weight of the forms the plastic concrete and reinforcement to exceed num of the form span or num inch whichever is less and do not base this deflection on a total loading of less than num pounds per square foot .
base the permissible form camber on the actual dead load condition .
do not use camber to compensate for deflection in excess of the forgoing limits .
num use the design span of the form sheets as the clear span between edges of support angles plus num inches measured parallel to the form flutes .
do not use a fabricated panel length that is less than the distance between edges of beam flanges minus num inches .
num compute physical design properties according to aisi specification for the design of coldformed steel structural members .
num maintain the plan dimensions of both layers of primary deck reinforcement from each surface of the concrete deck .
num do not consider permanent steel bridge deck forms as lateral bracing for compression flanges of supporting structural members .
num except when permitted by the engineer do not use permanent steel bridge deck forms in panels where longitudinal deck construction joints are located between stringers .
num do not weld to any steel girder stringer or floor beam to reinforcement bars in concrete beams or to form supports fabricated from nonweldable grades of steel .
protect flanges from damage during erection of forms .
num submit fabrication shop and erection drawings with design calculations to the engineer for review .
clearly indicate on these plans the grade of steel the physical and section properties for all permanent steel bridge deck form sheets and the locations where the forms are supported .
num adjust the steel forms to grade from the plan construction elevations to provide the plan slab thickness with no additional dead load other than that of the steel forms .
num fasten laps between sheets to ensure mortar tightness .
consider direction of concrete placement to determine lap orientation .
b installation .
install all forms according to approved fabrication and erection plans .
on steel members do not rest form sheets directly on the top of the girder stringer or floor beam flanges .
securely fasten sheets to form supports with a minimum bearing length of one inch at each end .
place form supports in direct contact with the flange of girder stringer or floor beam .
make all attachments by permissible welds screws bolts clips or other approved means .
however do not weld form supports to flanges of steel .
ensure that welding and welds are according to the provisions of aws d num pertaining to fillet welds except that the engineer will allow num inch fillet welds .
welder certification is not required .
securely fasten all forms to supports while placing them .
num on concrete beams show all support hardware that is to be cast into the beam on the shop drawings .
make attachments to the form supports or to the auxiliary components by permissible welds screws bolts clips or other approved means .
protect the concrete beam from damage .
clean all form welds of slag and wire brush just before placing the deck concrete .
thoroughly clean wire brush and paint any form metal where the galvanized coating has been damaged or where white rust has formed on the metal with num coats of zinc oxidezinc dust primer with no color added to the satisfaction of the engineer .
it is not necessary to touch up minor heat discoloration in areas of welds .
locate transverse construction joints in the concrete deck slab at the bottom of a flute and field drill num inch weep holes at not less than one foot on center along the line of the joint .
locate the joint and weep holes at the lowest portion of the concrete soffit .
c inspection .
the engineer will carefully observe placement of the bridge deck slab .
if the engineer determines that an event such as a delay that may have caused a cold joint or insufficient vibration of concrete during the placement of the concrete warrants inspection of the underside of the deck remove at least one section of the forms at a location and time selected by the engineer to provide visual evidence that the concrete mixture and construction procedures are obtaining the desired results .
when forms are removed for inspection do not replace the forms but repair the adjacent metal forms and supports to present a neat appearance and ensure their satisfactory retention .
upon removal of the forms the engineer will examine the concrete surfaces for cavities honeycombing and other defects .
if the engineer finds irregularities and determines that these irregularities do not justify rejection of the work repair the concrete and give it an ordinary surface finish .
if the engineer determines that the concrete where the form was removed is unsatisfactory remove additional forms as necessary for the engineer to inspect .
modify methods of construction as the engineer requires to obtain satisfactory concrete in the slab .
remove or repair all unsatisfactory concrete .
provide all facilities reasonably required for the safe and convenient conduct of the engineers inspection procedures .
num placing and fastening reinforcement .
place all steel reinforcement to within num inch vertically and horizontally of the position shown and according to applicable requirements of subsection num .
when concrete overlays are included in the original bridge construction construct according to the tolerance requirements for a new slab .
tie down reinforcing mats securely with wire num inch or greater in diameter at intervals of no greater than num feet in both the longitudinal and transverse directions to prevent upward movement of reinforcement during construction operations .
when tied to the forms extend the ties through the forms .
do not deposit any concrete until the reinforcement is in place and the engineer has inspected and approved it and observed a complete and thorough dry run with the finishing machine over the entire slab area to be placed to ensure accurate placement of steel top clearance and proper slab depth .
the engineer may allow splicing the reinforcement according to subsection num .
num expansion and fixed joints .
place all joints according to the details specified in the plans or as directed .
correct improperly placed joints to the satisfaction of the engineer even when the correction requires removal and replacement .
a open joints .
place open joints in the locations specified in the plans and construct them by the insertion and subsequent removal of a template of approved material .
accomplish the insertion and removal of the template num without chipping or breaking the corners of the concrete .
do not extend reinforcement across an open joint .
b steel joints .
accurately shape the plates angles or other structural shapes at the shop to conform to the configuration of the concrete slab .
ensure that the surface in the finished plane is true and free of warping .
employ methods in placing the joints to keep them in correct position during placement of the concrete .
set the opening at expansion joints to the temperature adjustment specified in the plans .
avoid impairment of the clearance .
when placing concrete make adjustments in the joint widths to accommodate temperature changes .
c coldapplied or hotapplied sealing compound .
ensure that all joints to be sealed are free of cracked or spalled areas .
chip cracked areas back to sound concrete .
ensure that the faces of all joints to be sealed are free of all foreign matter curing compound oils greases paint dirt free water and laitance .
thoroughly clean all joint faces by sandblasting or by means of a mechanical rotary wire brush .
immediately before sealing blow out the joint with air from an air compressor equipped with an oil and water trap .
use an air compressor of such capacity as will maintain numpsi pressure when air is delivered to the joint through a nozzle no more than num inch in diameter .
when any sealing compound has not bonded to the joint wall or face remove it and clean and reseal the joint .
place all coldapplied sealing compound with a manufacturer recommended applicator and follow the manufacturers mixing and placing instructions .
provide a copy of these instructions and the specifications for the applicator to the division of materials .
d preformed neoprene joint seals .
ensure that all joints are true to alignment and have vertical faces .
ensure that each joint is uniform in width throughout its length .
reform reconstruct and resaw or otherwise modify improperly constructed joints to the satisfaction of engineer .
construct expansion joints to be sealed by this method according to the details shown on the standard drawings or specified in the plans .
when a joint as constructed has a width larger or smaller than the specified width provide a seal for that joint that is the correct size for the asbuilt width .
ensure that all joints to be sealed are free of cracked or spalled concrete .
chip damaged areas back to sound concrete and repair them with an approved epoxy resin compound or other materials approved by the department .
install the seals in the properly prepared joints by a tool designed specifically for installing joint seals .
remove and replace any seal that is damaged during installation .
remove any seal that is improperly positioned in the joint and reinstall it at the proper elevation .
use hand methods to install seals only in areas that are inaccessible to the machine or obtain the engineers written permission to install seals by hand methods .
the engineer will measure seals before and after installation as a check against stretch .
remove any installed seal that shows more than num percent stretch and correctly reinstall it or replace it .
install the seals in structures immediately after expiration of the curing period .
install all seals securely and ensure that they are free from any objectionable curling or twisting in the joint groove .
use a lubricant adhesive that covers both sides of the seal over the full area in contact with the sides of the joint .
apply the lubricant adhesive either to the faces of the joint or to the seal or to both .
install all seals in a highly compressed state so that the top of the seals is num num inch below the level of the roadway surface .
install the seals in one piece without field splicing for the full length of each of the transverse joints .
the engineer will allow one factory splice per transverse joint .
obtain the engineers approval for any field splices required by partial width construction .
num when specified for longitudinal joints in structures install the seals in practical lengths without field splicing .
e neoprene expansion joints .
furnish neoprene expansion joint consisting of any one of the manufactured joint seals specified in the plans .
determine which of the specified joint seals will be used and obtain written approval of joint details prior to placing the deck concrete .
submit shop drawings for approval according to subsection num .
ensure that these drawings along with joint details include a layout plan of the joint units to be used .
also include procedures for setting expansion joint width so the opening will be the specified width at num f. the engineer will approve of details of installation and his decision will be final .
include the details and material specifications for the manufactured neoprene expansion joints and incidental accessories sealants and adhesives with the shop drawings for approval .
before beginning work on the joint furnish the manufacturers written installation instructions .
comply with the manufacturers installation instructions apply sealants and adhesives and install joint units as shown on the approved shop drawings and as specified in this section .
when the engineer requests obtain technical assistance from the supplier of the joint .
failure of the joint supplier to provide adequate technical assistance may be cause for removal of the joint seal from the departments list of approved materials .
remove all forms and debris from the joint opening .
ensure that concrete or metal surfaces where the neoprene expansion joints are to be set are dry clean and free from dirt grease and contaminants level and sound with no broken or spalled concrete .
ensure that adjacent joint seats are on a straight plane with each other .
furnish and install the neoprene strip sealing element in one continuous unbroken length for the entire joint length .
for the strip seal type joint ensure that the locking groove in the metal extrusion is clean and free of any dirt or corrosion before installing the neoprene strip seal element .
bond the strip seal in place with the manufacturers recommended adhesive which meets the engineers approval .
where longitudinal joints cross transverse joint seals provide a seal by flattening and extending the longitudinal joint neoprene seal element under the transverse joint pad .
when this procedure is not practical use a separate neoprene apron bonded to the longitudinal seal element .
ensure that the finished joint presents a smooth neat appearance .
wipe or scrape away excess sealant before it becomes hard .
upon completion of an entire joint grind any uneven concrete or armored edge .
num drainage .
install deck drains at the locations shown or as directed and place them before placing the bridge deck slab .
paint all drain pipes according to subsection num .
provide transverse drainage of the roadway surface by means of a suitable crown or cross slope in the floor slab .
effectively drain gutters using weep holes or drain scuppers constructed at locations and in the manner specified in the plans .
install drain scuppers to prevent drainage water from staining exposed surfaces of girders and abutment walls .
in general extend drain pipes through the concrete slab to a distance of no less than one inch below the slab or underlying beam .
provide the under surface of cantilever brackets and overlapping slabs with a v groove drip strip num inch in depth at a point no more than num inches from the outside face of the overhang for the purpose of arresting flow of moisture to prevent staining .
num weather limitations and placing concrete .
do not place any concrete within deck slabs during the months of january or february except for barriers plinths curbs walks etc without engineer approved cold weather plan .
place all deck concrete num according to subsection num .
any time the ambient temperature is anticipated to be num f or higher place concrete in the deck slab during evening hours after ambient temperatures cool to below num f and cease placement before temperatures rise above num f. cool forms and beams tops by water spray if their temperature exceeds num f. always protect deck placement from rain water being introduced into the concrete and from rainwater surface damage .
cease deck placement immediately or cover it for complete protection when rain occurs .
num depositing consolidating and striking off slab concrete .
wet the reinforcing steel and forms with water prior to placing concrete .
deposit the concrete between the curbs or between the longitudinal joints when specified in the plans to the full depth of the slab and consolidate it .
consolidate by means of handoperated internal vibrators according to subsection num .
use a spade in addition to vibrating if required to ensure that no honeycomb voids or air pockets exist against the forms .
continue consolidating the concrete until there is complete contact between the reinforcing steel and the concrete and until mortar flushes to the top surface .
when using permanent steel bridge deck forms place emphasis on proper vibration of the concrete to avoid honeycombing and voids especially at construction joints expansion joints and valleys and ends of form sheets .
obtain the engineers approval of pouring sequences procedures and mixtures .
continuously place concrete in any slab between expansion joints or between construction joints as specified in the plans .
prevent displacement of reinforcement during placing of concrete .
place concrete in the sequence as specified in the plans and in the absence of such designation place as directed .
obtain written approval to change the pouring sequence .
provide sufficient work capacity to place concrete at a minimum rate of num cubic yards per hour .
when in case of an emergency it becomes necessary to introduce a construction joint form it by means of a vertical bulkhead constructed to produce a keyed joint and located as approved by the engineer .
in placing concrete around steel shapes place it only on one side of the shape until it flushes up over the bottom flange of the shape on the opposite side after which place it on both sides to completion .
do not place concrete railings monolithic with the slab .
on continuous composite design structures keep concrete in slabs plastic for a sufficient length of time to allow the structure to deflect to the natural deflected shape .
place the concrete in each integral unit of the superstructure continuously .
do not begin placing concrete without sufficient approved material on hand nor without sufficient forces and equipment to complete that unit without interruption .
avoid joints in the concrete due to work stoppage .
form construction joints when necessary according to subsection num .
place concrete in slab spans in one continuous operation for each span .
place concrete in transverse strips the entire width of the bridge .
place concrete for the full depth and ensure that the width of strips is such that concrete in any one strip does not take its initial set before placing the adjacent strip .
when expansion devices such as rockers expansion dams and similar fixtures have been rigidly fixed to hold them in correct alignment immediately release them upon completion of concrete placement in the portion of the structure in which they are installed .
immediately following consolidation of the concrete strike off the surface to crown and cross section with the finishing machine .
move the machine in the direction that work is progressing .
maintain a slight excess of concrete at all times so no low spots are left in front of the finishing machine .
prevent the excess concrete from tearing the surface .
after finishing do not work walk on or disturb the concrete in place except as described in this section .
in general do not add water to the surface of the concrete to assist in finishing operations .
if the engineer allows the application of water to the surface apply it as a fog spray using approved spray equipment .
num num working the surface .
following the striking off or screeding randomly check the surface for irregularities and mortar ridges at least every num feet of bridge length with an approved numfoot straightedge operated parallel to the centerline of the bridge and slab surface .
eliminate all variations greater than num inch .
after the concrete slab has cured the engineer will again check the slab for variations exceeding num inch .
perform any corrective action that the engineer deems necessary .
after completing the finishing operation ensure that the surface of the concrete presents a uniform appearance conforms to the required grade and cross section and is free from surplus water rough and porous spots irregularities depressions and other objectionable surface features resulting from improper finishing .
num finish with burlap drag .
if the contract does not require texturing finish the slab using a burlap drag .
use a burlap drag of double thickness at least num feet wide and long enough to span between curb faces .
lay the burlap on the slab surface and drag it in the direction the slab is being placed keeping approximately num feet of its width in contact with the slab surface .
keep the burlap drag damp clean and free from hardened concrete .
num texturing .
texture the surface by forming transverse grooves .
form the transverse grooves by approved manual tools such as rakes with spring steel tines .
form the grooves in the concrete at an appropriate time during concrete set so that in the hardened concrete the grooves will be between num to num inch in width between num and num inch in depth and be spaced at random intervals between num and num inch .
terminate the grooves approximately num inches from faces of the curbs concrete barrier walls or other vertical walls .
regardless of the method used to form the grooves ensure that the grooves are relatively smooth and uniform are formed without tearing the surface or without bringing pieces of the coarse aggregate to the top of the surface and are formed to drain transversely .
correct any individual areas of hardened grooved concrete that do not conform to these requirements by the cutting of acceptable grooves in the hardened surface with an approved cutting machine or by other approved methods .
num waterproofing membranes and surface courses for slabs .
when a waterproofing membrane overlay or special surface course is specified in the contract prepare the slab surface according to the procedures designated in the contract .
do not texture the surface and do not apply a liquid membrane forming curing compound when the slab is to be waterproofed or receive a surface course .
num curing .
immediately after finishing and while the surface is slightly damp apply type ii white pigmented membraneforming curing compound to the slab between the curb lines .
do not dilute or alter the compound but thoroughly agitate it immediately before applying it .
when the compound is too viscous to apply warm it in a water bath to approximately num f before applying it .
apply the compound uniformly using an approved pressure sprayer at a rate of one gallon per num square feet .
if the engineer deems the application is not uniform as it progresses apply the compound in num applications each at a minimum rate of one gallon per num or less square feet .
start the second application after completing the first application .
the engineer will determine the total quantity of compound actually applied to the slab and compute the actual rate of application .
when the engineer determines the total actual application rate is less than one gallon per num square feet actual coverage apply additional compound immediately and uniformly over the entire surface at a rate the engineer directs .
when the contract does not require texturing reduce the total rate of application to one gallon per num square feet .
if the engineer deems the application is not uniform as it progresses apply the compound in num applications each at a minimum rate of one gallon per num square feet .
start the second application after completing the first application .
num when the engineer determines the total actual application rate is less than one gallon per num square feet actual coverage apply additional compound immediately and uniformly over the entire surface at a rate the engineer directs .
prevent the compound from being applied to reinforcing steel concrete surfaces to be bonded to other concrete or any other surfaces not specifically designated to receive the compound .
when having inadvertently applied the compound to areas or surfaces not designated remove by sandblasting or other approved methods .
after applying the compound and as soon as possible without damaging the surface texture cover the slab between the curb lines with curing blankets or a double thickness of burlap and keep the slab continuously wet until the required compressive strength is attained as determined by testing field cured cylinders .
if other operations are not delayed the engineer may require num days wet cure regardless of cylinder strengths .
if using curing blankets place and maintain blankets and apply water as specified in subsection num .
when using class s concrete wet cure according to subsection num .
num surface finish .
finish exposed areas of curbs railings and plinths as specified in subsection num .
num measurement .
num concrete .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards according to the record plans .
the department will base the final quantity on the design quantity .
when there is an error or omission in the design quantity in excess of num percent the department will adjust the design quantity accordingly .
the department will adjust quantities resulting from authorized dimension changes .
the department will not subject these quantities to the num percent limitation .
the department may measure the depth of concrete cover above the top mat of steel reinforcement in inches according to km num .
the department will not measure the depth of concrete cover above the top mat of steel reinforcement as a separate pay unit but will use it to calculate an adjusted contract quantity for concrete .
the department will not measure furnishing inspection facilities joint construction or stenciling for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num steel reinforcement .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num drain pipe .
if this item is a separate pay item the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
if this item is not a separate pay item the department will not measure the quantity for payment and will consider it incidental to structural steel .
num structural steel .
the department will measure the quantity including drainage systems and structural steel expansion joint systems according to subsection num .
the department will not measure paint fittings and connections for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num neoprene expansion dams .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
num joint sealing .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following num code pay item num num concrete classnum see subsection num pay unit num steel reinforcement see subsection num num structural steel see subsection num num masonry coating see subsection num num num drain pipe size linear foot num neoprene expansion dam size linear foot num joint sealing see subsection num num the department will adjust the contract quantity for concrete by the schedule for adjusted quantity for depth of cover deficiency .
the adjusted quantity is equal to the theoretical slab volume of concrete times the ratio of the area in square feet which is not within the specified tolerance to the plan slab area in square feet times the factor listed in the schedule for adjusted quantity for depth of cover deficiency .
the department will not make additional payment for depth of cover in excess of the specified thickness .
schedule for adjusted quantity for depth of cover deficiency depth of cover deficiency inches num to num num quantity adjustment factor num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num or greater num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num to num num num or greater num num construct a concrete overlay at no expense to the department .
the department may apply a factor of num to small isolated areas in lieu of a concrete overlay .
num remove and replace these areas with concrete of the specified thickness at no expense to the department .
num perform corrective work at no expense to the department .
the department may require removal of any excess concrete or removal and replacement of the entire slab .
the department may apply a factor of num to small isolated areas in lieu of corrective work .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num concrete box culverts and concrete headwalls num description .
build all concrete box culverts and concrete headwalls according to the contract .
for box culverts constructed using precast sections conform to section num .
for precast headwalls conform to section num .
num materials .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num concrete pipe .
conform to section num .
num joint materials .
conform to section num .
num masonry coating .
conform to section num .
num concrete curing materials .
conform to section num .
num construction .
conform to subsection num for all concrete construction .
num footings .
construct footings to the elevation specified in the plans and increase the depth when the engineer determines that it is necessary to provide sufficient bearing or to prevent undermining .
only raise footing elevations when encountering solid rock at elevations above those specified in the plans and with the approval of the engineer .
form the outside face of all footings of concrete headwalls for pipe box or arch culverts to the full depth of the footing .
do not place any concrete in the foundation until the engineer has inspected and approved the depth of excavation and character of the foundation material .
whenever the natural foundation material is not sufficiently stable to support the structure or whenever it is anticipated that high water may cause excessive erosion around the footings the engineer may order extra work to provide the structure with adequate support or protection according to subsection num .
when the condition of excavation for footings is otherwise satisfactory but is such that concrete can not be placed without mud becoming mixed with the concrete remove the entire mass of mud and replace it with stable material or prevent infiltration of mud by methods such as a layer of coarse aggregate and geotextile fabric or a layer of plastic material .
perform work by methods other than removing and replacing the entire mass of mud according to subsection num .
num apron walls and headwalls .
a apron walls .
the engineer may require additional depth than that specified in the plans if necessary to prevent undermining .
form the outside faces of all concrete apron walls for the full depth .
when necessary to form the back face or the end of apron walls due to the lack of solid material do not exceed the excavation limits specified for footing structure excavation .
pave the space between wings when the engineer directs .
in this event relocate the apron walls so that they are in a straight line between the ends of the wings or at locations to provide the best protection .
b headwalls .
construct headwalls according to the standard drawings for headwall supplement .
when headwalls for pipe culverts are located at the num shoulder construct the top of the headwalls parallel to the shoulder line for both line and grade .
num drainage .
place weep holes consisting of numinch pipe or formed to num inches in diameter at intervals not to exceed num feet in retaining walls nor exceeding num feet in box culverts .
place the outlet invert elevation of weep holes in box culverts num inches above the flowline of the culvert .
raise box culvert weep holes to accommodate significant silting when the engineer directs .
make adequate provisions for thorough drainage of backfill and embankment according to subsection num .
boxes less than num feet in height are not required to have weepholes .
num placing concrete .
place concrete according to subsection num .
place the base slab or footings and allow them to cure before constructing the remainder of the structure .
construct base slabs footings and apron walls as monolithic units when practical .
when construction joints are necessary place them at right angles to the culvert barrel .
bond construction joints according to subsection num .
in constructing all box culverts having a clear height of num feet or more place concrete in the side walls and allow it to set before placing the top slab .
for culverts having a clear height of less than num feet if desired pour the culvert top slab monolithically with the side walls .
when using this method of construction make all necessary construction joints vertical and at right angles to the axis of the culverts .
construct each wingwall as a monolithic unit .
place construction joints where unavoidable and when not specified in the plans horizontal or vertical as appropriate .
num removing forms .
remove forms according to subsection num .. num surface finish and placing fill .
finish surfaces according to subsection num .
texture top slabs of box culverts to be used as the wearing surface for traffic according to subsection num and conform to the roadway rideability requirements of subsection num .
place backfill or embankment as allowed by concrete strength .
backfill according to subsection num .
construct embankment according to subsection num .
num extensions to existing culverts .
construct extensions according to the lines and grades established and to dimensions specified in the plans .
remove portions of the existing structure designated to be removed according to subsection num .
remove portions of the existing structure designated to be removed in a manner that provides a neat junction with the extension and leave undamaged that portion of the existing structure that is to remain in service .
for exposed joints in the finish work the engineer may require sawing of the existing concrete to a depth sufficient to ensure a neat joint .
repair all damage to the existing structure due to his activities .
remove and dispose of all silt or other debris that may have collected within the barrel of the existing structure .
the engineer will only require this silt and debris removal once unless erosion control measures were not adequate .
num measurement .
num concrete .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num steel reinforcement .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num structure excavation .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
the department will measure the removal and num replacement of unstable material in footing excavation as structure excavation .
num removal of existing structure .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
the department will not measure repair of damage to removal of silt and debris from and providing a neat cut for the joint on the portion of the structure designated to remain for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num headwall .
the department will measure the quantity as each .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num pay unit num concrete see subsection num num steel reinforcement see subsection num structure excavation see subsection num num remove structure see subsection num num pipe culvert headwall size each the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections num description .
install precast reinforced concrete box sections used as culverts storm drains and sewers .
num materials .
num concrete .
conform to subsections num and num and the precastprestress concrete manual .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num backfill material .
conform to subsection num .
num free draining backfill material .
conform to section num .
num grout .
conform to subsection num .
num sand .
conform to section num .
num sand for pipe bedding .
conform to section num .
num crushed aggregate for bedding .
conform to section num .
num joint sealer for rigid pipe .
conform to section num .
num geotextile fabric .
conform to section num .
num construction .
num transportation and handling .
handle and store the precast units so that flexural stresses are not induced until the concrete age is num days or attains a compressive strength of num psi .
remove and replace all sections that are not in true alignment and grade or that show undue settlement after laying or are otherwise damaged .
num precast unit construction .
construct units according to astm c num and section num with the following exceptions and additions num a water meters is not required if using drycast methods .
num mark all box culverts sections with the following information on the inside top of each section with letters no less than num inches high a span rise maximum and minimum design earth cover and ky table num. b date of manufacture .
c name and trademark of the manufacturer .
for entrance and exit box sections indent the required information .
mark interior sections by indenting or with waterproof paint .
num furnish precast sections at least num feet long .
num contrary to astm c num section num ensure the compressive strength of the cores tested is equal to or greater than the design strength .
num shop drawings .
precast box sizes outside the depth or size range of astm c num will require shop drawings with structural steel calculation by an engineer num licensed in kentucky .
precast box dimensions and fill depth within kyhlnum or ky table num will not require shop drawings or calculations unless requested by the engineer .
precast wing walls and headwalls will require shop drawings and stamped calculations by an engineer licensed in kentucky for all precast structures .
submit shop drawings for review according to subsection num except do not include original tracings .
include on the shop drawings details of joint configuration the size of rubber gaskets or butyl rubber sealants when used the area of steel reinforcement lift holes and the size and location of reinforcement .
num excavation .
perform structure excavation according to section num except as modified in this subsection .
num bedding .
perform bedding as specified in the plans or standard drawings .
level the compacted bedding with a template or straightedge to ensure uniform support throughout the entire width and length of the structure .
when desired substitute crushed aggregate up to num inch maximum size for sand as bedding material .
do not use dga or gravel base for this substitution .
substitute measure for measure .
the engineer will require a vertical trench from the bottom of the excavation to the top of the culvert or original ground whichever is lower as specified in the plans or standard drawings .
num laying sections .
do not lay any unit until the engineer approves the proposed location .
take soundings for foundation design at the inlet and outlet of each culvert and at intervals no greater than num feet along the grade line of the bottom of the culvert to a depth of num feet .
perform soundings on the centerline and at each edge of the culvert .
where ledge rock gravel hardpan or other unyielding material is encountered or known to exist within the limits stated prepare the foundation as specified in the plans or standard drawings .
camber the box culvert sections as the engineer directs .
begin placing sections at the outlet end of the pipe with the bell or groove end being laid upgrade .
fully extend successive spigot ends into each adjoining hub .
provide a comealong or other mechanical device to pull each section firmly into the previously placed section tightly meshing the joints .
do not push sections together with a tractormounted blade .
after installing the sections seal lift holes by inserting a tapered precast concrete plug and coating the top of the joint around the plug with asphalt mastic material .
when the plans require the volume between sidebyside installations to be filled with grout use grout consisting of one part cement to num parts mortar sand or concrete sand with sufficient water to provide a consistency suitable for job conditions .
provide drainage with numinch weepholes as specified in subsections num and num respectively except that for sidebyside installations separated by grout place weepholes in the extreme outside walls only .
grout formed openings between the precast sections and any side entry of pipes or top entry of manholes to form a watertight joint .
when manholes are to be placed directly on the top slab of the precast sections provide sufficient additional steel reinforcement in the top slab to compensate for the section removed .
num joints .
use either rubber gaskets butyl rubber sealants or asphalt mastic joint sealing compound in joints between the precast box sections .
use the same material throughout each individual structure .
a rubber gaskets .
use a cement and lubricant to facilitate joining the sections that is recommended by the manufacturer of the rubber gaskets .
install the rubber gaskets in a manner to snugly fit in the beveled surface of the tongue and groove ends of the section to form a flexible watertight seal under all conditions of service .
b butyl rubber sealants .
use a primer rate and method of primer application num and width and method of application of the butyl rubber sealant recommended by the manufacturer .
provide the engineer with the manufacturers literature for installation procedures .
c asphalt mastic joints .
prime and seal asphalt mastic joints according to subsection num .
d joint fit .
regardless of the type of sealant to be used ensure proper meshing of the joints .
do not allow sand or foreign materials to intrude into joints .
if sand or foreign material is present within the joint upon joining the sections thoroughly clean until no sand or foreign material is present and reseal the joint .
if the joint is not entirely filled with sealant after connecting the culvert sections fill all exposed unsealed areas both inside and outside the culvert with asphalt mastic or other approved material .
if using plastic gaskets use an additional sealant compatible with the plastic and recommended by the gasket manufacturer .
fill the exterior joint gap on the top of precast reinforced concrete boxes with mortar .
cover the exterior joint with a minimum of a numinch double layer geotextile fabric joint wrap .
before applying the wrap ensure that the surface is free from dirt and foreign substance .
use one continuous roll of double layered joint wrap to cover the joint on the top of the box and to extend completely down the sides to the bottom of the box .
during backfilling keep the joint wrap in the proper location over the joint .
apply the joint wrap to all joint sections .
num backfilling .
backfill according to subsection num the plans and the standard drawings .
place free draining backfill between sidebyside installations when required by the plans .
compact the backfill as the engineer directs .
num headwalls .
construct headwalls as specified in the approved shop drawings plans or standard drawings .
num measurement .
num structure excavation .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
for necessary sidebyside installations the department will measure the entire excavated volume between sections when the plans or the engineer require excavation of this volume .
the department will measure embankment placed and subsequently excavated according to the plan requirements for bedding as structure excavation .
the department will not measure free draining backfill or grout between sidebyside installations for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num precast reinforced concrete box sections .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet according to the length dimensions specified in the plans .
the department will not measure joint materials including the geotextile fabric wrap shear connectors required for joining sections and any required acceptance coring for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure repair of sections not in true alignment and grade or that show undue settlement after laying or otherwise damaged .
num headwalls .
headwalls and wingwalls may be precast or pouredinplace .
the department will measure the quantity as each regardless of which construction method is used for construction of the headwall .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following num code pay item structure excavation see subsection num pay unit num precast concrete box sections size linear foot num pipe culvert headwall size each num num concrete class see subsection num num steel reinforcement see subsection num the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num structural plate soil interaction structures num description .
furnish and install corrugated metal multiplate soil interaction structures where an equivalent inner diameter of greater than num feet and less than or equal to num feet is required for drainage or other openings .
corrugated metal multi plate soil interaction structures include pipe pipe arches and arches .
num materials .
num pipe .
conform to section num for the following num corrugated aluminum alloy structural plate pipe pipe arches and arches .
num corrugate steel structural plate pipe pipe arches and arches .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num asphalt material for coating and paving .
conform to section num .
num bedding and backfill materials .
a fine aggregate .
conform to section num sand for pipe bedding .
b coarse aggregate .
conform to section num structural granular backfill .
c flowable fill .
conform to section num and num .
num joint materials .
conform to subsection num .
num construction .
num composition .
provide structures that consist of prefabricated sections ready to be assembled and erected at the site .
furnish prefabricated sections consisting of asphalt coated galvanized zinc coated corrugated steel or aluminum alloy plates that have been factory shaped and punched .
the department will allow the use of a factory assembled structure when units are available that conform to the requirements of the contract for opening size material corrugation dimensions metal thickness and coating .
ensure that factory assembled steel units are asphalt coated .
the department will not extend the contract time to accommodate the use of factory assembled pipe or pipe arches .
ensure that field and factory assembled steel pipe and pipe arch units are asphalt coated and paved .
num transportation and handling .
transport and handle according to subsection num .
num erections plans .
submit num full sets of erection plans for each unit to the engineer .
include with each submitted set of erection plans a natural scale plan an elevation view of the structure and the design calculations .
in lieu of design calculations the department will accept a manufacturers certification that the proposed structure conforms to all of the departments structural design requirements .
the department will return one set after review with needed corrections noted .
each time the department requires corrections submit num full sets of the erection plans .
the department will have num calendar days to review each submission .
after the department has approved the erection drawings submit one full set of the approved drawings .
submit final drawings on num inches wide by num inches long and num inch thick mylar film or equivalent capable of producing clear prints and microfilms .
num shop drawings .
before fabricating any parts of the structure submit shop drawings according to subsection num .
num num soundings for foundation .
take the soundings for foundation design for pipe and pipe arches according to subsection num .
where rock foundations are encountered or known to exist within the limits specified excavate the foundation to a depth below the proposed outside bottom of the structure of num inch per foot of fill to a subgrade elevation above the proposed outside top of the structure .
excavate no less than one foot and no more than num times the height of the structure .
replace with material conforming to subsection num .
rock foundations include ledge rock gravel hardpan or other unyielding material .
camber the pipe or pipe arch whenever directed .
do not lay the pipe in cuts until completing the rough grading .
when an unstable foundation is encountered at the grade established remove the unstable material and replace it with material conforming to subsection num to a width and depth that will provide a uniform and firm foundation .
num installation .
install steel pipe pipe arches and arches according to astm a num .
install aluminum alloy pipe pipe arches and arches according to astm b num .
provide the type and method of bedding according to astm a num and b num .
compact backfill according to subsection num .
construct in lifts of not exceeding num inches in thickness .
exercise care to avoid displacement of the true line of the arch .
backfill with flowable fill when the engineer directs .
proportion flowable fill according to subsection num .
conform to the elongation tolerance in appendix a tabulation of construction tolerances .
num paving .
after erecting steel structures and constructing the embankments pave the inverts throughout their length and to a minimum width of num percent of the circumference for circular pipes or to a minimum of num percent of the circumference for pipe arches .
pave with wire reinforced asphalt paving mixture or similarly reinforced concrete .
a asphalt paving .
place wire mesh of a diameter of num inch or more having openings num by numinch or less in the invert and securely fasten it to bolts of the structure with wire or suitable clips .
provide reinforcing mesh in widths that are one foot less than the finished width of the pavement .
provide an asphalt paving mixture that consists of num percent mortar sand and num percent mineral filler combined with sufficient bituminous material num to num percent by weight to provide a workable plastic mixture .
provide an asphalt material that consists of a pg num asphalt binder .
heat the aggregate and asphalt binder separately to num num f then combine and thoroughly mix them .
ensure that the invert of the culvert is clean and dry while spreading and compacting the mixture .
spread and shape the mixture by means of a template .
compact the mixture to a minimum depth of one num inch over the crest of the corrugations .
while the compacted paving material is still warm apply a num inch coating of heated asphalt cement throughout its width and length by spraying or other suitable means .
during the paving operation take precautions against asphyxiation heat or the accumulation of inflammable vapors in culverts .
the department recommends using forced ventilation .
b concrete paving .
place wire mesh of a diameter of num inch or more having openings num by numinch or less in the invert and securely fasten it to bolts of the structure with wire or suitable clips .
spread and shape class d concrete having num inch maximum size coarse aggregate throughout the required width and length of the invert to provide a uniform thickness of num num inch over the crest of corrugations .
shape and smooth the concrete pavement by means of a template to conform to the approximate contours of the invert .
float finish the concrete .
after initial set cure the concrete for num calendar days using a double layer of wet burlap .
num num end structures .
construct end structures according to the contract .
num measurement .
num structural plate pipes pipe arches and arches .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet along the bottom centerline .
the department will not measure paving bedding backfilling bolts and other hardware erection plans and shop drawings for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num embankmentinplace .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num roadway excavation .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num pipe undercut .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num structure excavation unclassified .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item aluminum alloy structural plate pipe size linear foot pay unit aluminum alloy structural plate pipe arch size linear foot aluminum alloy structural plate arch size linear foot steel structural plate pipe size linear foot steel structural plate pipe arch size linear foot steel structural plate arch size linear foot num embankmentinplace see subsection num num roadway excavation see subsection num num pipe undercut see subsection num num structure classification unclassified see subsection num the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num retaining walls num description .
construct a standard gravity castinplace reinforced concrete cip or gabion retaining wall as specified in the contract .
num materials .
use the same material throughout all individual walls and at both ends of all individual structures .
use only approved systems and materials .
num concrete .
conform to section num and num .
num reinforcing steel .
conform to section num .
num joint materials .
for cip walls conform to section num .
num geotextile fabric .
conform to section num table i .
use fabric sheets with a minimum width and lap of num inches for vertical joints one foot for horizontal joints and num inches for all laps in fabric .
num granular embankment .
conform to section num .
num gabion baskets .
conform to section num .
num gabion fill material .
conform to section num .
num grout .
conform to subsection num .
num construction .
num design .
when the plans do not include a complete design for the retaining wall provide all design calculations shop drawings and construction plans required .
comply with subsection num covering the use of patented devices materials and processes .
num design the wall through a registered professional engineer .
num design the wall in conformance with the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges current edition and all published interims and all other aashto or industry specifications required by the plans .
num require a minimum top wall thickness of num inches for standard gravity walls and a num inches minimum for all other cip walls .
num no materials are to be furnished and no fabrication or work done before the departments review of the proposed design drawings and instructions .
num foundation .
excavate the foundation bed for the retaining wall as required .
before wall construction compact the foundation to num percent of the maximum density as determined by km num .
remove and replace all foundation soils found unsuitable .
if shown on the plans or directed by the engineer place structure granular backfill to the dimensions required under the footings or bottom units .
obtain approval by the engineer before erection is started .
num standard gravity wall .
construct according to standard drawing no .
rgxnum .
construct walls footings leveling pads copings and all other castinplace appurtenances using class b concrete according to subsection num .
when the wall will be surcharged special drawings are required .
ensure the base width is half the vertical height of the wall and the top width is one num foot .
place transverse expansion joints num inch in width at minimum intervals of num feet throughout the length of retaining walls and fill with expansion joint material .
all exposed edges shall be beveled num inch .
when it is not practical to pour the wall to full height in one operation ensure construction joints are truly horizontal and provide a bond between the sections with keys formed by beveled timbers .
where necessary to provide construction joints in the length of the wall ensure joints are truly vertical and provide a bond between the sections with shear keys formed by beveled timbers .
grout around and behind all pipes in the wall face .
proportion grout according to subsection num .
at the end of each days operation slope the last level of the backfill away from the wall facing to direct runoff away from the wall face .
do not allow surface runoff from adjacent areas to enter the wall construction site .
when shown on the plans or directed by the engineer backfill with structure granular backfill .
num cip walls .
construct according to the structure plans .
num joints .
provide contraction joints at numfoot intervals and numinch expansion joints at numfoot intervals in all cip walls .
provide numinch joint material in all expansion joints .
place numinch long numinch diameter commercial grade steel dowels and numinch long numinch inside diameter commercial grade steel dowel sleeves across the joint .
provide caps on one end of the sleeves .
grease one end of the dowel and insert into the sleeve .
space dowels and sleeves at numinch intervals along the centerline of the wall stem .
do not pass reinforcing steel through either joint .
seal joints from top to bottom with waterstops .
num drainage .
provide numinch weep hole drains at numfoot intervals through standard gravity and cip walls .
place fabric wrapped backfill drains at each weep hole according to subsection num .
place weep hole inverts num inches above finish grade at the front face .
num gabion walls .
construct according to standard drawings and the contract .
place the basket flat on the ground flatten any kinks or bends and erect the sides ends and diaphragms .
ensure all creases are in the correct position and the tops of all sides are level .
lace the num corners of the basket together with alternating single and double loops at numinch intervals .
secure both ends of the lacing wire by looping and twisting .
install and lace internal diaphragms in the same manner .
place the individual assembled baskets in their proper location .
connect all adjoining baskets using individual tie wires looped and twisted at approximately numinch intervals along the entire perimeter of their contact surfaces .
partially fill the first basket in line for anchorage and stretch the connected gabions to proper alignment using a comealong or other means of at least one ton capacity .
keep the baskets in tension while filling .
control joints to avoid any unraveling .
filled in one foot layers in a manner that will minimize voids .
place num connecting wires in each direction between each layer in all cells by looping lacing wire around num mesh openings in the front and back face and in the ends and diaphragms .
securely fasten the ends of the connecting wires to prevent their loosening under tension .
fill cells in each course of in stages .
do not allow any cell at any time to be filled to a depth exceeding one foot more than the adjoining cell .
level the last layer of stone with the top of the basket to allow proper closing of the lid and provide an even surface for the next course .
stretch the lids tightly over the stone fill using crowbars or similar methods until the lid meets the edges of the front and ends .
tie the lids along all edges ends and diaphragms in the same manner as required for connecting adjoining baskets .
place and connect succeeding courses or tiers as specified for the first course .
offset vertical joints for succeeding courses at least num inches from course to course .
place baskets as headers or stretchers in accordance with the contract .
tie each course of baskets to the lower course after num stretching but before filling with individual tie wires looped and twisted at approximately numinch spacing along all edges and diaphragms .
reinforce vertical edges at each end of the wall that are not connected to an adjoining basket by looping and twisting individual tie wires at approximately num inches spacing the full length of such edges .
ensure the stone fill is firmly in place bulging or distortion of the filled baskets is minimal and all lacing and tying is thoroughly wound looped and twisted to preclude loosening in service .
num measurement .
the department will measure items such as concrete barriers that are not a part of normal retaining wall construction as the wall area .
when barriers are constructed on retaining walls the plans will show the top of the wall for payment purposes .
the department will consider all joint material design calculations shop drawings and construction plans with required corrections manufacturer supplied technical assistance incidental to the retaining wall .
num standard gravity and cip walls .
the department will measure concrete steel reinforcement and structure excavation according to subsections num num and num respectively .
the department will consider backfill foundation preparation portions of the footings for castinplace walls outside of the approved gross area structure granular backfill and geotextile fabric required incidental .
the engineer may include portions or all of the footings for castinplace walls in the gross area as shown on the plans .
the department will include the wwf dowel and dowel sleeves in the weight of steel reinforcement .
num gabion walls .
unless the contract provides for payment based on field measurements the department will not measure gabion walls but will make final payment at the contract unit price for the design quantity increased or decreased by authorized adjustments .
the department will measure structure excavation according to subsection num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num concrete see subsection num pay unit num steel reinforcement see subsection num num structure excavation unclassified see subsection num num granular embankment cubic yard num retaining wall gabion cubic yard the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num maintenance cleaning and painting steel bridges num description .
clean and prepare all surfaces to be painted furnish and apply all paint maintain protect and control all pedestrian and vehicular traffic and protect the structure and all other property against damage that may result from this work .
the surfaces to be painted include all structural steel surfaces and other exposed metal surfaces that may exist within the limits of the project such as handrails guardrails cables wire fence light fixtures metal flooring and other metal appurtenances except items specifically deleted in the contract .
num materials and equipment .
num paint .
conform to section num or as the contract designates .
furnish a paint system in which all coats are produced by the same manufacturer and use the same system throughout the entire project .
num brushes .
use brushes not exceeding num inches in width .
maintain brushes in a usable and acceptable condition at all times .
num spraying equipment .
conform to the paint manufacturers recommendations .
use equipment that applies the paint in a fine even spray without adding thinner .
provide adequate separators and traps in the air spraying equipment to remove all water and oil from the compressed air .
num construction .
num responsibility for damage .
protect all pedestrian vehicular and other traffic upon or beneath the bridge all adjacent property and all portions of the bridge superstructure and substructure against damage or disfigurement by paint or paint materials .
when performing work in urban areas or when developed areas exist in the close vicinity of the work submit for the engineers review a detailed written outline including sketches if necessary of the proposed methods to prevent damage to these areas from the work .
include specific information for protecting vehicular traffic on or beneath the bridge boats and marinas beneath the bridge and buildings or other property in the vicinity of the bridge .
do not begin work until the engineer reviews and accepts the protection methods .
take sole responsibility for all damage resulting from painting operations even if the engineer reviewed and accepted the protection methods .
num seasonal and weather limitations .
do not paint between november num and april num unless the engineer provides written permission .
apply paint only when the temperature measured at the area of the bridge to be painted is num f or greater the surface temperature of the steel members to be painted is at least num f above the dew point temperature and the relative humidity measured at the site is num percent or less .
do not apply paint when the surfaces are hot enough to cause the paint to blister or produce a porous film when the air is misty when there is moisture or frost on the surfaces or when other weather conditions in the judgment of the engineer are unsatisfactory for work .
num prosecution of the work .
upon beginning the operation of cleaning and painting proceed with the operation on all working days without stoppage until completion .
when specified in the contract submit a schedule proposing the sequence and time needed to clean and paint all structures included in the contract .
clean and paint all areas in strict conformance with the contract unless the engineer approves alternate methods in writing .
num num maintaining traffic .
maintain all pedestrian highway railway and waterway traffic while working .
do not leave cleaning or painting equipment on the roadways or sidewalks of any structure overnight .
furnish and erect all necessary warning signs and other traffic control devices as directed to ensure public safety and convenience .
num surface preparation .
before applying any paint thoroughly clean and properly prepare all surfaces to be coated including drains expansion dam troughs and other areas subject to build up of rust and debris to the satisfaction of the engineer .
expect that surface conditions may vary throughout the structure requiring different cleaning methods to prepare the surfaces for painting .
remove all contaminants that might prevent paint from adhering tightly to the underlying surface .
pressure wash and tool clean all steel surfaces to be overcoated to requirements specified in the contract .
obtain the minimum acceptable surface quality immediately before painting that corresponds to the contract requirements .
do not apply paint until the engineer inspects and accepts the cleaned surfaces .
remove and clean all trash debris and other foreign substances from pockets and crevices and from around expansion dams bearing plates shoes etc .
clean the entire surface of the bridge seat on each unit of the structure .
cut and remove all tree limbs or other growth overhanging or fouling the structure .
proceed with cleaning by sections bays or other readily identifiable parts of work .
completely clean each section bay or part and have it inspected and accepted by the engineer before applying any paint .
provide safe access to the work to allow the engineer to properly inspect the cleaning and painting .
when traffic or any other source produces an objectionable amount of dust prevent dust and dirt from coming in contact with the cleaned or freshly painted surfaces .
num paint application .
before beginning painting provide the engineer with the manufacturers technical data sheets safety instructions material safety data sheets and application instructions for the paint to be used .
when necessary or requested by the engineer furnish a technical representative from the paint manufacturer to observe the initial application of all coatings used to advise as to proper application techniques and to determine that proper results are being obtained .
ensure that the technical representative is also available to visit the project at all times during the work if the engineer requests or deems a visit is necessary .
spread the paint smoothly and uniformly and work it into all corners and crevices without allowing excess paint to collect at any point .
when the engineer determines that work done by spraying or rolling is not satisfactory the engineer may require hand brushing or removing and repainting .
apply paint with sheepskin daubers on surfaces inaccessible to brushes .
when applying paint with spray equipment immediately brush the area sprayed as necessary to secure uniform coverage and to eliminate wrinkling blistering and air holes .
paint from the top of the structure toward the bottom and proceed by sections bays or parts of the work unless the contract or engineer directs otherwise .
finish painting each coat on each section bay or part of work before applying a succeeding coat to any portion of that section bay or part .
ensure that each coat is thoroughly dry throughout the full thickness of the coat before applying another coat .
conform to the tolerance requirements of appendix a tabulation of construction tolerances or as the contract specifies .
a thinning .
do not thin paint unless the engineer gives written permission .
add only thinners specified or recommended in writing by the manufacturer according to the written recommendations of the manufacturer .
provide the engineer with the manufacturers technical data sheets and application instructions for the thinner and its use with the paint .
b mixing .
thoroughly mix the paint in the original containers .
use a mechanical mixer to mix the paint so the pigment is in uniform suspension .
frequently stir num the paint to keep it thoroughly mixed while being applied to keep the pigments in suspension according to the paint manufacturers written instructions or as directed .
c marking .
stencil the maintenance project number the month and year of the painting completion date and any existing panel numbering system or any panel numbering system set forth in the contract on the structure at approved locations .
make the legend in letters and numerals num inches high and use a paint color that contrasts with the background .
num unsatisfactory work .
remove paint at any stage of its completion that the engineer finds unsatisfactory and clean prepare again and repaint the surface at no expense to the department and to the satisfaction of the engineer .
unsatisfactory work includes but is not be limited to num failure to properly clean and prepare the surface num poor workmanship in application of the paint num painting with impure improperly mixed thinned or unauthorized paint and num failure of the paint to adhere to the metal or to previously applied paint coat .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity as a lump sum unit .
the department will not measure necessary cleaning and painting and furnishing all materials equipment tools tackles and scaffolding for separate payment but will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will consider having the manufacturers technical representative present incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will pay for this work at the lump sum contract price for clean and paint structural steel or a designated section of a structure .
the department will base partial payments on department estimates per section as the work progresses .
when the structure is not divided into sections the department will consider the entire structure as one section for pay purposes .
for purposes of partial payments the department will allocate percentages of the lump sum contract price to the various phases of the work as set out below depending on the number of paint coats specified .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantity under the following code pay item num clean and paint structural steel lump sumnum pay unit num twocoat system .
when the specified number of paint coats consists of a prime coat and finish coat the department will allocate num percent to the satisfactory cleaning and acceptable spot painting if applicable num percent to the acceptable application of the prime coat of paint and the remaining num percent to the acceptable application of the finish coat of paint .
threecoat system .
when the specified number of paint coats consists of a prime coat an intermediate coat and a finish coat the department will allocate num percent to the satisfactory cleaning and spot painting if applicable num percent to the acceptable application of the prime coat num percent to the acceptable application of the intermediate coat and the remaining num percent to the acceptable application of the finish coat .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num precast three sided structures num description .
this work shall consist of constructing precast concrete three sided units for culverts storm sewers tunnels arch bridges etc .
in accordance with these specifications and in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades design and dimensions shown on the plans or as established by the engineer .
in situations where two or more specifications apply to this work the most stringent requirements shall govern .
num types .
precast reinforced concrete units manufactured in accordance with this specification shall be designated by span and rise .
precast reinforced concrete endwalls manufactured in accordance with this specification shall be designated by length and height .
num materials concrete .
the concrete for the structures shall be air entrained when installed in areas subject to freezethaw conditions composed of portland cement fine and coarse aggregates admixtures and water .
airentrained concrete shall contain num num percent air .
the air entraining admixture shall conform to aashtnum mnum .
num portland cement .
shall conform to the requirements of astm specifications cnumtype i type ii or type iii cement .
num coarse aggregate .
shall consist of stone having a maximum size of num inch .
aggregate shall meet requirements for astm cnum .
num water reducing admixture .
the manufacturer may submit for approval by the engineer a waterreducing admixture for the purpose of increasing workability and reducing the water requirement for the concrete .
num calcium chloride .
the addition to the mix of calcium chloride or admixtures containing calcium chloride will not be permitted .
num materials steel reinforcement and hardware .
all reinforcing steel for the structures shall be fabricated and placed in accordance with the detailed shop drawings submitted by the manufacturer .
num steel reinforcement .
reinforcement shall consist of welded wire fabric conforming to astm specification a num or a num or deformed billet steel bars conforming to astm specification a num grade num .
longitudinal distribution reinforcement may consist of welded wire fabric or deformed billetsteel bars .
num hardware .
inserts for endwall connections shall be aisi type num stainless steel fnum expanded coil inserts .
coil rods and nuts used in endwall connections shall be aisi type num stainless steel .
washers used in endwall connections shall be aisi type num stainless steel plate washers .
or equals reinforcing bar splices shall be made using the dowel bar splicer system and shall consist of the dowel bar splicer dbsae and dowellindi or equal system .
hook bolts used in endwall connections shall be astm a num .
num manufacture .
num mixture .
the aggregates cement and water shall be proportioned and mixed in a batch mixer to produce a homogeneous concrete meeting the strength requirements of this specification .
the proportion of portland cement in the mixture shall not be less than num pounds num sacks per cubic yard of concrete .
num num curing .
the precast concrete units shall be cured for a sufficient length of time so that the concrete will develop the specified compressive strength in num days or less .
any one of the following methods of curing or combinations thereof shall be used a steam curing .
the units may be low pressure steam cured by a system that will maintain a moist atmosphere .
b water curing .
the units may be water cured by any method that will keep the sections moist .
c membrane curing .
a sealing membrane conforming to the requirements of astm specification c num may be applied and shall be left intact until the required concrete compressive strength is attained .
the concrete temperature at the time of application shall be within num degrees f of the atmospheric temperature .
all surfaces shall be kept moist prior to the application of the compounds and shall be damp when the compound is applied .
num forms .
the forms used in manufacturing shall be manufactured steel forms and accurate to maintain the structure dimensions within the permissible variations given in section num of these specifications .
all casting surfaces shall be of a smooth material .
num handling .
handling devices or holes shall be permitted in each unit for the purpose of handling and setting .
num storage .
the precast elements shall be stored in such a manner to prevent cracking or damage .
the units shall not be moved until the concrete compressive strength has reached a minimum of num psi and they shall not be stored in an upright position until the concrete compressive strength is a minimum of num psi .
num weep holes .
place weep holes consisting of numinch pipe or formed to num inches in diameter in each precast unit .
fabric wrapped perforated pipe drains may be used in retaining walls in place of weep holes .
place the outlet invert elevation of weep holes in box culverts num inches above the flowline of the structure .
raise weep holes to accommodate significant silting when the engineer directs .
make adequate provisions for thorough drainage of backfill and embankment according to subsection num .
num design .
num .
obtain the precast concrete numsided structure and endwalls from a preapproved manufacturer list maintained by the division of highway design .
the precast element dimension and reinforcement details shall be as prescribed in the plan and the shop drawings provided by the manufacturer subject to the provisions of section num below .
the minimum concrete compressive strength shall be as shown on the shop drawings .
the minimum steel yield strength shall be num psi unless otherwise noted on the shop drawings .
the manufacturer shall submit num sets of working drawings num sets of shop drawings and structural design calculations to the department for review and approval prior to manufacturing the precast numsided units or endwalls .
num .
the precast elements shall be designed in accordance with kyhlnum .
a minimum of one foot of cover is required .
cover is defined as the area from the top of structure to the top of finished roadway along the entire length of structure over the driving lanes and shoulder .
unless noted otherwise on the shop drawings designed accordingly and approved by this department .. num num placement of reinforcement in precast numsided units .
the cover of concrete over the outside circumferential reinforcement shall be num inches minimum .
the cover of concrete over the inside circumferential reinforcement shall be num num inches minimum unless otherwise noted on the shop drawings .
the clear distance of the end circumferential wires shall not be less than one inch nor more than two inches from the ends of each section .
reinforcement shall be assembled utilizing single or multiple layers of welded wire fabric not to exceed num layers supplemented with a single layer of deformed billetsteel bars when necessary .
welded wire fabric shall be composed of circumferential and longitudinal wires meeting the spacing requirements of num below and shall contain sufficient longitudinal wires extending through the vault unit to maintain the shape and position of the reinforcement .
longitudinal distribution reinforcement may be welded wire fabric or deformed billetsteel bars and shall meet the spacing requirements of num below .
the ends of the longitudinal distribution reinforcement shall be not more than num inches and not less than num num inches from the ends of the unit .
num placement of reinforcement for precast endwalls .
the cover of concrete over the longitudinal and transverse reinforcement shall be num inches minimum .
the clear distance from the end of each precast element to the end transverse reinforcing steel shall not be less than one inch nor more than two inches .
reinforcement shall be assembled utilizing a single layer of welded wire fabric or a single layer of deformed billetsteel bars .
welded wire fabric shall be composed of transverse and longitudinal wires meeting the spacing requirements of num below and shall contain sufficient longitudinal wires extending through the element to maintain the shape and position of the reinforcement .
longitudinal reinforcement may be welded wire fabric or deformed billet steel bars and shall meet the spacing requirements of num below .
the ends of the longitudinal reinforcement shall be not more than num inches and not less than num num inches from the ends of the walls .
num bending of reinforcement for precast numsided units .
the outside and inside circumferential reinforcing steel for the corners of the structure shall be bent to such an angle that is approximately equal to the configuration of the structures outside corner .
num laps welds and spacing for precast numsided units .
tension splices in the circumferential reinforcement shall be made by lapping .
laps may not be tack welded together for assembly purposes .
for smooth welded wire fabric the overlap shall meet the requirements of aashto num and num .
for deformed welded wire fabric the overlap shall meet the requirements of aashto num and num .
the overlap of welded wire fabric shall be measured between the outer most longitudinal wires of each fabric sheet .
for deformed billetsteel bars the overlap shall meet the requirements of aashto num .
for splices other than tension splices the overlap shall be a minimum of num for welded wire fabric or deformed billetsteel bars .
the spacing center to center of the circumferential wires in a wire fabric sheet shall be no less than num inches and no more than num inches .
the spacing center to center of the longitudinal wires shall not be more than num inches .
the spacing center to center of the longitudinal distribution steel for either line of reinforcing in the top slab shall be not more than num inches .
num laps welds and spacing for precast endwalls .
splices in the reinforcement shall be made by lapping .
laps may not be tack welded together for assembly purposes .
for smooth welded wire fabric the overlap shall meet the requirements of aashto num and num .
for deformed welded wire fabric the overlap shall meet the requirements of aashto num and num .
for deformed billet steel bars the overlap shall meet the requirements of aashto num .
the spacing center tocenter of the wire fabric sheet shall not be less than num inches or more than num inches .
num num permissible variations .
num precast numsided units .
a internal dimensions .
the internal dimension shall vary not more than num from the design dimensions nor more than num inches whichever is less .
the haunch dimensions shall vary not more than num inch from the design dimension .
b slab and wall thickness .
the slab and wall thickness shall not be less than that shown in the design by more than num inch .
a thickness more than that required in the design shall not be cause for rejection .
c length of opposite surfaces .
variations in laying lengths of two opposite surfaces of the vault unit shall not be more than num inch in any section except where beveled ends for laying of curves are specified by the purchaser .
d length of section .
the underrun in length of a section shall not be more than num inch in any vault unit .
e position of reinforcement .
the maximum variation in position of the reinforcement shall be num inch .
in no case shall the cover over the reinforcement be less than num num inches for the outside circumferential steel or be less than num inch for the inside circumferential steel as measured to the external or internal surface of the vault .
these tolerances or cover requirements do not apply to mating surfaces of the joints .
f area of reinforcement .
the areas of steel reinforcement shall be the design steel areas as shown in the manufacturers shop drawings .
steel areas greater than those required shall not be cause for rejection .
the permissible variation in diameter of any reinforcement shall conform to the tolerances prescribed in the astm specification for that type of reinforcement .
num endwalls .
a wall thickness .
the wall thickness shall not vary from that shown in the design by more than num inch .
b length height of wall sections .
the length and height of the wall shall not vary from that shown in the design by more than num inch .
c position of reinforcement .
the maximum variation in the position of the reinforcement shall be num inch .
in no case shall the cover over the reinforcement be less than num num inches .
d size of reinforcement .
the permissible variation in diameter of any reinforcing shall conform to the tolerances prescribed in the astm specification for that type of reinforcing .
steel area greater than that required shall not be cause for rejection .
num testing and inspection .
num type of test specimen .
concrete compressive strength shall be determined from compression tests made on cylinders or cores .
for cylinder testing a minimum of num cylinders shall be taken during each production run .
for core testing one core shall be cut from each of num precast elements selected at random from each production group .
a production group shall be defined as num or fewer units of a particular size or num endwalls in a continuous production run .
for each continuous production run each production group or fraction thereof shall be considered separately for the purpose of testing and acceptance .
a production run shall be considered continuous if not interrupted for more than num consecutive days .
num compression testing .
cylinders shall be made and tested as prescribed by the astm c num specification .
cores shall be obtained and tested for compressive strength in accordance with the provisions of the astm cnum specification .
num acceptability of cylinder tests .
when the average compressive strength of all cylinders tested is equal to or greater than the design compressive strength and not more than num of the cylinders tested have a compressive strength less than the design concrete strength and no cylinder tested has a compressive strength less than num of the design compressive strength then the lot shall be accepted .
when the compressive strength of the cylinders tested does not conform to this acceptance criteria the acceptability of the lot may be determined as described in section num below .
num acceptability of core tests .
the compressive strength of the concrete in each production group as defined in num is acceptable when the average core test strength is equal to or greater than the design concrete strength .
when the compressive strength of the core tested is less than the design concrete strength the precast element from which that core was taken may be recored .
when the compressive strength of the recore is equal to or greater than the design concrete strength the compressive strength of the concrete in that production group is acceptable .
when the compressive strength of any recore is less than the design concrete strength the precast element from which that core was taken shall be rejected .
two precast elements from the remainder of the group shall be selected at random and one core shall be taken from each .
if the compressive strength of both cores is equal to or greater than the design concrete strength the compressive strength of the remainder of that group is acceptable .
if the compressive strength of either of the two cores tested is less than the design concrete strength the remainder of the group shall be rejected or at the option of the manufacturer each precast element of the remainder of the group shall be cored and accepted individually and any of these elements that have cores with less than the design concrete strength shall be rejected .
a plugging core holes .
the core holes shall be plugged and sealed by the manufacturer in a manner such that the elements will meet all of the test requirements of this specification .
precast elements so sealed shall be considered satisfactory for use .
b test equipment .
every manufacturer furnishing structures under this specification shall furnish all facilities and personnel necessary to carry out the test required .
num joints .
precast numsided units shall be produced with flat butt ends .
the ends of the units shall be such that when the sections are laid together they will make a continuous line with a smooth interior free of appreciable irregularities all compatible with the permissible variations in section num above .
the joint width shall not exceed num inches .
flattop units with less than num ft. of cover shall be produced with a minimum num deep by num wide key way joint .
mortar in accordance with section num shall be placed in the keyway .
when the installed height of cover measures numfeet or less the precast num sided end units shall be connected by tie plates to the adjacent interior unit .
num workmanship and finish .
the precast units and endwalls shall be substantially free of fractures .
the ends of the units shall be normal to the walls and centerline of the section within the limits of the variations given in section num above except where beveled ends are specified .
the faces of the endwalls and units shall be parallel to each other within the limits of variations given in section num above .
the surface num of the precast elements shall be a smooth steel form or troweled surface .
provide an ordinary surface finish .
num repairs .
precast elements may be repaired if necessary because of imperfections in manufacture or handling damage and will be acceptable if in the opinion of the purchaser the repairs are sound properly finished and cured and the repaired section conforms to the requirements of this specification .
num inspection .
the quality of materials the process of manufacture and the finished structures shall be subject to department guidelines specifications manuals and other contract documents .
num rejection .
the precast elements shall be subject to rejection on account of any of the specification requirements .
individual precast elements may be rejected because of any failure to meet specification and contract document requirements .
num marking .
each unit shall be clearly marked by waterproof paint .
the following shall be shown on the inside of the vertical leg of the section unit span unit rise date of manufacture and name or trademark of the manufacturer .
units must also be stenciled as outlined in standard drawing bgxnum current revision .
num .
construction requirements .
perform structure excavation in accordance with section num except as noted in this section .
num site preparation .
perform structure excavation according to section num .
the foundation design must be in accordance with the appropriate geotechnical notes in the project bid documents .
construct foundations in accordance with the foundation design as determined by the engineer .
num footings .
the precast numsided units and endwalls shall be installed on either precast or castinplace concrete footings .
the design size and elevation of the footings shall be as determined by the engineer based on kyhlnum the applicable geotechnical notes in the project bid documents such as bearing capacity requirements specified scour countermeasures and minimum differential settlement tolerance .
in cases where a minimum differential settlement tolerance is not specified in the bid contract documents the minimum differential settlement tolerance for the precast numsided structure shall be numinch .
a minimum three inch deep keyway shall be formed in the top surface of the precast numsided unit footing at least three inches clear of the inside and outside faces of the bridge units unless specified otherwise on the plans .
the completed footing surface shall be constructed in accordance with grades shown on the plans .
when tested with a num foot straight edge the keyway surface shall not vary more than num inch in num feet .
if a precast concrete footing is used the contractor shall prepare a num inch thick base layer of compacted granular material the full width of the footing prior to placing the precast footing .
the foundations for precast concrete numsided units and endwalls must be connected by reinforcement to form one monolithic body .
expansion joints shall not be used in lieu of a continuous foundation .
compressive cylinders must reach numpsi before precast units shall be set on the foundation .
compressive cylinder strength must reach num design strength before backfill operations shall begin .
num placement of the units and endwalls .
the manufacturer shall provide a technical representative .
the technical representative shall be available onsite while the contractor is setting the precast numsided structure and thereafter as determined necessary by the engineer .
the units and endwalls shall be placed as shown on the engineers plan drawings .
special care shall be taken in setting the elements to the true line and grade .
the units and endwalls shall be set on num x num masonite or steel shims .
a minimum gap of num inch shall num be provided between the footing and the bottom of the units vertical legs or the endwall .
the gap shall be filled with nonshrink cement grout portland cement and water or cement mortar composed of portland cement sand and water .
if units have been set with temporary ties cables bars etc .
all pieces in the current phase must be completely grouted before ties may be removed .
num external protection of joints .
the buttjoint made by two adjoining units shall be covered with a num x num num preformed bituminous joint sealant and a minimum of a num inch wide joint wrap .
the surface shall be free of dirt before applying the joint material .
a primer compatible with the joint wrap to be used shall be applied for a minimum width of nine inches on each side of the joint .
the external wrap material shall meet aashto mnum .
the joint shall be covered continuously from the bottom of one unit section leg across the top of the and to the opposite unit section leg .
any laps that result in the joint wrap shall be a minimum of six inches long with the overlap running downhill .
in addition to the joints between unit units the joint between the end unit and the endwall shall also be sealed as described above .
also if lift holes or lift inserts are formed in the units they shall be plugged and grouted .
during the backfilling operation care shall be taken to keep the joint wrap in its proper location over the joint .
internal protection of joints in applications where the traveling public will be expected to cross under the structure roadways mixed use paths sidewalks etc .
or where specified in the contract documents provide additional joint protection to ensure that the structure is watertight .
various joint sealing details including elastomeric urethane or liquid sealing may be shown on the plans .
any internal joint sealing shall be performed as indicated on the shop drawings .
num backfill .
critical backfill shall be clean durable stone backfill that conform to the structural granular backfill requirements section num .
critical backfill shall be paid as structural granular backfill .
the limits of critical backfill shall be num feet to the outside of each structure and from the top of the footing to num feet over the top of the structure for spans up to num feet .
for spans greater than num feet the limits of critical backfill shall be num feet to the outside of each structure and from the top of the footing to num feet over the top of the structure .
backfill shall be considered as all other replaced excavation and new embankment adjacent to the precast units and endwalls .
the project construction and material specifications which include the specifications for excavation for structures and roadway excavation and embankment construction shall apply except as modified in this section .
any backfill requirements of the manufacturer that are beyond the limits of the departmentspecified critical backfill requirements shall be binding upon the contractor but will not be measured for payment as they shall be considered incidental to the critical backfill quantity .
no backfill shall be placed against any structural elements until they have been approved by the engineer .
backfill against external joint material or waterproofed surface shall be placed carefully to avoid damage to the waterproofing material .
mechanical tampers or approved compacting equipment shall be used to compact all backfill and embankment immediately adjacent to each side and over the top of each precast numsided unit until it is covered to a minimum depth of one foot unless the design fill height is less than num .
the backfill within the critical backfill zone as defined above shall be placed in lifts of six inches or less loose depth .
heavy compaction equipment shall not be operated in this area or over the bridge until it is covered to a depth of one foot unless the design fill height is less than num .
lightweight dozers and graders may be operated over precast units having one foot of compacted cover but heavy earth moving equipment larger than a dnum dozer weighing in excess of num tons and having track pressures of eight psi or greater shall require two feet of cover unless the design cover is less than two feet .
in no case shall equipment operating in excess of the design live load kyhlnum be permitted over the precast numsided units unless approved by the producer .
any additional fill and subsequent num excavation required to provide this minimum cover shall be made at no additional cost to the project .
as a precaution against introducing unbalanced stresses on the precast numsided units when placing backfill at no time shall the difference between the heights of fill on opposite sides of the vault exceed num .
once fill heights reach two feet over the top of structure backfill as specified in kentucky standard specifications division num .
num quality assurance .
the precast supplier shall conform to the requirements for precast structures in section num and the kytc division of materials precast prestress concrete manual .
the precast supplier shall be listed on the kytc division of materials list of approved precast concrete producers .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item numen numsided culvert linear foot linear foot pay unit num structure granular backfill cubic yard num concreteclass a cubic yard num steel reinforcement pound num foundation preparation see section num num structure excavation solid rock see section num num structure excavation common see section num num structure excavation unclassified see section num num roadway excavation see subsection num num embankment in place see subsection num the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
division num drainage traffic and roadside construction num section num culvert pipe entrance pipe storm sewer pipe and equivalents num description .
furnish and install culvert pipe entrance pipe and storm sewer pipe .
use units conforming to the dimensions fabrication material and strength requirements for the type culvert entrance or storm sewer diameter cover height and ph level the contract specifies .
this work may include removing pipe and relaying pipe .
num materials .
num pipe .
conform to section num for the following num reinforced concrete circular pipe .
num reinforced concrete horizontal elliptical pipe .
num corrugated steel circular pipe with helical lock seam or helical welded seam .
num corrugated steel circular pipe with longitudinal riveted or spot welded seam .
num corrugated steel pipe arch .
num corrugated aluminum alloy circular pipe with helical lock seam .
num corrugated aluminum alloy pipe arch .
num high density polyethylene hdpe pipe thermoplastic .
num polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe thermoplastic .
num spiral rib steel circular pipe .
num spiral rib steel pipe arch .
num spiral rib aluminum alloy circular pipe .
num spiral rib aluminum alloy pipe arch .
num structural plate pipe .
conform to section num for the following num corrugated aluminum alloy circular pipe with longitudinal seam with aluminum or steel bolts .
num corrugated aluminum alloy circular pipe arch with longitudinal seams with aluminum or steel bolts .
num corrugated steel pipe arch with longitudinal seams with steel bolts .
num corrugated steel pipe with longitudinal seams with steel bolts .
num joint materials .
a mortar joints .
conform to section num for cement and section num for mortar sand .
b asphalt mastic joint sealing compound .
conform to subsection num .
c rubber gaskets .
conform to subsection num .
d butyl rubber sealants .
conform to subsection num .
e elastomeric seals .
conform to astm fnum .
f couplings for thermoplastic pipe .
conform to section num .
g cleated and noncleated integral welded bell coupler with gaskets .
conform to section num .
num bedding materials .
use no .
num aggregate no .
numm aggregate or a fine aggregate conforming to subsection num for bedding material .
do not use a dga or gravel base material for bedding material .
num num backfill materials .
a granular backfill .
num for reinforced concrete pipe .
use size no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num or numm aggregate or material conforming to aashto m num al or anum material with a maximum plasticity index of num see table below .
limit rock fragments to a numinch maximum size .
num for corrugated metal pipe .
use size no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num or numm aggregate or material conforming to aashto m num al or anum material with a maximum plasticity index of num see table below .
limit rock fragments to a size that does not exceed the corrugation width .
num for thermoplastic pipe .
use size no .
num num num num num num or numm aggregate or material conforming to aashto m num al or anum material see table below .
limit rock fragments to a numinch maximum size .
for corrugated pipe limit rock fragments to a size that does not exceed the corrugation width or num inches whichever is least .
num for structural plate pipe .
use structure granular backfill conforming to section num .
anum and anum characteristicsnum anum anum sieve analysis percent passing no .
num percent passing no .
num num max num min percent passing no .
num num max num max plasticity index of material passing no .
num num max num for a complete description see aashto m num b flowable fill .
conform to subsection num b .
num embankment .
conform to subsection num .
num geotextile fabric material .
use type iv fabric with a minimum width of num inches conforming to section num .
num asphalt material for coating .
conform to section num .
num construction .
num pipe foundations .
take soundings for the pipe foundation design at the inlet and outlet and along the grade line of each culvert on num foot intervals .
take the soundings to a depth of num inch per foot of embankment height measured from the crown of the pipe to the maximum fill height or num inches whichever is greater .
where rock foundations ledge rock gravel hardpan or other unyielding material are encountered or known to exist within the limits specified prepare the foundation according to the standard drawings .
where unstable soft foundations are encountered at the established grade line remove the material that the engineer determines is unstable and replace with a material conforming to subsection num .
the department will determine the depth of the over excavation by a soils investigation for the specific structure .
wrap the replacement material in geotextile fabric when backfilling .
num trench conditions .
install all pipe in excavated trenches .
where an embankment condition exists excavate the trench only after constructing the embankment num according to section num to an elevation equal to or greater than the minimum cover height of the pipe .
num pipe bedding .
a reinforced concrete pipe .
construct bedding according to the standard drawings and this section .
num type num installation .
when working on a rock foundation place bedding to a depth of num inches or equal to bcnum the pipe diameter in inches divided by num whichever is greater .
for all other foundations place a minimum of num inches of bedding .
shape the bedding to conform to the invert shape throughout the entire width and length of the proposed structure .
compact the bedding but leave the center third of the pipe diameter bcnum uncompacted .
place and compact additional bedding material in lifts num inches or less to an elevation of num the culvert diameter .
num type num installation .
when working on a rock foundation place bedding to a depth of num inches or equal to bcnum the pipe diameter in inches divided by num whichever is greater .
for all other foundations place a minimum of num inches of bedding .
b corrugated metal thermoplastic and structural plate pipe .
place and compact bedding to provide num inches of bedding below the outside invert of the pipe after shaping .
shape the bedding to conform to the invert shape throughout the entire width and length of the proposed structure .
place and compact additional bedding material in lifts num inches or less to an elevation of num the culvert diameter .
num pipe hauling handling and installation .
furnish a copy of the manufacturers handling and installation procedures to the engineer before beginning work .
ensure that pipe structures do not sustain damage during loading unloading placement on the bedding compaction of the backfill by movement of excessively heavy equipment over the fill or by any other forces that may cause damage .
repair or replace damaged structures as the engineer directs .
remove and replace any structure that is not constructed to true alignment or shows undue settlement after installation or is otherwise damaged without additional compensation .
a reinforced concrete pipe .
install the pipe beginning at the outlet end of the culvert with the bell or groove end laid upgrade .
extend successive spigot or tongue ends fully into each adjoining bell or groove .
when the pipe includes markings to designate the top and bottom lay the pipe so the mark is less than num degrees from the vertical plane throughout the longitudinal axis of the pipe .
cover all lift holes after installing the pipe by the following num coat an area num inches or wider than the holes on the outside of the pipe with an asphalt coating material num place a piece of sheet metal num inches or wider than the holes and shaped to conform to the outer pipe diameter over each hole and num apply an additional coating of asphalt material over the entire area of previously applied metal .
when desired use precast lift hole plugs instead of the asphalt and sheet metal .
b corrugated metal pipe .
num asphalt coating .
apply according to aashto mnum .
num num transporting and handling .
transport and handle coated pipe using equipment and methods that prevent damage to the coating .
when storing pipe on the project keep it supported above the ground using wooden timbers or pallets .
repair minor damage to exterior and interior coating with asphalt coating material according to aashto m num or as the engineer directs before installing the pipe .
repair significant damage and coating deficiencies at the pipe fabrication site as the engineer directs .
significant damages include spalled coating on the interior of the pipe uncoated areas due to manufacturing error and insufficient coating thickness on the interior or exterior of the pipe .
at all times during construction use every precaution to prevent damage to the protective coating .
do not allow any metal tools or heavy objects to unnecessarily come in contact with the finished coating .
repair any damage to the protective coating from any cause during installation and before final acceptance as the engineer directs .
num installing .
assemble according to the manufacturers instructions .
install in the bed starting at the downstream end .
when using corrugated metal pipe with paving material install the pipe with paving material along the bottom centerline or flowline .
construct struts and vertical elongation of corrugated metal pipe as specified in the plans .
remove the struts only after completing the embankment over the structure .
c thermoplastic pipe .
handle thermoplastic pipe according to the manufacturers recommendations .
provide a manufacturers technical representative to assist in the installation of the pipe when the engineer requests .
d structural plate pipe .
install the pipe according to the manufacturers specifications and installation procedures .
when the engineer requests provide a manufacturers technical representative to assist in pipe construction .
do not place backfill until all plates in a ring are complete and all bolts in the structure are tightened .
num joints .
provide soil tight joints .
wrap all pipe joints with a geotextile fabric when their inner diameters are num inches and greater .
a reinforced concrete pipe .
use only one type of jointing materials system throughout each single structure .
construct joints for reinforced concrete pipe with one of the following options .
num mortar joints .
use a mixture containing one part cement and num parts sand .
use enough water not exceeding num num gallons per sack of cement to product a stiff workable mortar .
thoroughly clean and wet the ends of the pipe before joining them .
place the mortar in the lower half of the bell or groove section that has been laid and apply mortar to the upper half of the spigot or tongue of the pipe that is being laid .
insert the spigot or tongue in the bell or groove of the pipe already laid pull the joint tight and ensure that the inner surfaces of the abutting sections are flush and even .
after laying a section of the pipe and before laying the succeeding section thoroughly plaster the lower portion of the bell or groove of the preceding section on the inside with mortar to such a depth to ensure a smooth joint between the abutting sections .
fill the remainder of the joint flush with mortar .
finish the inside of the joint and wipe smooth around the full circumference .
after the initial set protect the mortar from air and sun with a burlap cover or permanently backfill .
num asphalt mastic joints .
immediately before installation apply the asphalt mastic joint sealing compound to the ends of the pipe section in the same manner as mortar joints except precoat all joining surfaces .
precoat with the num manufacturers recommended primer or an approved emulsified asphalt .
complete installation as per manufacturers recommendations .
num rubber gaskets .
in addition to the requirements of subsection num use a pipe section conforming to aashto m num .
use the gasket manufacturers recommended cement and lubricant .
snugly fit the rubber gasket in the beveled surface of the tongue and groove ends of the sections to form a flexible seal under all conditions of service .
complete installation as per manufacturers recommendations .
num butyl rubber sealants .
in addition to the requirements of subsection num use pipe with a joint design conforming to aashto m num .
when a joint is located num feet or less from the outlet on a num or steeper slope provide a tied joint according to the standard drawings .
b corrugated metal pipe .
construct joints using a band with annular corrugations and a bolt bar and strap connection .
use a minimum nominal band width of num inches for all pipe diameters num inches and smaller .
use a twopiece band with a minimum nominal width of num inches for all pipe diameters greater than num inches .
manufacture the band from the same base materials as the pipe .
the pipe bands may be up to two gauges lighter than the pipe it is joining with a minimum gauge thickness of num .
the department may allow dimple band connections for field cut pipe .
install the connecting bands according to the manufacturers written recommendations .
c thermoplastic pipe .
use an integral bell and spigot type with elastomeric seal joints .
when a joint is located num feet or less from the outlet on a num or steeper slope use a cleated integral bell locking joint or a standard coupling aided by two num by numinch galvanized sheet metal screws inserted through the coupling into the corrugation crest num inches apart circumferentially at the bell and spigot couplers quarter points .
num initial backfill .
locate a suitable backfill source for each project .
for backfill containing soils have an aashto accredited lab classify the material run a standard proctor and certify that the material conforms to the specified granular material .
keep the material certification on file and available to the engineer upon request .
place the backfill material in a trench condition as the contract specifies .
use numinch lifts and ensure the backfill is compacted to not less than num percent of the maximum density as determined according to km num .
when the top of the pipe is within one pipe diameter of the subgrade backfill with flowable fill to an elevation of one foot above the pipe from the outside edge of shoulder or back of curb to outside edge of shoulder or back of curb as applicable .
when installing under existing pavement backfill with flowable fill to the subgrade elevation .
when granular backfill is used the surrounding conditions are not similar in gradation and the pipe is located within the area bounded by the centerline and a distance num feet outside the edge of shoulder or back of curb as applicable wrap the bedding and granular backfill in geotextile fabric .
the department will not require geotextile fabric for entrance pipe .
when geotextile fabric is required according to this section or the engineers direction install according to section num .
when the contract specifies perform quality control testing to verify compaction according to km num .
the department may verify the density results at any time of the duration of the project .
a reinforced concrete pipe .
num type num installation .
when the top of the pipe is not within one pipe diameter of the subgrade backfill with granular backfill additional bedding material or flowable fill from the top of the bedding to an elevation equal to num num the pipe diameter and either granular backfill flowable fill or embankment material in numinch lifts to an elevation of onefoot above the pipe .
num type num installation .
backfill from the top of the bedding with granular backfill flowable fill or embankment material in numinch lifts to an elevation of onefoot above the pipe .
the department will allow type num installations for median drains and pipe installations located num feet or more from the edge of shoulder back of curb or any paved surface .
b corrugated metal thermoplastic and structural plate pipe .
when the top of the pipe is not within one pipe diameter of the subgrade backfill with either granular backfill or flowable fill to an elevation at least one foot above the top of the pipe .
num construction loads .
do not allow construction equipment or traffic to travel over the top of the structure material until the fill is compacted to a minimum depth of num inches over the top of the structure .
the engineer may require temporary cover where the final grade is less than num inches .
the engineer may raise but will not lower the minimum cover based on the pipe manufacturers recommendations .
num inspection of pipe .
the engineer will visually inspect all pipe .
the department will require cameravideo inspection on projects that have more than num linear feet of storm sewer andor culvert pipe and on routes with an adt of greater than num vehicles .
conduct cameravideo inspections in accordance with km num on num percent of the pipes that are located under the road and num percent of the pipes that are not under the road .
cameravideo and laser deflection inspection must be completed by a prequalified contractor that has been certified according to km num .
testing performed by a company failing to meet these requirements will result in non payment of the pipeline video inspection and noncertification of the pipe tested .
deflection testing using the laser deflection method shall be limited to pipe up to num inches in diameter .
deflection testing using physical measurements is limited to pipes where adequate access is available and to pipes num inches and larger in diameter .
mandrel or physical measuring will be used for pipes larger than num inches in diameter .
deflection testing is not required for concrete pipe .
the pipe to be tested will be selected in complete runs junctionjunction or headwallheadwall .
provide a pipe inspection summarization report in accordance with km num .
unless the engineer directs otherwise schedule the inspections no sooner than num days after completing the installation and completion of earthwork to within num foot of the finished subgrade .
when final surfacing conflicts with the numday minimum conduct the inspections prior to placement of the final surface .
the contractor must ensure that all pipes are free clear of any debris and as dry as possible so that a complete inspection can be performed .
notify the engineer immediately if distresses or locations of improper installation are discovered .
when camera testing shows distresses or improper installation in the installed pipe the engineer may require additional sections to be tested .
provide the video and report to the engineer when testing is complete in accordance with km num .
pipes that exhibit distress or signs of improper installation may necessitate repair or removal as the engineer directs .
these signs include but are not limited to deflection cracking joint separation sagging or other interior damage .
if flexible pipes exceed the deflection and installation thresholds indicated in the flexible pipe deduction table in section num provide the department with an evaluation of each location conducted by a professional engineer addressing the severity of the deflection structural integrity environmental conditions design service life and an evaluation of the factor of safety num using section num buried structures and tunnel liners of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
based on the evaluation the department may allow the pipe to remain in place at a reduced unit price as shown in the flexible pipe deduction table in section num .
provide num business days for the department to review the evaluation .
when the pipe shows deflection of num percent or greater remove and replace the pipe .
when laser deflection results are called into question the department may require direct measurements andor mandrel testing .
if rigid pipes exceed the cracking and installation thresholds indicated in the rigid pipe remediation table in section num provide the department with an evaluation of each location conducted by a professional engineer addressing the severity of the cracking structural integrity environmental conditions design service life and an evaluation of the factor of safety using section num buried structures and tunnel liners of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
based on the evaluation the department may allow the pipe to remain in place if the cracking is remediated according to an approved remediation plan submitted in writing to the engineer by the contractor as shown in the rigid pipe remediation table in section num .
provide num business days for the department to review the evaluation .
when the pipe shows cracking of .num inches or greater remediate or replace the pipe as directed by the engineer .
when the cameravideo cracking results are called into question the department may require direct measurements .
the cabinet may elect to conduct quality assurance verifications of any pipe inspections .
these verification inspections will be performed by the kentucky transportation center .
the division of construction shall be contacted by the engineer when verification testing is needed .
num end structures .
construct anchors concrete headwalls and other end structures specified in the plans according to section num section num and the standard drawings .
num extensions to existing culvert pipe and entrance pipe .
construct pipe extensions for culvert pipe entrance pipe and equivalent pipe arches according to this section and the contract .
remove the necessary portions of the existing structure to provide a neat junction with the extension .
do not damage the portion that is to remain in service .
remove all silt and debris that has accumulated in the remaining portion of the structure for a distance back equal to twice the pipe diameter or as the engineer directs .
numremoving pipe removing and relaying pipe .
remove all pipe designated for removal in the contract .
safely store all reusable pipe .
restore or replace any pipe designated for reuse that incurs damage or destruction through faulty handling .
relay all removed pipe the contract designates to be relayed .
where pipe is not to be relayed fill the area to the existing ground line according to subsection num .
the department will retain ownership of reusable pipe that is not to be relaid in areas on the project .
unless the engineer directs otherwise deliver all reusable pipe not relayed on the project to the designated maintenance facility in the county where the project is located .
take ownership of and remove from the project all pipe that is not designated for reuse or salvage .
num measurement .
num culvert pipe .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet from endtoend along the bottom or pipe invert of the installed structure .
the department will include bends elbows crosses tees reducers laterals wyes and other shapes in the pipe lengths measured .
the department will not measure joint materials and bedding materials for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure replacement of damaged pipe for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure for payment the num providing of a manufacturers technical representative to assist in the construction of the pipe and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num culvert pipe equivalent .
culvert pipe equivalent includes elliptical culvert pipe and culvert pipe arches .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet according to subsection num .
num entrance pipe .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet according to subsection num .
num entrance pipe equivalent .
entrance pipe equivalent includes elliptical entrance pipe and pipe arches .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet according to subsection num .
num storm sewer pipe .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet according to subsection num .
num storm sewer pipe equivalent .
storm sewer pipe equivalent includes elliptical storm sewer pipe and storm sewer pipe arches .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet according to subsection num .
num pipeline video inspection .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet along the pipe invert of the structure inspected .
when inspection above the quantity specified in the contract is performed due to a disagreement or suspicion of additional distresses and the department is found in error the department will measure the quantity as extra work according to subsection num .
however if additional distresses or nonconformance is found the department will not measure the additional inspection for payment .
num geotextile fabric type iv .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards .
num flowable fill .
the department will not measure the quantity for payment and will consider it incidental to the pipe bid item .
when the engineer determines that it is necessary and to the departments benefit to excavate beyond the typical excavation limits shown in the standard drawings the department will measure the quantity of flowable fill required for backfill outside the typical excavation limits as extra work .
num embankmentinplace .
the department will measure the quantity where there is unstable foundation material in excess of num times the width of outside diameter of the pipe or the width of the outside diameter plus num feet whichever is less in cubic yards according to subsection num .
num roadway excavation .
the department will measure the quantity for removal of unstable foundation material in excess of num times the width of outside diameter of the pipe or the width of the outside diameter plus num feet whichever is less in cubic yards according to subsection num .
when using special design the department will measure the quantity by the length of the trench the contract specifies or as the engineer directs .
the department will not measure backfilling the trench with bedding material for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure any other excavation and will consider it incidental to culvert pipe entrance pipe and storm sewer pipe .
num pipe undercut .
the department will measure the quantity for removal of unstable foundation material or bedded rock in cubic yards up to a maximum of num times the width of the outside diameter of the pipe or the width of the outside diameter of the num pipe plus num feet whichever is less and to a depth of up to num feet .
the department will measure the quantity at a depth of greater than num feet as extra work according to subsection num .
num structure excavation unclassified .
when the engineer changes the pipes plan length or location and causes the required excavation to increase more than num percent above the original average excavation per yard the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards according to subsection num .
when the department requires a substantial increase in excavation submit verification to the engineer before starting excavation .
the engineer will then measure the quantity of excess volume .
the department will not consider the excavation of unstable material from the foundation when determining the percentage of material increase .
num removing pipe .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet of net laying length per section .
the department will measure bends elbows crosses tees reducers laterals wyes and other shapes in linear feet along the central axis of the unit .
the department will not measure furnishing and placing any borrow material necessary to refill the area to the original ground line for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
when the department retains ownership the delivery of the pipe to the designated maintenance facility will not be measured for payment and is considered incidental to this item of work .
unless design quantities are included in the contract the department will not measure pipe within the typical section for payment and will consider it incidental to roadway excavation .
num removing and relaying pipe .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
the department will not measure sections that are damaged or broken for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure furnishing and placing any borrow material necessary to refill the area to the original ground line for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
when the department retains ownership the delivery of the pipe to the designated maintenance facility will not be measured for payment and is considered incidental to this item of work .
num deduction for pipe deflection .
the department will determine the quantity of deflected pipe using the pipe inspection summarization report in accordance with km num .
the department will make deductions for pipe sections that do not meet the requirements of the specifications in accordance with the tables in section num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num culvert pipe size linear foot pay unit num culvert pipe equivalent size linear foot num entrance pipe size linear foot num entrance pipe equivalent size linear foot num storm sewer pipe size linear foot num storm sewer pipe equivalent size linear foot num fabricgeotextile type iv for pipe square yardnum num embankmentinplace see subsection num num roadway excavation see subsection num num pipe undercut cubic yardnum num structure excavation unclassified see subsection num num remove pipe linear foot num remove and relay pipe linear foot num numernum pipeline video inspection linear foot numns pipe deflection deduction dollars num the unit price is num per cubic yard for pipe undercut num feet in depth or less .
the department will pay for pipe undercut exceeding a depth of num feet as specified in subsection num .
numthe unit price is num per square yard for fabricgeotextile type iv for pipe rigid pipe remediation table pipe crack width inches payment num num of the unit bid price greater than num remediate or replace num num provide the department in writing a method for repairing the observed cracking .
do not begin work until the method has been approved .
flexible pipe deduction table amount of deflection payment num to num num of the unit bid price num to num num of the unit bid price num num to num num of the unit bid price num num or greater remove and replace num num provide structural analysis for hdpe and metal pipe .
based on the structural analysis pipe may be allowed to remain in place at the reduced unit price.num provide structural analysis for hdpe and metal pipe .
based on the structural analysis pipe may be allowed to remain in place at the reduced unit price .
num the department may allow the pipe to remain in place with no pay to the contractor in instances where it is in the best interest to the public and where the structural analysis demonstrates that the pipe should function adequately .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num slotted drain pipe num description .
furnish and place slotted drain pipe of the specified size and wall thickness at the locations specified in the plans or designated by the engineer .
num materials .
num slotted drain pipe .
conform to subsection num .
num coupling bands .
provide coupling bands recommended by the manufacturer .
num construction .
conform to section num and the standard drawings for excavation of the pipe trench pipe placing and backfill .
do not begin installing the slotted drain pipe until paving of the traffic lanes adjacent to the pipe has been completed at the location where the pipe is to be installed .
before backfilling plug the upgrade end of the slotted drain pipe with a metal cap or by other methods the engineer approves .
during the backfilling operations and paving operations adjacent to the slot cover the slot to prevent infiltration of material into the pipe and do not damage the slotted drain pipe .
remove foreign material that enters the pipe and repair any damage to the slotted drain pipe to the satisfaction of the engineer at no expense to the department .
num measurement .
num slotted drain pipe .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
the department will not measure structure excavation backfill plugging removal of foreign material or coupling bands for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num slotted drain pipe size linear foot pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num slope protection and channel lining num description .
furnish and place the specified material for a protective covering for slopes or linings in channels and ditches according to the contract or as the engineer directs .
slope protection includes the following types reinforced concrete slope wall cyclopean stone riprap and crushed aggregate slope protection .
channel lining includes the following types class ia mattress units class ii class iii and class iv prepared from rock excavation .
num materials .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num coarse aggregate .
conform to section num .
num fine aggregate .
conform to section num natural sand .
num joint material .
conform to section num preformed joint filler .
num drain pipe .
conform to section num .
num mattress units for channel lining class ia .
conform to section num .
num anchor bars for channel lining class ia .
use grade num or better steel reinforcing bars conforming to the dimensions shown on the standard drawings .
the engineer will base acceptance of the anchor bars on visual inspection .
num geotextile fabric .
use type i fabric conforming to section num .
num construction .
num slope protection .
a general .
do not allow slopes on which protection is placed to be steeper than the natural angle of repose .
shape the slopes to the slope and contour indicated or as the engineer directs .
use slope templates in determining the slope .
bring depressions to the required slope line with fill material moistened and compacted as the engineer directs .
unless solid rock is encountered begin all slope protection except crushed aggregate slope protection in a trench num feet below the natural ground .
where solid rock is encountered stop the lower terminus of the slope protection at the solid rock line unless the engineer directs otherwise .
unless solid rock is encountered underlay cyclopean stone riprap crushed aggregate slope protection and all classes of channel lining with geotextile fabric .
b reinforced concrete slope wall .
use numinch slope walls on slopes num to one or flatter .
construct porous aggregate underdrains at the location of all construction joints at the intervals shown on the standard drawings .
ensure that the porous aggregate underdrains consist of a numinch by numinch trench excavated in the earth or solid rock and filled with coarse aggregate or natural sand .
place weep holes along the toe of the reinforced concrete slope walls at a maximum of num foot intervals .
construct weep holes by using numinch diameter pipe or suitably formed numinch diameter holes through the walls .
num construct slope walls using class a concrete according to subsection num .
construct slope walls using the size position width of sheets length of laps and diameter of the mesh shown on the standard drawings .
construct the finished slope walls with an even smooth surface that will not show a variation from a true plane of more than numinch in num feet .
build warped or curved surfaces to the same degree of accuracy as plane surfaces .
cure concrete according to subsection num .
after completing the slope protection backfill excavated areas that are not filled by slope protection to the surface of the original groundline .
c cyclopean stone riprap slope protection .
construct cyclopean stone riprap to a minimum thickness of num feet measured perpendicular to the slope .
the department will allow dumping stone in place and relocating it in a manner to produce a surface of approximate regularity not varying more than num inches from a true plane .
d crushed aggregate slope protection .
unless otherwise shown place the aggregate to a depth of one foot measured perpendicular to the slope flush with the embankment slopes under the bridge extend it from the face of the abutments or end bents across the berm and down the slope to the toe of the slope and extend it laterally to num inches beyond the outer edges of the superstructure .
the department will allow dumping the crushed aggregate in place and relocating it in a manner to produce a uniform surface varying no more than num num inches in num feet from a true plane .
the department will not require hand placing except as necessary to correct irregularities exceeding the specified tolerances .
num channel lining .
before placing any channel lining materials excavate and shape the area to receive the channel lining so that the completed channel lining will be uniform and will conform to the designated lines grades and cross section .
a channel lining classes ii and iii .
construct channel lining classes ii and iii to the dimensions specified in the plans standard drawings or as the engineer directs .
the department will allow dumping the stone in place and relocating it in a manner to produce a surface of approximate regularity varying no more than num inches from a true plane .
the department will not require hand placing except as necessary to correct any surface irregularities exceeding the specified tolerance .
b channel lining class iv .
unless solid rock is encountered begin the channel lining in a trench num feet below the natural ground or num feet below the channel flowline when the flowline is not lined .
where solid rock is encountered stop the lower terminus of the slope protection at the solid rock line .
construct channel lining class iv to the minimum thickness specified in the plans .
the department will allow dumping the stone in place and relocating it in a manner to produce a surface of approximate regularity not varying more than num inches from a true plane .
c channel lining class ia .
construct according to the standard drawings .
set empty mattress units to the required line and grade .
use lacing wire to join the units together .
after the mattress units are set to line and grade stretch them to remove any kinks from the mesh and to hold alignment .
fill the mattress units with stone .
place by hand or machine to ensure good alignment .
avoid bulging of the mesh by minimizing voids between the stones .
after filling a unit close its top so that it meets the sides and ends of each mattress unit .
then secure the top to the sides ends and the diaphragms with lacing wire as shown on the standard drawings .
when placing the mattress unit on a grade begin placing the stone at the bottom of the slope and progress upgrade .
overfill mattress units approximately num one inch to allow for settlement .
when space limitations prevent the installation of a complete mattress on the slope cut the unit to fit in the manner the plans specify .
drive anchor bars in place at the locations shown on the standard drawings when the grade is num percent or greater .
num measurement .
num reinforced concrete slope walls .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards of surface area including the area of the front face of concrete placed within the trench below natural ground .
the department will not measure steel reinforcement or any excavation required for the construction of slope protection for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num cyclopean stone riprap .
the department will measure the quantity in tons .
the department will not measure excavation required for the construction of slope protection for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num crushed aggregate slope protection .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num channel lining class ia .
the department will measure the quantity in tons .
the department will not measure excavation below the upper surface of any channel lining for payment and will consider it incidental to the work .
the department will not measure anchor bars wire mesh lacing wire or other material necessary to acceptably complete the wire mattress units for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num channel lining class ii .
the department will measure the quantity in tons .
the department will not measure excavation below the upper surface of any channel lining for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num channel lining class iii .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num channel lining class iv .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num geotextile fabric .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num reinforced concrete slope wall size square yard pay unit num cyclopean stone riprap ton num crushed aggregate slope protection ton num channel lining class ia ton num channel lining class ii ton num channel lining class iii ton num channel lining class iv see subsection num the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num underdrains num description .
construct underdrains of perforated pipe nonperforated pipe and porous aggregate .
when required construct headwalls according to section num and the standard drawings .
num materials and equipment .
num underdrain pipe .
a all underdrain pipe except edge drain outlet pipe .
conform to section num for the following num circular reinforced concrete pipe .
num corrugated steel pipe type iii .
num corrugated aluminum alloy pipe type iii .
num high density polyethylene hdpe pipe thermoplastic .
b edge drain outlet pipe .
conform to section num for the following num corrugated steel pipe type iii .
num corrugated aluminum alloy pipe type iii .
num high density polyethylene pipe hdpe type s thermoplastic .
num polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe thermoplastic as follows a smooth .
conform to astm d num for schedule num or astm d num for sdr num. b ribbed .
conform to astm f num for series num. c corrugated .
conform to astm f num .
num coarse aggregate .
conform to subsection num .
num natural sand .
conform to section num .
num geotextile fabric .
use type ii fabric conforming to section num for wrapping coarse aggregate .
use circularknit geotextile conforming to astm d num for perforated pipe socks .
num pipeline inspection camera .
provide a pipeline inspection camera for edge drains having the following num capable of recording the station milepost distance into the drain or other indicators of location on the video .
num a device for measuring the distance the camera has been pushed from the end of the outlet .
num the ability to record the distance superimposed on the video .
num an outside diameter no greater than num inches .
num color capability with a minimum horizontal resolution of num lines according to the manufacturers specifications .
num capable of being pushed in the numinch outlet pipes and mainline pipes for a minimum of num feet num feet of mainline plus outlet pipe .
num capable of being pushed or tractored for num feet in numinch or larger pipes serving as a collector system for edge drains without headwalls .
num a video output jack for connecting a vcr .
num capable of being connected to controls including the vcr for the pipeline inspection equipment in the inspection vehicle .
num num vcr .
provide a vcr capable of connecting to the video output jack on the pipeline inspection system for recording the inspection .
num inspection vehicle .
provide an inspection vehicle that will accommodate the operation of the inspection camera and vcr and num passengers .
provide a pipe inspection operator to operate the vehicle and observe the inspection .
the engineer may accompany the pipe inspection operator in the vehicle at any time .
num flowable fill .
conform to subsection num b .
num headwalls .
conform to subsection num .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num .
num construction .
num porous aggregate underdrain .
excavate the trench to the lines grades and section according to the contract .
finish the bottom of the trench so that it is smooth and firm .
tamp if necessary .
after preparing the trench place the aggregate in the trench in loose layers not exceeding num inches in depth and firmly tamp each layer in place .
use either crushed or uncrushed coarse aggregate including pea gravel or natural sand .
continue backfilling the trench with aggregate until the backfill reaches the compacted depth specified in the plans .
when using coarse aggregate completely wrap the aggregate in geotextile fabric type ii according to subsection num .
backfill above the aggregate with soil that the engineer approves and tamp in place in layers not exceeding num inches loose thickness .
num perforated and nonperforated pipe underdrains .
a all pipe underdrains except pavement edge drains .
excavate the trench to a depth below the outside bottom of the plan underdrain elevation to allow for the placement of sufficient bedding to eliminate any irregularities in the trench bottom and to a width of at least one foot wider than the external diameter of the pipe .
place perforated pipe with the perforations in the invert .
join perforated sections with coupling fittings or bands .
place and compact granular backfill of size no .
num num or numm coarse aggregate or natural sand around the pipe ensuring that the pipe is true to line and grade and the haunches are fully supported .
where perforated pipe installations outlet into open ditches provide a minimum of num feet of nonperforated pipe from the outlet .
for nonperforated pipe installations place the pipe with the bell end upgrade and with open joints not exceeding num inch .
join the last num outlet sections .
close the upgrade ends of all underdrain pipe installations with plugs to prevent entry of debris .
equip the outlet end of underdrain pipe with a screen .
after placing the pipe place coarse aggregate or natural sand to a height of at least one foot above the top of the pipe .
when using natural sand for backfill wrap the perforated pipe in circularknit geotextile fabric when using coarse aggregate for backfill completely wrap the aggregate in geotextile fabric according to subsection num .
fill any remaining portion of the trench with either granular or impervious material according to the contract or as the engineer directs .
do not allow the minimum height of fill to be more than num feet above the top of the pipe except the engineer will allow one foot of fill from the top of the pipe to the top of subgrade in cases where num feet would not allow proper installation for drainage .
thoroughly compact the fill material in layers not exceeding num inches loose measurement .
during placement of the aggregate and granular or impervious material do not damage or displace the pipe .
num encase any pipe that has less than one foot of cover at the outlet end in num inch thick concrete of any class or flowable fill .
proportion the concrete or flowable fill according to subsection num .
b pavement edge drains .
construct using numinch diameter pipe according to subsection num a or as shown on the plans except for the following num backfilling .
a .
fabric wrapped trench and crushed aggregate .
when backfilling place geotextile fabric in the trench and shape to the sides and bottom of the trench without stretching the fabric .
ensure that the geotextile fabric does not pull down into the trench when placing the backfill material .
do not damage the geotextile fabric when placing the filter aggregate .
partially wrap the aggregate according to subsection num .
fold the fabric over the backfilled trench and secure .
b. geotextile pipe sock and sand .
backfill the pipe with a natural sand conforming to section num .
do not use geotextile pipe sock and sand if the pavement section is constructed with a drainage blanket .
c. edge drain outlet pipe .
encase any outlet pipe with a minimum of num inches of concrete or flowable fill over the top of the outlet pipe .
in paved sections bring the concrete or flowable fill up to the bottom of pavement .
proportion the concrete or flowable fill according to subsection num .
num headwalls for outlets .
when the contract requires outlet headwalls the engineer will require adjustments to the headwalls when necessary to fit existing drainage conditions .
place precast headwalls according to subsection num b .
install the headwall with a slope of num inch in one foot .
when practical place the toe of the headwall a minimum of num inches one foot desirable above the bottom of the ditch .
place crushed aggregate size no .
num a minimum depth of num inches around the headwall as specified in the contract .
num cored hole drainage box or cross drain headwall connector .
make the connection according to section num .
make the cored hole drainage box connection a minimum of one foot above the bottom of the box .
attach a rodent screen to all edge drain outlet structures according to the standard drawings .
num construction near guardrail .
when guardrail is attached to a structure adjust the placement of the outlet pipe so that guardrail posts will not be driven within one foot of the outlet pipe .
when the guardrail is not attached to a structure adjust the placement of the outlet pipe or the guardrail so that guardrail posts will not be driven within one foot of the outlet pipe .
mark the location of the outlet with paint or other means the engineer approves .
conduct a mandrel test after driving the guardrail posts by pushing a piece of flexible numinch gas pipe through the outlet pipes .
replace all damaged outlets .
num field data .
visually observe the condition of each headwall .
observe the extent of debris blocking the headwall .
provide a description of the debris the condition of the rodent screen a description of the ditch line drainage and the percent grade of the headwall .
take photographs of significant distresses and provide copies of the photographs to the engineer .
describe the location of these significant distresses and the headwall type for each headwall .
record all observations and data and submit them to the engineer on standard forms approved by the engineer .
num inspection of edge drain systems .
inspect installed pavement edge drain system immediately before placing the final surface .
use a pipeline num inspection camera to determine if the edge drain system is functioning properly .
beginning at the rodent screen push the camera through the outlet pipe system and into the mainline edge drain system .
push the camera into the mainline edge drain until there is resistance against further movement the end of the pipe segment is reached or for approximately num feet and record this distance .
use the camera as a mandrel for determining locations of compressed pipes when desired .
document observed distresses including blockages rips separations backfill in the crushed pipe crushed pipe improper couplings improper connections and all other distresses .
make all photographic observations on video tape and provide a copy to the engineer .
record all observations and data and submit to the engineer on standard forms approved by the engineer .
provide the cctv inspection on standard vhs tape or other format the engineer approves .
num certification of edge drain systems .
provide certification that the installed pavement edge drain system is functioning properly before formal acceptance of the project .
num trenching material .
when the engineer approves excavated trench material may be used to dress the existing shoulder adjacent to the trench .
num corrective work .
the department may require corrective work when the video or inspection report indicates there are pipe distresses .
num measurement .
num porous underdrain .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet along the centerline of the underdrain .
the department will not measure excavation for the trench less than or equal to num feet in depth or the geotextile fabric used to wrap coarse aggregate for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num perforated and nonperforated pipe .
the department will measure the quantity of each size of perforated and nonperforated pipe in linear feet along the centerline of the pipe .
the department will not measure saw cutting the existing shoulder materials for bedding and backfill encasement with concrete or flowable fill or excavation of the trench up to num feet in depth for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num perforated pipe headwalls .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
num structure excavation common .
the department will measure the quantity of excavation for the trench in excess of num feet in depth in cubic yards .
the department will measure the maximum trench width as that specified in the plans or standard drawings .
num crushed aggregate size no .
num .
the department will measure the quantity used for edge drain headwall outlet erosion control by the ton .
the department will not measure removal of excess material for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num inspect and certify edge drain system .
the department will measure inspect and certify edge drains system by the lump sum .
the department will not measure corrective work due to the construction operation for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num perforated and nonperforated pipe for edge drains .
the department will measure the quantity of each size of perforated and nonperforated pipe for edgedrains in linear feet along the centerline of the pipe .
the department will not measure materials for bedding and backfill encasement with concrete or flowable fill num geotextile fabric used for wrapping perforated pipe or for wrapping coarse aggregate backfill or excavation of the trench up to num feet in depth for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num porous underdrain linear foot pay unit num perforated pipe size linear foot perforated pipe edge drain size linear foot num nonperforated pipe size linear foot num perforated pipe headwalls type size see subsection num num structure excavation common see subsection num num crushed aggregate size no .
num ton num inspect and certify edge drain system lump sum the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num cored hole drainage box connector num description .
core drill a hole in the side or sides of existing small drainage structures and connect the outlet end of num num or numinch underdrain pipe instead of constructing concrete headwalls on the underdrain pipe .
num materials .
num nonshrink grout .
conform to subsection num b .
num asphalt mastic joint sealing compound .
conform to section num .
num pipe .
conform to subsection num .
furnish the same type and size as the underdrain pipe .
num styrofoam backer rod .
obtain the engineers approval .
num construction .
cut holes by core drilling into existing small drainage structures at the locations specified in the contract or where the engineer directs without damaging the existing structure .
cut holes of a diameter equal to the outside diameter of the pipe with a tolerance of plus num inch .
place num styrofoam backer rods on the pipe near each wall face and seal the opening around the pipe with mastic material or a nonshrink grout .
use wyes tees and ells in the pipe system to reduce the number of holes to be drilled .
patch all damage to the existing wall in the coring operation with nonshrink grout .
apply nonshrink grout according to subsection num .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
the department will not measure pipe wyes tees ells styrofoam backer rods or repair of damage to existing wall for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num cored hole drainage box connector size each pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num encasement pipe num description .
provide an encasement pipe open cut or a bored and jacked pipe under a roadway or other sensitive area .
num materials .
num welded and seamless steel pipe .
conform to the following table for the minimum wall thickness for steel pipe minimum wall thickness for steel pipe nominal diameter inches wall thickness inches num or less num num num num num num num num num num construction .
num open cut .
install the pipe according to the manufacturers specifications and installation procedures .
when the engineer requests provide a manufacturers technical representative to assist in pipe installation .
num bore and jack .
construct access pits on both sides of the area to be tunneled one for the boring equipment and one on the receiving end .
use a boring and jacking machine that is capable of keeping the advanced bore hole within the required alignment .
maintain the alignment of the guide rails to the proper line and grade immediately correcting any possible displacement until completing the boring and jacking operation .
use a smooth casing pipe of sufficient strength and diameter to provide a tight fit against the earth sides of the bore hole and of sufficient size to allow installation of the carrier pipe and any required positive anchorage .
weld the joints with a continuous circumferential weld .
frequently check the line and grade and adjust the alignment as practical .
when a physical obstruction or other situation requires the abandonment of a partially completed bore hole and the starting of a new hole backfill as the engineer directs .
num measurement .
num open cut encasement pipe .
the department will measure the completed length of encasement pipe through the flowline from end to end in linear feet .
the department will not measure the backfill and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num bored and jacked encasement pipe .
the department will measure the completed length of encasement pipe through the flowline from end to end in linear feet .
when abandoning a bore hole due to an unforeseen physical obstruction or situation the department will measure the work according to a negotiated supplemental agreement .
when abandoning a bore hole due to mechanical malfunction improper alignment or other problems due to construction operations the department will not measure the backfill and relocation for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following num code pay item num steel encasement pipebore and jacksizethickness linear foot pay unit steel encasement pipeopen cutsizethickness linear foot the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num tunnels by use of steel liner plates num description .
tunnel using conventional tunneling methods and install tunnel liner plates .
num materials .
num liner plates .
conform to section num .
num grout .
conform to subsection num .
num construction .
excavate tunnels by full face heading and bench multiple drift procedures or other engineer approved methods .
complete all work under the supervision of a superintendent familiar with tunneling and the use of tunnel liner plates .
begin tunneling at either end unless otherwise directed .
when necessary to reach the entrance grade construct an access pit of sufficient size to accommodate the tunnel excavation spoil removal access rails liner plates and other items necessary for the tunnel operation .
sheet or shore the access pit to accommodate all requirements for safety and stability .
excavate for the tunnel in close conformance to the outside shape of the liner plates .
replace any liner plates damaged during handling and placing .
handle coated plates in a manner that prevents damage to the coating .
assemble the liner plates according to the manufacturers recommendations at such time so there will not be more than num feet of tunnel mucking ahead of the bolting up of plates .
at the end of each work day construct a bulkhead inside the assembled liner plate at the construction face unless the engineer specifically grants permission to omit the bulkhead .
install grout blocks at each end after completing bolting of liner plates .
proportion grout according to subsection num .
force grout into voids through the grouting holes in the plates with such pressure that all voids occurring between the liner plates and excavation will be filled .
grout and install liner plates simultaneously .
num measurement .
the department will measure tunnels of each size in linear feet along the invert .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item tunnel size linear foot pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num filling and capping safeloading and plugging abondoned underground structures num description .
fill and cap designated wells inlets catch basins and manholes .
safeload designated small drainage structures and underground containers .
plug designated pipe and wells .
this work does not include the removal of hazardous material .
num materials .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num coarse aggregate .
conform to section num no .
num or numm .
num flowable fill .
conform to subsection num and num .
num cement .
conform to section num .
num sand .
conform to section num .
num water .
conform to section num .
num fly ash .
conform to section num .
num construction .
num filling and capping wells catch basins inlets and manholes diameters num inches or less .
fill all wells except water wells catch basins inlets and manholes having an average diameter of num inches or less with coarse aggregate to within num inches of their surface elevation .
place then rod or tamp aggregate without creating large voids or unfilled pockets .
after placing the aggregate fill the remaining num inches with concrete .
use class a concrete according to subsection num .
tamp rod or vibrate the concrete in place .
the department will not require curing the concrete .
when it is not practical to completely fill a deep well the engineer may allow plugging according to subsection num and then filling and capping the well or structure .
num filling and capping wells catch basins inlets and manholes diameters over num inches .
fill all wells except water wells catch basins and manholes having an average diameter exceeding num inches with select compatible soil or other approved material to within num inches of their surface elevation .
place and compact the soil or other approved material in layers not exceeding one foot in thickness .
compact by hand or mechanical tamping .
cap the remaining num inches with an numinch reinforced concrete slab either precast or castinplace .
use class a concrete according to subsection num .
reinforce the slab with no .
num reinforcing bars placed at numinch centers in both directions and located num inches from the bottom surface of the slab .
cure slabs according to subsection num .
num plugging water wells .
plug water wells according to num kar num .
employ a kentucky certified water well driller as required by krs num through num to perform the work .
furnish copies of the drillers log sheets to the engineer after completing the plugging work .
num num safeloading small drainage structures .
when safeloading either completely fill the designated areas with grout in such a manner to make them safe from collapse or fill the designated area with flowable fill .
mix flowable fill according to subsection num .
furnish grout consisting of one part cement or cement with fly ash to num parts mortar sand or concrete sand by volume and water .
mix to a workable consistency .
add an amount of fly ash that does not exceed num percent of the cement quantity .
clean septic tanks before safeloading .
remove appreciable deposits of debris from other structures prior to safeloading .
plug the ends of existing culverts with bulkheads containing small openings at the tops through which the grout or flowable fill may be pumped at a minimum pressure of num psi .
completely fill all structures that require safeloading with grout or flowable fill .
num plugging pipe .
shape or place plywood num inch or greater in thickness or use other approved material to snugly fit the interior of the pipe to be plugged .
when bracing is necessary adequately secure it in the designated location to ensure that the placement of concrete will not move or distort it .
place the forming material within the pipe a distance of no less than num feet measured along the flowline from the end of the pipe to be plugged .
then completely fill the portion to be plugged with concrete .
use class a concrete according to subsection num .
tamp rod or vibrate the concrete in a manner to form a dense mass and to exclude voids .
keep the plastic concrete within the pipe using adequately braced forms .
the department will not require curing the concrete .
num measurement .
num filling and capping diameters num inches or less .
the department will measure the quantity of wells except water wells by each individual unit .
the department will not measure plugging wells except water wells for payment and will consider plugging wells other than water wells incidental to this item of work .
num plug water wells .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num capping diameters over num inches .
the department will measure the quantity in square yards of the finished reinforced concrete cap .
num embankmentinplace diameters over num inches .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
the department will measure material used in lieu of select compatible soil as embankmentinplace .
num roadway excavation diameters over num inches .
the department will measure the quantity according to subsection num .
the department will measure material used in lieu of select compatible soil as roadway excavation .
num safeloading .
the department will measure safeloading structures in cubic yards .
num plugging pipe .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit per end plugged .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num num fill and cap item num inches or less each pay unit num num cap item over num inches square yard num roadway excavation see subsection num num num embankmentinplace see subsection num num plug water well each num safeloading cubic yard num plug pipe each the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num flume inlets and paved ditches num description .
construct reinforced concrete flume inlets and paved ditches .
num materials .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num construction .
construct according to the plans and standard drawings .
excavate the subgrade to the required depth below the finished grade .
remove all soft and yielding material replace it with suitable material compact the subgrade and finish it to a firm and smooth surface .
place class a concrete with steel reinforcement finish and cure according to subsection num .
when adjacent to a concrete pavement or shoulder tie flume inlets to the concrete pavement or shoulder by means of deformed steel tie bars .
furnish and install strips of recessed type longitudinal metal joint punched to accommodate tie bars at the designated locations adjacent to the forms at the pavement edge .
bend tie bars to right angles at the midpoints and install them in the pavement with one end of each tie bar placed in the grooves of the metal joint so the bar can be straightened after removing the pavement forms .
when constructing flume inlets prior to installing guardrail posts provide a blockout in the inlet using a numinch radius .
after setting the posts fill the holes between the posts and flume inlets with concrete .
construct paved ditches at the locations and to the widths the engineer directs .
the location and width specified in the plans are for purposes of estimating only .
construct anchors according to the standard drawings .
construct end anchors at the inlet and outlet ends .
when required construct intermediate anchors on numfoot centers .
form and cast against earth the exposed ends of end anchors for paved ditches and the other ends of end anchors and all intermediate anchors .
moisten the subgrade prior to placing the concrete .
place sod in areas the standard drawings designate .
num measurement .
num flume inlets .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit .
the department will not measure steel tie bars longitudinal metal joints or blockouts for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num paved ditches .
the department will measure this quantity in square yards of actual surface area .
the department will not measure intermediate anchors for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num roadway excavation .
the department will measure this quantity according to subsection num .
num sod .
the department will measure this quantity according to subsection num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following num code pay item pay unit num flume inlet type each num paved ditch type square yard num roadway excavation see subsection num num sodding see subsection num the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num small drainage structures num description .
construct reconstruct or adjust inlets outlets manholes junction boxes catch basins edge drain outlet headwalls and other small drainage structures .
num materials .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to subsection num .
num manhole pipe .
conform to section num .
num brick unit masonry .
conform to section num .
num preformed joint filler .
conform to section num .
num dense graded aggregate .
conform to section num .
num pipe .
conform to section num .
num mortar .
conform to section num .
num structural steel .
conform to section num .
num miscellaneous metals .
conform to section num .
num steel manhole risers .
conform to section num .
num manhole covers and lids .
conform to section num .
num precast manhole sections .
conform to section num .
num manhole steps .
provide manhole steps that are on the departments list of approved materials .
num plastic adjusting rings .
provide plastic or rubber adjusting rings that are on the departments list of approved materials .
num construction num newly constructed small drainage structures .
a general .
construct all small drainage structures according to the contract or as the engineer establishes .
the engineer may approve similar units that conform to the typical features depicted in the standard drawings .
construct small drainage structures using class a concrete according to subsection num .
attach all cast iron grates and lids and all structural steel grates to the frames or to the concrete in the event there is no frame with a chain of sufficient length to permit removal for clean out and maintenance purposes .
obtain the engineers approval in writing of shop drawings for the security device when different from what the plans specify .
when extending pipe through the walls of small drainage structures use pipe that is the same size and type and conforms to the same requirements as the existing pipe with which it is to be connected .
use extensions of sufficient length to provide for connections and construction to prevent leakage of the pipe num and structure wall joint .
when excavation for small drainage structures extends under pavement curb gutter or sidewalk backfill the excavation with dense graded aggregate or gravel base .
for backfill under aprons around drop box inlets or similar structures use dense graded aggregate or gravel base when required by the standard drawings .
use dense graded aggregate or gravel base backfill as the engineer directs and compact it in layers not exceeding num inches loose thickness .
when structures abut rigid pavement place num inch preformed joint filler between the rigid pavement and the structure for the full depth of the pavement .
construct concentric or eccentric concrete pipe cones for manholes according to the standard drawings .
use precast concrete precast concrete pipe sections and castinplace concrete for manhole construction according to the standard drawings .
use precast concrete precast concrete pipe sections cast inplace brick or plastic adjusting rings or for adjustment of existing manholes according to the standard specifications .
the department will allow the use of square outside castinplace bases in lieu of round bases .
form and construct a ushaped channel in the base of circular pipe manholes with class a concrete for a smooth continuation of the pipe .
do not allow the channel height to be less than num of the diameter of the smaller pipe that is intercepted .
construct the tops of box inlets specified in the standard drawings to the same cross slope as any existing or proposed shoulder sidewalks medians or islands that will abut the box inlets .
install steps according to the standard drawings in all manholes num feet or greater in depth .
do not paint frames grates and lids made of structural steel or cast iron for any of the structures .
b precast structures except manholes .
if furnishing precast structures conform to the following requirements .
only furnish products manufactured by a precast producer listed in the departments list of approved materials .
if the producer does not have an approved drawing for the product submit num copies of shop drawings to the engineer for review and approval .
ensure that the shop drawings show details of any variation from the departments standard drawings and include any special installation instructions necessary .
submit specifications for any special materials for joint construction with the shop drawings and submit samples of joint materials when requested .
before beginning fabrication furnish copies of the approved shop drawings to the engineer .
use concrete that equals or exceeds the requirements for class a concrete .
conform to section num for the fabrication of the structures the requirements for a mix design and a certified concrete technician .
set the precast structures on a foundation of at least num inches of dense graded aggregate compacted using mechanical tampers .
backfill box inlets with cantilevered portions to the elevation of the bottom of the cantilevered element and place num inches of compacted dense graded aggregate before placing the cantilevered element .
make positive seals between the pipe and the precast structure and between individual precast segments of the structure in the field .
obtain any special materials required for joint construction from the structure fabricator at no additional expense to the department .
the department will sample and test all materials used in manufacture of the precast elements including cement aggregates water admixtures steel reinforcement and galvanized metal items according to the departments standard procedures for these items .
do not begin fabrication until the department has approved these materials .
num repair or replace structures damaged during handling transporting erecting or backfilling or any structure that can not be placed satisfactorily as the engineer directs or approves .
num reconstructed small drainage structures .
reconstruct existing units to the required line and elevation according to the standard drawings .
recondition structures where work is in excess of the limits required for adjusting small drainage structures .
attach all cast iron grates and lids and all structural steel grates to the frames or to the concrete in the event there is no frame with a chain of sufficient length to permit removal for clean out and maintenance purposes .
num adjusted small drainage structures .
adjust existing frames and covers or gratings to the proper elevation .
accomplish this by removing or adding castinplace concrete masonry precast reinforced concrete masonry brick masonry or an adjusting ring for a vertical distance not to exceed one foot above or below the existing masonry and replacing existing castings firmly and permanently in place .
for plastic or rubber adjusting rings install and seal according to the manufacturers recommendations .
when the contract specifies use the adjusting ring method as described in this section for adjusting manhole castings to grade .
when applicable use the adjusting ring method in lieu of the methods outlined in the preceding paragraph .
raise a casting by inserting an additional casting into the existing frame as follows num use an adjusting casting of an approved type .
hold it rigidly to the existing frame using set screws in the bearing leg of the ring or spot weld the adjusting ring to the existing frame in num equally spaced locations .
num adjust existing manhole covers to the proper elevation by inserting variable height adjustable casting that the engineer approves into the existing frame .
use an adjustable casting capable of diameter adjustment as well as vertical height adjustment .
when the difference between the existing elevation and the proposed elevation is less than the outer thickness of the cover or grate plus num inch insert a casting that provides for receiving a new casting that is num inches less in diameter in any horizontal measurement than the existing casting .
furnish a new cover or grate similar in design to the existing cover or grate except for the diameter or other horizontal dimensions .
num use a steel expanding manhole riser that is of the correct height and is designed to receive the existing manhole cover .
attach all cast iron grates and lids and all structural steel grates to the frames or to the concrete in the event there is no frame with a chain of sufficient length to permit removal for clean out and maintenance purposes .
num measurement .
num newly constructed small drainage structures except type num drop box inlets .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
the department will not measure any increase in the height of a structure to one foot from the plan height for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
the department will measure for payment a change in height that exceeds one foot .
the department will measure the quantity of reinforcing steel and concrete placed in excess of the plan height plus one foot according to subsections num and num respectively .
the department will not measure excavation or materials for backfill for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
the department will not measure extra work or materials required for use of precast units and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num type num drop box inlets .
the department will measure the quantity by num each individual unit according to subsection num except the department will measure the units in linear feet .
num reconstructed small drainage structures .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num adjusted small drainage structures .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num newly constructed small drainage structure each pay unit except type num drop box inlets type size num num adjusting small drainage structure type sizenum each num num num num reconstructing small drainage structure type size each num num num drop box inlet type num linear foot num when small drainage structures that require adjusting exist on a project and there is not a bid item for adjusting small drainage structures the department will make payment according to subsection num .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num prefabricated vertical wick drains num description .
furnish and place prefabricated vertical wick drains at the locations shown on the plans .
num materials .
conform to the contract requirements .
num construction .
stake the proposed location of the drains before installation .
do not vary the locations by more than num inches from those shown on the plans .
maintain staked locations during construction .
install trial drains at locations within the work area .
demonstrate that all equipment and materials produce a satisfactory installation .
obtain approval from the engineer that materials and installation procedures are satisfactory .
perform corrective action if trial drains are not accepted .
install the prefabricated wick drains with a protective mandrel or sleeve .
provide an anchor plate or similar arrangement at the bottom to prevent soil from entering the bottom of the mandrel during installation of the drain and to anchor the drain tip at the required depth .
advance the mandrel or sleeve by continuously pushing or vibrating into the soil and retract after each installation .
the maximum cross sectional area of the mandrel or sleeve is num square inches including the attached anchor .
preauger when mandrel or sleeve can not be continuously pushed or vibrated and when the engineer deems necessary .
use augers with a maximum outside diameter of num inches .
install the prefabricated wick drains vertically from the top of the working platform to the elevation shown on the plans .
ensure that plumbness of the drain does not deviate from the vertical more than num num inches in num feet .
provide the engineer a means to verify plumbness of the equipment and the depth of the drain .
splice no less than num inches or connect the drain material according to the manufacturers recommendations to ensure continuity of flow .
limit splices to one per drain .
cut the drain flush with the upper surface of the working platform .
install the drains in a sequence that prevents travel over previously installed drains .
repair or replace drains that are more than num inches from the plan locations improperly installed or damaged during construction at no cost to the department .
remove any auger cuttings or debris from the top of the working platform before continuing with fabric and fill placement over drains .
num measurement .
the department will measure prefabricated vertical wick drains in linear feet .
the department will not measure trial drains or preaugering for payment and will consider it incidental prefabricated vertical wick drains .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num prefabricated wick drain linear foot pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num raised pavement markers num description .
furnish and install raised pavement markers .
num materials .
num markers .
use type iv or type v raised markers as designated in the contract that conform to section num .
num adhesives .
conform to the manufacturers recommendations .
num construction .
before installing the markers furnish the manufacturers current recommendations for adhesives and installation procedures to the engineer .
use one brand and design throughout the project for each type of marker required .
the contract or standard drawings will specify either monodirectional or bi directional markers and the marker color .
remove all excess adhesive from in front of the reflective faces .
if any adhesive or foreign matter can not be removed from the reflective faces or if any marker fails to properly adhere to the pavement surface remove and replace the marker .
num type iv markers .
before installing new markers remove all portions of the existing type iv marker and all traces of adhesive rust and dirt from the casting to the satisfaction of the engineer .
abrasive blast or use other methods approved by the engineer .
ensure that the casting surface is dry and free from dirt and other deleterious material before placing the marker in the casting .
place adhesive on the marker or casting in sufficient quantity to ensure complete coverage of the contact area with no voids present and with a slight excess after the marker is pressed in place .
firmly seat the marker in the casting with a minimum load of num pounds .
ensure that the pavement surface temperature is at or above num f at the time of application .
conform to a higher temperature if recommended by the adhesive manufacturer .
num type v markers .
install type v markers in slots cut into the pavement according to the manufacturers recommendations .
do not cut the slots until the pavement has cured sufficiently to prevent tearing or raveling .
prepare the pavement surfaces and install the markers according to the manufacturers recommendations and the following requirements .
remove all dirt grease oil loose or unsound layers and any other material from the marker area which would reduce the bond of the adhesive .
maintain pavement surfaces in a clean condition until placing markers .
ensure that the adhesive bed area is equal to the bottom area of the marker and apply adhesive in sufficient quantity to force excess out around the entire perimeter of the marker .
use materials equipment and construction procedures that ensure proper adhesion of the markers to the pavement surface .
num location and spacing .
install markers as specified on the standard drawings .
do not install markers in bridge decks .
under no circumstances install a marker on top of a pavement joint or crack .
offset markers a minimum of num inches from any longitudinal pavement joint or crack and at least one inch from the painted stripe ensuring that the finished line of markers is straight with minimal lateral deviation .
preference should be given to maintaining the numinch offset between marker and joint as opposed to keeping the line of markers straight .
if conflicts between marker placement in relation to pavement joint and striping can not be resolved markers may be eliminated with the engineers approval .
place type v markers as much in line with existing pavement striping as possible .
for facilities with double yellow centerlines place markers between the num lines provided num the minimum numinch gap requirement between the marker and the longitudinal pavement joint or crack is not violated .
for instances when the double yellow centerline may bound the longitudinal pavement joint or crack use judgment to determine which side of the painted stripe would be suitable for marker installation .
place markers installed along an edgeline or channelizing line so that the near edge of the casting is no more than one inch from the near edge of the line .
place markers installed along a lane line or dashed yellow centerline between and in line with the dashes .
do not place markers over the lines except where the lines deviate visibly from their correct alignment and then only when the engineer approves the location .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num pavement marker type iv mono or bidirectional color each pay unit num pavement marker type v mono or bidirectional color each the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under the section .
num section num permanent pavement striping num description .
furnish and apply waterborne striping paint to provide lane lines edgelines and gore markings as specified in the contract .
num materials and equipment .
num paint .
conform to section num and section num .
num drop on glass beads .
use beads that will ensure the pavement marking material will meet retroreflectivity requirements .
the department will evaluate the beads as part of the marking system through retroreflectivity readings .
num application equipment .
use a selfpropelled striper capable of heating the paint to provide uniform flow .
ensure that the striper has a guide boom or optical pointer to attain smooth and straight lines .
ensure that the equipment maintains proper application pressures for paint and beads at all times .
provide equipment capable of applying a single line or parallel lines of the specified width and in any combination of a skip line and a solid line in one pass .
provide equipment with a paint cutoff device to provide clean square marking ends of the paint lines .
equip the paint pots or tanks with an agitator that will keep the paint thoroughly mixed .
provide equipment with bead dispensers minimum of one for each paint spray gun placed such that the beads are applied to the paint almost instantly as the paint is being placed on the roadway surface .
design and align the bead dispensers so that beads are applied under air pressure uniformly to the entire surface of the paint lines .
equip the bead dispensers with cutoff controls synchronized with the cutoff controls for the paint spray guns .
num construction .
provide yellow centerline markings which are defined as those separating traffic moving in opposite directions .
provide white lane line markings which are defined as those separating traffic moving in the same direction .
ensure that these markings are skip lines and solid lines as required by part num of the mutcd .
ensure that edge lines are solid lines and determine the color from part num of the mutcd .
on interstates and parkways and other routes approved by the state highway engineer install pavement striping that is num inches in width .
on other routes install pavement striping that is num inches in width .
when centerline markings consist of a double yellow line either a onedirection or twodirection no passing zone marking the spacing between the two lines shall be the same as the width of one line marking .
ensure that all lines have clean edges with a width tolerance of plus num inch .
the engineer may waive the tolerances when deviations are caused by undulation in the pavement surface .
construct skip lines with a stripetogap ratio of a numfoot paint stripe to a numfoot gap .
ensure that the length of the stripe is between num and num num feet .
ensure that the stripegap cycle is between num and num num feet .
offset longitudinal lines at least num inches from longitudinal pavement construction joints .
offset longitudinal lane lines on multi lane highways num inches towards the median .
on resurfacing pavement restoration and pavement rehabilitation projects reinstall the recorded existing pavement markings as modified by the engineer .
on new construction place the markings as the contract specifies or as the engineer directs .
num records .
on resurfacing pavement restoration and pavement rehabilitation projects prepare and keep a written record of the locations of existing pavement markings and furnish a copy to the engineer before removing or obliterating the markings .
num num pavement surface preparation .
clean grease oil mud dust dirt grass loose gravel or other deleterious material from the surface where pavement markings are to be applied .
use only engineer approved cleaning methods .
num paint application .
apply permanent striping to new pavements when the final surface course has been placed and subsequent paving operations will not adversely impact the permanent striping .
when subsequent paving operations will adversely impact the permanent striping apply temporary striping according to section num and apply the permanent striping as soon as conditions permit .
apply striping before sunset on new pavement that is to be driven over by the public .
comply with the following application rates .
material paint application rate glass bead application rate num inch waterborne paint min .
of num gallonsmile min .
of num poundsgallon num in waterborne paint min .
of num gallonsmile min .
of num poundsgallon num inch durable waterborne paint min .
of num gallonsmile min .
of num poundsgallon num marking removal .
remove all markings made in error or not conforming to the traffic operation in use .
do not paint with asphalt binder or other material to obliterate the markings .
remove pavement striping temporary or permanent from asphalt or concrete pavement using ultrahigh pressure water .
marking removal totaling num linear feet or less may be removed by an abrasive method to the satisfaction of the engineer .
vacuum all marking material and removal debris concurrently with the marking removal operation .
do not damage the pavement in any way and protect all joint seals .
if damage is observed stop the removal process until the operation can provide an acceptable marking removal .
repair any damage to the pavement as a result of the marking removal .
removal of marking will not be measured for payment .
waterblast to remove temporary or permanent striping completely as the engineer directs .
num proving period .
a proving period will follow the application of the permanent pavement striping .
during this period the engineer will make such observations as are necessary to determine if the markings are acceptable .
the proving period begins when the facility is opened to traffic .
a requirements .
the minimum retroreflectivity requirements at the end of the proving period as measured with a department approved num meter geometry handheld or mobile retroreflectometer are as follows white num mcdluxsquare meter yellow num mcdluxsquare meter the department will take these measurements between num and num days after the start of the proving period with acceptance based on km num or km num as applicable .
if the department determines that the markings are acceptable the installation of the markings will be considered complete .
b failure .
for any onemile section and each gore area during the proving period the department will consider the section defective when the retroreflectivity falls below the minimum required .
the department will consider each edge line centerline lane line and gore area marking separately .
c corrective work .
if a line is found to be defective repair or remove and replace the line .
perform pavement marking replacement according to the num requirements specified in this subsection for the initial application .
the corrective work will be subject to a proving period as listed above .
num acceptance of nonspecification markings .
if weather conditions allow perform corrective work to bring striping retroreflectivity into conformance .
if corrective work has been performed and the work meets all requirements except for minimum retroreflectivity the department may accept the work according to subsection num .
when the engineer determines that the markings may be left in place the department will accept them at a reduction in the contract unit bid price according to the acceptance pay schedule .
additionally the engineer may remove the striping crew for the remainder of the project according to subsection num part a .
the engineer may also apply this section when corrective work can not be performed due to weather .
acceptance pay schedule for permanent striping pay value white yellow mcdluxsquare meter mcdluxsquare meter num num num num num num num num num num num num remove and replace num num num measurement .
num pavement striping .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
when a bid item is not included for gore markings the department will measure the quantity by converting the actual length and width of line installed to an equivalent length of the normal width line on that section of roadway .
the department will measure temporary striping according to num when subsequent paving operations will adversely impact the permanent striping .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num pavement striping permanent paint width linear foot pay unit numer durable waterborne marking num in w linear foot numer durable waterborne marking num in y linear foot numer durable waterborne marking num in w linear foot the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num durable pavement striping num description .
furnish and install durable marking materials thermoplastic or type i tape to provide lane lines edgelines and gore markings as specified in the contract .
num materials and equipment .
num thermoplastic .
conform to section num .
num type i tape .
conform to section num .
num binder .
furnish a binder that the manufacturer of the pavement marking material recommends and the engineer approves .
provide a binder that forms a continuous film that dries rapidly and adheres to the pavement .
provide a material that does not discolor or cause any noticeable change in the appearance of the pavement outside of the finished pavement marking .
submit the material and method of application to the engineer and obtain written approval from the engineer and the manufacturer of the pavement marking material before applying .
num drop on glass beads .
use beads that will ensure the pavement marking material will meet retroreflectivity requirements .
the department will evaluate the beads as part of the marking system through retroreflectivity readings .
num thermoplastic application equipment .
provide equipment with an extrusion die that simultaneously deposits and shapes lines at a minimum thickness of num mils on the pavement surface .
do not use spray and ribbon gun applicators .
ensure the application equipment conforms to the following num capable of providing continuous and uniform heat to maintain the material between num and num f throughout the mixing conveying and dispensing .
num the kettle is capable of continuous agitation during mixing and heated storage and is equipped with an automatic thermostat control device and material thermometer .
num motorized and capable of applying a uniform line at a rate of num mph .
num equipped with a cutoff device that provides clean square stripe ends .
num equipped with an automatic bead dispenser .
num construction .
provide yellow centerline markings which are defined as those separating traffic moving in opposite directions .
provide white lane line markings which are defined as those separating traffic moving in the same direction .
ensure that these markings are skip lines and solid lines as required by part num of the mutcd .
ensure that edge lines are solid lines and determine the color from part num of the mutcd .
install pavement striping at the width specified in the contract .
ensure that all lines have clean edges with a width tolerance of plus num inch .
the engineer may waive the tolerances when deviations are caused by undulation in the pavement surface .
construct skip lines with a stripetogap ratio of a numfoot stripe to a numfoot gap .
ensure that the length of the stripe is between num and num feet .
ensure that the stripegap cycle is between num and num feet .
use type i tape for markings on bridge decks jpc pavement and jpc intersections .
do not use thermoplastic materials on bridge decks jpc pavement and jpc intersections .
num layout .
install all pavement markings according to part num of the mutcd and the following requirements .
num make the width of lane lines and edgelines as specified in the plans or as the engineer directs .
make lines for gore area markings twice the normal width line for that section of roadway .
unless striping plans are included in the proposal or otherwise directed by the engineer install gore area markings as shown in figures numbnum and numbnum of the mutcd .
do not use the optional markings shown transverse lines in the neutral area and dotted extension of the right edgeline .
due to the possibility that water may be retained on the roadway by the thermoplastic edgelines place a one foot gap every num feet in all thermoplastic edgelines .
do not install gaps for taped edgelines .
offset longitudinal lines at least num inches from longitudinal pavement construction joints .
offset longitudinal lane lines on multilane highways num inches towards the median .
on resurfacing pavement restoration and pavement rehabilitation projects prepare and keep a written record of the locations of existing pavement markings and furnish a copy to the engineer before removing or obliterating the markings .
the engineer will notify you of any changes to the existing markings .
before applying the pavement marking material premark the pavement surface and obtain the engineers approval of the proposed location alignment and control guides .
num surface preparation .
num remove existing pavement markings and clean grease oil mud dust dirt grass loose gravel or other deleterious material from the surface where pavement markings are to be applied as directed by and by methods acceptable to the engineer .
num remove the existing pavement markings until a minimum of num percent of the pavement surface is uniformly exposed throughout .
ensure that the pavement surface is in proper condition for successful bonding of the pavement markings and provides a neat appearance .
do not leave any loose or flaking existing pavement markings .
num when removing the existing pavement markings ensure that the finished pavement surface is not damaged or left in a condition that may mislead or misdirect the motorist .
repair any damage to the pavement pavement joint materials or the pavement surface caused by the removal of the existing pavement markings in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
after completing these operations use compressed air to blow clean the pavement surface of residue and debris resulting from the removal of existing pavement markings .
num when removal of existing pavement markings and objectionable materials obscures existing pavement markings of a lane occupied by public traffic immediately remove the residue including dust from the surface being treated .
obtain the engineers approval of the removal methods .
num place the final pavement markings on the same day that the existing pavement markings are removed .
num on concrete surfaces and as the engineer directs on older asphalt pavements apply binder to the area where placing pavement marking material .
num on new concrete pavement surfaces remove the curing compound from the pavement surface before applying the binder and the pavement marking material .
num application .
a type i tape .
apply according to the manufacturers recommendations .
when applied to concrete cut the tape at all joints .
b thermoplastic .
rather than installing thermoplastic pavement markings on fresh asphalt the department will allow temporary striping with paint .
when choosing this option cover the temporary striping with the thermoplastic pavement markings within num calendar days .
the department will not require num removal of the interim pavement marking paint before applying the thermoplastic pavement markings .
install the thermoplastic material at a minimum thickness of num mils on the pavement surface in a melted state at a temperature from num and num f. apply additional glass beads by dropon or pressure spray methods in sufficient quantities to obtain the retroreflectivity requirements specified in subsection num .
verify the adhesion of the thermoplastic to asphalt pavements by performing bond checks at least num per mile of line as follows .
approximately num to num seconds after applying a thermoplastic line to the roadway surface cut and lift approximately a numinch section of thermoplastic .
the thermoplastic is successfully bonding to the pavement surface if a layer of asphalt clings to the removed thermoplastic stripe and the pavement surface under the removed stripe is shiny and black .
provide finished markings that are continuous and uniform in shape having clear and sharp dimensions .
ensure that all lines have welldefined edges .
num restrictions .
do not apply the pavement marking material when air and pavement temperatures are below num f. do not apply the pavement marking material when the surface of the pavement contains evidence of moisture in amounts significant enough to prevent the pavement marking material from bonding to the pavement .
significant amounts of moisture can be caused by heavy dew or very humid nights as well as from rainfall .
if encountering significant amounts of moisture while applying the thermoplastic the contractor at his own risk may attempt to apply thermoplastic subject to the following restrictions .
heat the thermoplastic material to the upper temperature limit specified by the manufacturer and apply a test line on the pavement .
perform a bond check according to subsection num .
if the thermoplastic successfully bonds to the pavement continue to apply thermoplastic lines provided there is evidence that the moisture is escaping through the surface of the line as indicated by very small pin holes .
if there is excessive moisture as indicated by larger sized holes or bubbles on the surface of the line do not apply thermoplastic until the moisture can be effectively dealt with .
perform a sufficient number of bond checks to ensure that the thermoplastic is bonding to the pavement .
num project conflicts .
when other construction projects are in progress within the limits of the designated work areas install no pavement markings that will be removed or damaged by immediate subsequent construction .
the engineer will give notification of all conflicting construction projects .
schedule the installation of pavement markings after completion of the conflicting construction .
when scheduling is impossible or creates an undue hardship the engineer will delete the intersection from this project .
num proving period for durable markings .
a num day proving period will follow the application of the durable markings .
during this period the engineer will make such observations as are necessary to determine if the markings are acceptable .
the proving period begins when the facility is opened to traffic .
a requirements .
num type i tape .
during the proving period ensure that the pavement marking material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings chipping spalling poor adhesion to the pavement loss of retroreflectivity vehicular damage and normal wear .
type i tape is manufactured off site and warranted by the manufacturer to meet certain retroreflective requirements .
as long as the material is adequately bonded to the surface and shows no sign of failure due to the other items listed in num subsection num a num retroreflectivity readings will not be required .
in the absence of readings the department will accept tape based on a nighttime visual observation .
num thermoplastic .
during the proving period ensure that the thermoplastic pavement marking material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials smearing or spreading under heat deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings chipping spalling poor adhesion to the pavement materials loss of retroreflectivity vehicular damage and normal wear .
the minimum retroreflectivity requirements at the end of the proving period as measured with a department approved num meter geometry handheld or mobile retroreflectometer are as follows white num mcdluxsquare meter yellow num mcdluxsquare meter the department will take these measurements between num and num days after the start of the proving period with acceptance based on km num or km num as applicable .
if the department determines that the markings are acceptable the installation of the markings will be considered complete .
b failure .
during the proving period the department will consider markings defective when the retroreflectivity falls below the minimum required or the material fails to meet the other requirements of a above .
additionally when more than num percent of any onemile section or individual gore area is defective the department will consider the entire section defective .
the department will consider each edge line centerline lane line and gore area marking separately .
c corrective work .
if a line is found to be defective repair or remove and replace the line .
perform pavement marking replacement according to the requirements specified in this subsection for the initial application .
the corrective work will be subject to a proving period as listed above .
num marking removal .
remove all markings made in error or not conforming to the traffic operation in use .
do not paint with asphalt binder or other material to obliterate the markings .
remove pavement striping temporary or permanent from asphalt or concrete pavement using ultrahigh pressure water .
marking removal totaling num linear feet or less may be removed by an abrasive method to the satisfaction of the engineer .
vacuum all marking material and removal debris concurrently with the marking removal operation .
do not damage the pavement in any way and protect all joint seals .
if damage is observed stop the removal process until the operation can provide an acceptable marking removal .
repair any damage to the pavement as a result of the marking removal .
removal of marking will not be measured for payment .
num acceptance of nonspecification thermoplastic markings .
when reasonably acceptable work has been produced but retroreflectivity requirements are not met the department may accept the work according to subsection num .
when the engineer determines that the markings may be left in place the department will accept them at a reduction in the contract unit bid price according to acceptance pay schedule for thermoplastic .
num measurement .
when a bid item is not included for gore markings the department will measure the quantity by converting the actual length and width of line installed to an equivalent length of the normal width line on that section of roadway .
num num thermoplastic pavement markings .
the department will measure for payment by the units listed in the quantity summary .
the department will not measure sampling testing surface preparation premarking interim marking and binder application for payment and will consider them incidental to the thermoplastic bid items .
the department will not measure corrective work for payment .
num durable pavement markings type i .
the department will measure for payment by the units listed in the quantity summary .
the department will not measure sampling testing surface preparation premarking and binder application for payment and will consider them incidental to the pavement marking bid items .
corrective work will not be measured for payment .
num pavement striping removal .
when listed as a bid item the department will measure for payment by the units listed in the quantity summary .
the department will not measure for payment the removal of existing pavement markings that have not been authorized by the engineer .
when the contract does not list a bid item the department will consider existing pavement marking removal incidental to the other pavement marking bid items .
the department will not measure for payment any corrective work required due to the removal work .
num payment .
the department will make payment upon completion of the work .
if after the proving period the markings do not meet minimum retroreflectivity requirements the department will adjust the payment or require corrective work according to the following code pay item num pavement striping thermoplastic width color linear foot pay unit num pavement striping durable type i tape width color linear foot the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
acceptance pay schedule for thermoplastic pay value white yellow mcdluxsquare meter mcdluxsquare meter num num num num num num num num num num num num remove and replace num num num section num panel traffic signs num description .
furnish and install extruded panel traffic signs .
traffic signs include ground mounted overhead structure mounted or bridge mounted signs .
num materials .
num panel signs .
conform to section num .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
conform to section num .
num structural steel .
conform to section num .
num miscellaneous metals .
conform to section num .
num retroreflective materials .
conform to section num .
num pop fasteners .
use corrosion resistant protruding head pop rivets with a minimum diameter of num inch .
obtain the engineers approval before use .
num construction .
the department may inspect fabrication and erection work .
the department will perform a day and night inspection after the installation is complete .
if a manufacturer provides a warranty on any materials covered under these specifications furnish the same warranty to the state .
perform the work according to the requirements specified in the following publications mutcd aashto specifications for design and construction of structural supports for highway signs federal standard num standard highway sign colors standard highway signs use class a concrete according to subsection num .
num location .
use the plans as general guidance for the extent and general arrangement of signs .
consider sign locations specified in the plans as approximate only .
determine the exact location for each sign and obtain the engineers approval .
when it is necessary to relocate any sign more than num feet from the station listed obtain the division of traffics approval .
center overhead signs over the lane or lanes to which they apply .
allow for differences in elevation across the full shoulder width as specified in the plans in maintaining the required numfoot minimum vertical clearance to the bottom of the lowest parts of the signs or supports for overhead signs .
submit all proposed revisions in writing to the engineer for written approval .
num messages .
sign messages specified in the plans are the final messages .
due to construction phasing the engineer may make changes in some messages .
if the engineer changes a message before the sign installation store the final message copy on the project .
conform message spacing to the applicable requirements of the previously cited publications for guide signs and the manufacturers recommendations for sign sizes indicated as the engineer approves .
center message copy over the lane or lanes to which they apply .
num attachment .
attach letters symbols numbers and borders to sign faces with pop fasteners pop rivets .
num num shields .
for panel sign mounted route markers use a retroreflectorized white cutout for the us shield and ky round shape omitting the black background of the standard rectangular shapes .
do not use borders on the cutout shapes .
use the dimensions shown in the standard highway signs manual .
space route markers evenly across the panel sign face .
provide route markers for panel signs that meet the specification requirements for type vii viii or ix class i of astm d num and that consist of reflective sheeting having an integral air cavity between the front surface and the optical elements mounted on fully covering aluminum base copy stock not otherwise embossed or crimped but having a minimum thickness of num inches .
num covering .
cover sign faces only when absolutely necessary and keep covered only as long as necessary .
do not use tape paper plastic or sheet metal covers .
replace any signs damaged as a result of being covered at no expense to the department .
num shop drawings .
submit num complete sets of detailed shop drawings to the engineer for written approval before fabricating signs .
before installation obtain the engineers written approval of drawings descriptions manufacturers cuts etc .
covering all materials to be used .
submit mill test reports for ibeams wide flange beams aluminum or steel panels and each different gauge of aluminum or steel sheeting used to the engineer for approval before installation .
num fabrication .
hot dip galvanize all steel components after completing fabrication .
regalvanize or paint all abraded or damaged surfaces with num coats of commercially available zinc rich paint .
ensure that sign structures are free from kinks twists or bends and are uniform in appearance .
assemble completed sections in the shop and check them for straightness alignment and dimensions .
correct any irregularities .
consider sign post lengths as approximate only .
conform to the applicable requirements contained in aws for welded fabrication .
num footings bases and pedestals .
provide protection for traffic during construction of concrete bases for overhead sign structures .
exercise caution during any excavation to prevent damaging existing utilities whether specified or not specified in the plans .
repair or replace any utilities that are disturbed or damaged during construction at no additional expense to the department .
provide the engineer the opportunity to inspect repairs to damaged utilities before covering the repairs .
construct footings and bases according to subsection num .
the department will allow construction of footings against undisturbed earth without forms unless otherwise directed .
slope top surfaces of bases and pedestals to provide for drainage .
provide an ordinary surface finish for all exposed concrete .
construct a rustication groove in all pedestals .
cure concrete according to subsection num .
remove beam sign supports concurrently with the relocation of affected signs to new supports .
grade to the existing slope any areas disturbed by removing existing signs or constructing new signs and reseed as the engineer directs .
num sign beams and supports .
use beams of sufficient length to extend from the top of the sign to the required base embedment .
use either type a standard fixed beam installation or type b unidirectional breakaway beam installation or type c omnidirectional breakaway beam installation as specified in the plans .
embed type a and type b beams in concrete to a depth equal to the dimension a as indicated for each sign .
provide a concrete footing for type c beams according to the design on the type c beam sheets .
wait num calendar days after placing concrete before mounting beams and supports to the bases or pedestals .
where aluminum is in contact with concrete thoroughly coat the contacting surface with alumilastic compound or an approved equal in order to completely num insulate the aluminum from the concrete .
where bond between the aluminum and concrete is desired coat the aluminum with commercially available zinc chromate paint and allow it to dry before installation .
a type a beam .
furnish a num steel beams galvanized according to astm a num .
b type b beam .
specifications for type b unidirectional breakaway beams are listed on the detail sheet for type b beams .
specifications for type b beams are listed on the breakaway detail sheet .
c type c beam .
specifications for type c omnidirectional breakaway beams are listed on the details sheets for type c beams .
num bridge mounting for signs .
do not install brackets for support of bridge mounted signs within num inches of open joints in concrete handrail plinths .
the department will allow moving of supports to clear handrail posts .
place sign brackets on numfoot maximum centers with a numfoot maximum sign overhang .
when necessary remove existing handrails to drill anchor bolt holes .
reinstall handrails after drilling .
locate bolt holes drilled in prestressed concrete beams to not interfere with steel strands .
drill holes for concrete beams with a rotary type core drill .
do not use impact type drills .
install bolts with expansion plugs and lock washers in the holes and fill the void between the plug and face of the concrete with nonshrinking grout .
num mounting signs .
install new concrete bases support beams etc .
before dismantling any existing sign .
when existing signs are to be out of service for more than one work shift install temporary signing of the proper color shape and with copy of similar configuration to existing signs at the same approximate station as the out of service sign .
install sign panels on sign structures beams or bridge mounted brackets as specified in the plans .
delay installation as long as possible to avoid any damage to the sign .
replace all damaged signs .
num measurement .
num concrete .
the department will measure according to subsection num .
num steel reinforcement .
the department will measure according to subsection num .
num sign supports .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
the department will not measure clearing and grubbing excavation electrical conduit and ground rods located in support bases and temporary panel signing for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num beams .
the department will measure the quantity in pounds .
num bridge mounted sign fixtures .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
a unit is as all material necessary for mounting a bridge mounted sign of given size .
num sign panels .
the department will measure the quantity in square feet for each size and type .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num class a concrete for signs see subsection num pay unit num num steel reinforcement for signs see subsection num num num sign supports size and type each num num num num num num gmss galvanized steel type pound num gmss aluminum pound num sign bridge attachment bracket each num sign panels type and size square foot the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num roadway lighting systems num description .
furnish install and connect roadway lighting systems with accessories according to the contract .
num materials .
num roadway lighting materials .
conform to section num .
obtain the engineers approval for all materials before installation .
submit for material approval an electronic file of descriptive literature drawings and any requested design data to the division of traffic operations .
do not begin work until shop drawings are approved .
notify the engineer when submitting any information to the division of traffic operations .
do not make substitutions for approved materials without written permission as described above .
num paint .
conform to sections num and num .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num construction .
perform the work according to num the contract num kentucky department of highways standard drawings num national fire protection association nfpa num national electrical code num institute of electrical and electronic engineers ieee national electrical safety code num aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals num edition num aashto roadside design guide num aashto roadway lighting design guide num edition num manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways current edition and num the standards of the utility company servicing the installation .
the plans indicate the extent and general arrangement of the lighting circuits and equipment and are for general guidance .
advise the engineer in writing and obtain written approval for any necessary modifications .
stake pole locations and obtain the engineers approval .
num utility requirements .
contact all utility companies and the district utility agent before any holes are dug or set to insure proper clearance and shielding from existing or proposed utility lines .
before ordering materials confirm the type and location of the service available from the utility company .
after completing the installation and before the electrical service is connected obtain a certificate of compliance from the kentucky department of housing buildings and construction electrical inspection division .
coordinate with the kentucky department of housing buildings and construction electrical inspection division to ensure the cabinet and all components within are approved as an assembly .
num lighting standard installation .
locate poles to avoid trees drainage structures etc .
regardless of the station offset noted located all polesbases behind guardrail a minimum of num feet behind the face of the guardrail .
all poles shall be placed as close to stations and offsets as stated on plans to provide proper illumination .
if any pole needs to be located more than numfrom stations indicated division of traffic operations shall be contacted .
when submitting brochures for suggested luminaries num include iso lux curves ies type distribution lamp lumens and typical ballast factor used for each type of luminaire .
submit the photometric data is ies format in a digital format to central office division of traffic operations .
include with the submittal a point of contact and phone number to answer technical questions about the luminaire .
a conventional installation .
install each conventional pole as noted on plans and have luminaires with light patterns as indicated .
orient luminaires as shown in plans .
orient the transformer base door though the backside .
the department will allow steel plates or washers between the nuts and the transformer base or pole for stabilization and shims to plumb the pole for gaps up to num inch .
num breakaway installation and requirements .
for breakaway supports conform to section num of the standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals num edition .
grade the surrounding surface appropriately to meet the num inch breakaway support stub height .
this stub height includes the pole base conduits and the anchors bolts .
num concrete base installation .
ensure that concrete bases for lighting up to num feet high have a minimum depth of num feet and a minimum diameter of num feet .
construct a level base with no more than a numinch gap existing between the concrete base and the transformer base when the pole is plumbed .
num require time to apply loads on concrete structures .
see section num b high mast installation .
install each conventional pole as noted on plan .
install each high mast pole on a separate circuit and have luminaires with light patterns as indicated .
orient luminaires as shown in plans .
orient the axis of the winch drum along the north south axis .
top nuts shall be tightened to onesixth turn beyond snugtight .
snugtight is defined as the condition where the nut is in full contact with the base plate .
it is assumed that the full effort of a workman on a numinch wrench results in a snugtight condition .
the clearance between the bottom of the leveling nuts and the top of the concrete foundation shall not exceed one bolt diameter .
num breakaway installation and requirements .
highmast poles shall not be installed on break away supports .
num concrete base installation .
drilled shaft depth shall be based on the soil conditions encountered during drilling and slope condition at the site .
refer to the design chart below .
num drilled shaft depth data level ground num ground slope num ground slope num ground slope num soil rock soil rock soil rock soil rock num ft num ft num ft num ft num ft num ft note num num ft steel requirements vertical bars ties or spiral size total size spacing or pitch num num num num inch note num shaft length is num for cohesive soil only .
for cohesionless soil contact geotechnical branch for design .
num do not construct high mast drilled shafts on ground slopes steeper than num without the approval of the division of traffic .
if rock is encountered during drilling operations and confirmed by the engineer to be of sound quality the shaft is only required to be further advanced into the rock by the length of rock socket shown in the table .
the total length of the shaft need not be longer than that of soil alone .
both longitudinal rebar length and number of ties or spiral length shall be adjusted accordingly .
if a shorter depth is desired for the drilled shaft the contractor shall provide for the states review and approval a detailed column design with individual site specific soil and rock analysis performed and approved by a registered professional engineer .
spiral reinforcement may be substituted for ties .
if spiral reinforcement is used one and onehalf closed coils shall be provided at the ends of each spiral unit .
subsurface conditions consisting of very soft clay or very loose saturated sand could result in soil parameters weaker than those assumed .
engineer shall consult with the geotechnical branch if such conditions are encountered .
the bottom of the drilled hole shall be firm and thoroughly cleaned so no loose or compressible materials are present at the time of the concrete placement .
if the drilled hole contains standing water the concrete shall be placed using a tremie to displace water .
continuous concrete flow will be required to insure full displacement of any water .
the reinforcement and anchor bolts shall be adequately supported in the proper positions so no movement occurs during concrete placement .
welding of anchor bolts to the reinforcing cage is unacceptable templates shall be used .
exposed portions of the foundation shall be formed to create a smooth finished surface .
all forming shall be removed upon completion of foundation construction .
num splicing of reinforcement .
see section num .
splicing of vertical reinforcement shall be class c. when a drilled shaft is lengthened num in the field the splice location shall be made at the bottom of the reinforcement cage .
num require time to apply loads on concrete structures .
see section num num highmast inspection .
each lowering device shall be inspected by a representative of the manufacturer of the lowering device prior to final acceptance of the project by the kentucky transportation cabinet .
the contractor shall submit a letter from the manufacturer that this inspection has been preformed and that the lowering device has been installed according to the manufacturer requirements to the division of traffic operations .
the letter shall be on the companys letterhead and signed by the representatives from the company that preformed the inspection .
if the lowering device is not installed according to the manufacturer requirements the contractor shall install according the manufacturer requirements .
num trenching .
a trenching of conduit for highmast ducted cables .
trench and lay conduit for ducted cables to a depth at least num inches below grade .
b trenching of conduit for nonhighmast cables .
lay conduit not subjected to traffic to a depth at least num inches below grade .
on transverse crossings under roadway surfaces and shoulders place the conduit as specified in contract at a depth of no less than num inches below grade .
make all pavement crossings by placing conduit in the subgrade before paving or by boring and jacking under existing pavements .
when it is necessary to bore under roadways and ramps obtain the engineers approval of the boring procedure .
do not cut any pavement without obtaining the engineers prior approval .
num conduit installation .
provide rigid steel conduit encasement for all conductors except as specified in the contracts .
provide conduit that is listed on the list of approved materials on the division of materials website .
ream all conduit ends to remove burrs and sharp edges .
ensure that conduit bends have a radius of not less than num times the nominal diameter of the conduit .
cap spare conduits on both ends with testpipe plugs .
conduit locations are schematic only .
provide exact locations approved by the engineer and denoted on the asbuilt plans .
a conduit requirements in junction boxes .
provide conduits that are installed num inches from the bottom of the junction box .
install conduit inside the junction box with num degree conduit elbow .
provide conduits that are accessible inside junction boxes .
num highmast ducted cable .
install conduit inside the junction box that go straight through and shall be num from the bottom and numinch from the side of the junction box .
the conduit and ducted cable shall be accessible inside junction boxes .
b barrier wall installation .
the department will allow bonded slip joints for joining rigid conduit to junction boxes in barrier wall .
c highmast ducted cables .
run ducted cables inside numinch rigid steel conduits or other engineer approved methods when crossing num roadways .
run only one ducted cable through each numinch rigid steel conduit .
d coupling installation .
when a standard coupling can not be used use an approved threaded union coupling .
e bonding requirements .
bond together conduits junction boxes metal poles and control boxes throughout the lighting system to all ground rods by using grounding bushings on the conduit ends .
bond these conduits to the electrical system ground .
f painting .
paint damaged portions of galvanized surfaces and untreated threads resulting from field cuts with an engineer approved rust prohibitive paint .
num underground warning tape .
install underground utility warning tape immediately above the circuit cables .
bury the tape at a depth of num to num inches .
num backfilling and disturbed areas .
before starting backfilling operations allow the engineer to inspect the conduit installation .
place and compact the backfill materials in lifts of num inches or less .
restore all disturbed areas as a result of the contractors operations to the engineers satisfaction .
num wiring installation .
where installing more than one circuit within the same conduit affix permanent circuit identification numbers to the wires wherever the wiring emerges including junction boxes poles transformer bases and control cabinets .
run all cable or wire splicefree from the controller to each pole the cable or wire is feeding .
num splicing .
permission to splice is determined by the division of traffic operations and the locations shall be shown on the layout sheet .
if splicing is needed but not shown on the layout sheet receive prior approval from the division of traffic operations through the engineer .
when the engineer allows splicing splice only in junction boxes in transformer bases or in the pole when no transformer base is provided .
where specifically allowed by the plans ensure the splices are of the correct size for the wire being used .
num fused connector kits .
install inside transformer base barrier wall junction box junction box or as noted on the plans .
num junction boxes .
place junction boxes in locations to avoid standing water and ditch lines .
where required junction box shall be oriented such that the dimensions comply with the national electrical code .
any additional junction boxes must be approved by the engineer .
num grounding installation .
ground all conduits poles pedestals the controller cabinet and the service according to the plans .
separate all ground rods by a minimum of num feet .
ensure the top of the ground rod is a minimum of num inches below finished grade .
num marker installation .
when specified in the contract mark the position of buried circuits with concrete slab markers .
install cable markers immediately above the cable .
place the markers with the top exposed approximately one inch above ground .
mark each cable run at approximately numyard increments between junction boxes andor light poles with additional markers at each change of direction .
install concrete slab markers at the end of the conduits crossing a roadway if a junction box is not present .
num temporary lighting .
the contractor shall furnish and install all materials necessary to light the proposed roadway to design standards in section num num .
the contractor shall submit his proposed design of temporary lighting to the engineer for approval at least num days before installation .
num remove lighting .
transformers not owned by a utility shall be tested for pcbs and disposed of in accordance with state regulations .
pole base shall be removed a minimum of num foot below finished grade .
chipping off or other method that is approved by the engineer may be used .
contractor shall backfill hole with material approved by the engineer .
incidental to this item shall be the removal of all materials off the project .
all salvageable poles brackets transformer bases and luminaires shall be returned to the district pole yard or as instructed by the engineer .
num painting .
clean ungalvanized or damaged surfaces of exposed junction boxes pull boxes control panels poles and similar equipment and apply one coat of an inhibiting paint and two coats of aluminum paint inside and out after completing installation .
for items fabricated from galvanized or nonferrous alloys which are inherently rust resistant paint only on damaged surfaces with an application of inorganic zinc rich primer or aluminum paint as applicable .
num drawings .
before final inspection of the roadway lighting system provide a complete set of reproducible asbuilt drawings that show the arrangement and locations of all equipment and circuits .
include each duct or conduit pavement crossing with distances to permanent markers such as structures and curb lines .
keep a daily record of all conduit placed in trenches showing the distance from the pavement edge the depth and the length of runs and indicate these on the asbuilt drawings .
num acceptance and inspection requirements .
see section num .
after the work has been completed conduct an operational test demonstrating that the system operates in accordance with the plans in the presence of the engineer .
the department will also conduct its own tests with its own equipment before final acceptance .
traffic operations will conduct an inspection of the installation prior to calling the job complete .
the inspection will include but not limited to the following num .
wires or ducted cables shall test free of shorts and unauthorized grounds and shall have an insulating resistance of at least one hundred megaohms when tested with a num volt direct current potential in a reasonably dry atmosphere between conductors and ground .
num .
ground rods shall have a resistance to ground not to exceed num ohms .
if the resistance to ground is greater than num ohms two or more ground rods connected in parallel shall be installed .
num measurement .
num poles .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure anchor bolts anchor bolt covers ground lugs any associated hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num high mast pole .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure lowering device in accordance with manufacturers installation instructions anchor bolts head frame assembly cables winch unit power cables wiring connectors circuit breakers grounding lugs any associated hardware adjustment and calibration of the unit to provide the desired operation and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num bracket the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure any associated num hardware needed for attaching the bracket to the pole and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num pole base the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit or cubic yards furnished and installed .
the department will not measure excavation concrete conduits fittings ground rods ground wires reinforcing steel and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
this item includes backfilling and restoring disturbed areas to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num pole base in median wall the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure conduit fittings junction boxes additional reinforcing steel ground rod ground wire aluminum cover plate if specified and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num transformer base the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure transformer door ground lug associated hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num pole with secondary equipment the department will measure the quantity as each furnished and installed .
the department will not measure pole mounted cabinet pole service racks lightning arrestors photoelectric control circuit breakers contactor manual switch fuses ground rod transformers cutouts conduits and service wires .
this item includes excavation backfilling any necessary anchors and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
electrical service and all electrical inspection fees are incidental to this item of work .
num lighting control equipment .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure base mounted cabinet with secondary control equipment pole service racks lightning arrestors photoelectric control circuit breakers contactor manual switch fuses ground rod transformers cutouts conduits and service wires excavation backfilling any necessary anchors and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
electrical service and all electrical inspection fees are incidental to this item of work .
num luminaire .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual furnished and installed .
the department will not measure lamps starters ballasts specified shielding if required any adjustments necessary to provide the desired lighting pattern and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num fused connector kits .
the department will measure the quantity as each furnished and installed .
num conduit .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet furnished and installed .
the department will not measure installation in ground or on structure conduit fittings pipetest plugs expansion joints with bonding straps drill anchors clamps any additional hardware required and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num markers .
the department will measure the quantity as each furnished and installed .
num junction box .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure num aggregate backfilling restoration of disturbed areas to the satisfaction of the engineer concrete num if required and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
a junction electrical .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual furnished and installed .
the department will not measure hot dipped galvanized cover stainless steel screws rubber gasket drain any associated hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num trenching and backfilling .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
the department will not measure roadway crossings underground utility warning tape if required the restoration of disturbed areas to original condition and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num wire or cable .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet furnished and installed or cable within conduit as indicated in plans .
the department will not measure installation within conduit splice boots any other hardware required for installing cable and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num ducted cable .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet furnished and installed .
the department will not measure installation within trench or conduit any other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num temporary lighting .
the department will measure the quantity as lump sum furnished and installed .
the department will not measure poles luminaires wire conduit trenching and backfilling control equipment all relocations and removal any other necessary hardware to make a complete installation and will consider them incidental to this item of work .. num remove lighting .
the department will measure the quantity as lump sum furnished and installed .
the department will not measure the removal of existing poles luminaires control equipment power transformers transformer bases and pole bases .
num remove pole base .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit .
the department will not measure removal of pole base a minimum of numfoot below ground chipping off or any other method that is approved by the engineer may be used backfill hole with material approved by the engineer and will consider them incidental to this item of work .. num bore and jack conduit .
see section num .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num poles various mtg ht each pay unit num poles various mtg ht high mast each num bracket various each num pole base each numen pole base high mast eachcubic yard num pole base in med wall each num transformer base each num pole w secondary control equip each num lighting control equipment each num hps luminaire various each num fused connector kit each num num conduit various linear foot num marker each num junction box various each numnsnum junction box type a each numnsnum junction box type c each num trenching and backfilling linear foot num wireno various linear foot num cableno various ducted linear foot numnsnum temporary lighting lump sum num remove lighting lump sum num remove pole base each numen bore and jack conduit linear foot the department will consider payment as full compensation for installing and placing the complete roadway lighting systems in satisfactory operation .
num section num intersection markings num description .
furnish and install thermoplastic or type i tape intersection markings stop bars crosswalks turn arrows etc .
by either a machine applied screed extrusion process or by applying preformed thermoplastic intersection marking material .
num materials and equipment .
num preformed thermoplastic intersection marking material .
select from the departments list of approved materials .
num extruded thermoplastic pavement marking material .
conform to section num .
num binder .
conform to subsection num num drop on glass beads .
use beads that will ensure the pavement marking material will meet retroreflectivity requirements .
the department will evaluate the beads as part of the marking system through retroreflectivity readings .
num extruded thermoplastic application equipment .
provide equipment with a shaping die that simultaneously deposits and shapes lines at a minimum thickness of num mils on the pavement surface .
do not use spray and ribbon gun applicators .
ensure the application equipment conforms to the following num capable of providing continuous and uniform heat to maintain the material between num and num f throughout the mixing conveying and dispensing .
num the kettle is capable of continuous agitation during mixing and heated storage and is equipped with an automatic thermostat control device and material thermometer .
num equipped with a cutoff device that provides clean square stripe ends .
num equipped with an automatic bead dispenser .
num type i tape .
conform to section num .
num construction .
num layout .
on resurfacing pavement restoration and pavement rehabilitation projects prepare and keep a written record of the locations of existing pavement markings and furnish a copy to the engineer before removing or obliterating the markings .
the engineer will notify you of any changes to the existing markings .
on new construction the department will provide more detailed information for each intersection prior to beginning work .
this information will consist of plans a drawing of each intersection or an inspector to work with each crew to layout the markings in the field .
before applying the pavement marking material premark the pavement surface and obtain the engineers approval of the proposed location alignment and control guides .
num surface preparation .
clean all grease oil mud dust dirt grass loose gravel or other deleterious material from the surface where pavement markings are to be applied as directed by and by methods acceptable to the engineer .
on concrete surfaces and as the engineer directs on older asphalt pavements apply binder to the area where placing pavement marking material .
ensure that all solvents have evaporated from the binder before applying the marking material .
on new concrete pavement surfaces remove the curing compound from the pavement surface before applying the binder and the pavement marking material .
num num application .
a thermoplastic .
install extruded thermoplastic at a minimum thickness of num mils on the pavement surface in a melted state at a temperature from num and num f. install preformed thermoplastic according to manufacturers instructions at a minimum thickness of num mils .
apply additional glass beads by a dropon method at a rate that satisfies the retroreflectivity requirements of subsection num .
when installing symbols and legends turn arrows the word only etc .
by the extrusion process ensure that the finished markings conform to the standard size and shape in the manual on uniform traffic control devices .
verify the adhesion of the thermoplastic to asphalt pavements by performing bond checks as follows .
approximately num to num seconds after applying the thermoplastic material cut and lift approximately a numinch section .
the thermoplastic is successfully bonding to the pavement surface if a layer of asphalt clings to the removed thermoplastic and the pavement surface under the removed section is shiny and black .
ensure that finished markings are continuous and uniform in shape having clear and sharp edges with uniform bead distribution across the entire width and length of the line symbol or legend .
b type i tape .
apply according to the manufacturers recommendations .
cut all tape at pavement joints when applied to concrete surfaces .
num restrictions .
do not apply the pavement marking material when air and pavement temperatures are below num f. do not apply the pavement marking material when the surface of the pavement contains evidence of moisture in amounts significant enough to prevent the pavement marking material from bonding to the pavement .
significant amounts of moisture can be caused by heavy dew or very humid nights as well as from rainfall .
if encountering significant amounts of moisture while applying the thermoplastic the contractor at his own risk may attempt to apply the thermoplastic material subject to the following restrictions .
heat the thermoplastic material to the upper temperature limit specified by the manufacturer and apply a test line on the pavement .
perform a bond check according to subsection num .
if the thermoplastic successfully bonds to the pavement continue to apply thermoplastic material provided there is evidence that the moisture is escaping through the surface of the material as indicated by very small pinholes .
if there is excessive moisture as indicated by larger sized holes or bubbles on the surface of the material do not apply thermoplastic until the moisture can be effectively dealt with .
perform a sufficient number of bond checks to ensure that the thermoplastic is bonding to the pavement .
num proving period .
a proving period of num days will follow the application of the durable markings .
during this period the engineer will make such observations as are necessary to determine if the markings are acceptable .
the proving period begins when the facility is opened to traffic .
a requirements .
num thermoplastic .
during the proving period ensure that the material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials smearing or spreading under heat deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings chipping spalling poor adhesion to the pavement materials loss of retroreflectivity vehicular damage and normal wear .
the minimum retroreflectivity requirements at the end of the proving period as measured with a department approved num meter geometry handheld retroreflectometer are as follows white num mcdluxsquare meter yellow num mcdluxsquare meter num the department will take these measurements between num and num days after the start of the proving period with acceptance based on km num .
if the department determines that the markings are acceptable the installation of the markings will be considered complete .
num type i tape .
during the proving period ensure that the pavement marking material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials drippings chipping spalling poor adhesion to the pavement loss of retroreflectivity vehicular damage and normal wear .
type i tape is manufactured off site and warranted by the manufacturer to meet certain retroreflective requirements .
as long as the material is adequately bonded to the surface and shows no signs of failure due to the other items listed in subsection num a num retroreflectivity readings will not be required .
in the absence of readings the department will accept tape based on a nighttime visual observation .
b failure .
the department will consider any marking defective when the readings for that marking do not satisfy the retroreflectivity requirements or more than num percent of the material fails to meet the other requirements of a above .
the department will consider each marking separately .
c corrective work .
if any marking is found to be defective repair or remove and replace the marking .
perform pavement marking replacement according to the requirements specified in this subsection for the initial application .
the corrective work will be subject to a proving period as listed above .
num marking removal .
remove all markings made in error or not conforming to the traffic operation in use .
remove markings by water blasting process to the satisfaction of the engineer .
vacuum all marking material and removal debris concurrently with the removal operation .
do not paint with asphalt binder or other material to obliterate the markings .
a waterblast stripe removal .
conform to subsection num .
num acceptance of nonspecification markings .
when reasonably acceptable work has been produced but retroreflectivity requirements are not met the department may accept the work according to subsection num .
when the engineer determines that the markings may be left in place the department will accept them at a reduction in the contract unit bid price according to acceptance pay schedule for thermoplastic .
the department will not consider these procedures a means to continue accepting nonspecification markings .
num measurement .
the department will measure the intersection markings on a per unit basis for items listed in the quantity summary .
the department will not measure the removal of existing markings layout surface preparation binder glass beads or testing for payment and will consider them incidental to the installation of the new marking .
the department will exclude the gaps when measuring dotted lane line extensions .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following acceptance pay schedule for thermoplastic pay value white yellow mcdluxsquare meter mcdluxsquare meter num num num num num num num num num num num num remove and replace num num num code pay item num num pavement marking thermoplastic xwalk size linear foot pay unit num num pavement marking thermoplastic stop bar size linear foot num pavement marking thermoplastic cross hatch square foot num pavement marking dotted lane extension linear foot num num pavement marking thermoplastic arrow type each num pavement marking thermoplastic only each num pavement marking thermoplastic school each num pave marking rr x bucks num in linear foot numnsnum pave marking thermo bike each numesnum pave mark ty i tape xwalk size linear foot numesnum numesnum pave mark ty i tape stop bar size linear foot numesnum numesnum pave mark ty i tape cross hatch square foot numesnum pave mark ty i tape dotted lane extension linear foot numesnum pave mark ty i tape arrow type each numesnumesnum numesnum pave mark ty i tape only each numesnum pave mark ty i tape school each numesnum pave mark ty num tape rr x bucksnum in linear foot numesnum pave mark ty num tapebike each the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num bridge end object markers num description .
furnishing and place type num object markers at bridge ends .
see section numc.num of the mutcd for a general description .
num material .
the type num object marker has a vertical dimension of one foot and a horizontal dimension of num inches and consists of reflective materials on an aluminum sheet .
num retroreflective sheeting .
provide yellow sheeting conforming to section num .
num aluminum substrate .
conform to section num .
num construction .
prepare the aluminum sheeting and the reflective material applied according to the manufacturers recommendations .
mount the object marker on a post meeting the requirements for type ii in section num .
the minimum length of post is num feet .
the contractor is responsible for determining the actual length necessary at each location .
install the object markers as near each bridge end as practical .
ensure the inside edge of the marker is in line with the inner edge of the bridge wall .
drive the post num feet with one foot behind the marker and the remaining length as necessary to provide a mounting height to the bottom of the marker of num feet above the surface of the nearest traffic lane .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity of object marker type num by each individual unit .
the department considers a unit to include all materials including the post necessary to acceptably furnish and install the marker .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num object marker type num each pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num guardrail num description .
furnish and install or remove all necessary material for each type of guardrail end treatment terminal section and guardrail bridge end connector .
remove and relocate or remove and reset all necessary material for each type of guardrail .
adjust guardrail including replacement of existing offset blocks with new modified offset blocks .
furnish additional new hardware as needed to complete the adjustment .
num materials .
num guardrail systems .
conform to section num .
num concrete .
use class a concrete conforming to subsection num and num .
num reinforcement steel .
conform to section num .
num grout .
conform to subsection num .
when used in placement on a curve having a radius of num feet or less curve guardrail in shop .
mark the radius of curvature on each of the curved elements .
furnish rail elements that have a nominal length of num num feet .
use the same type of posts fastenings and accessories throughout the project .
num construction .
do not leave uncompleted guardrail bridge end connectors terminal sections or end treatments exposed to the traveling public .
construct guardrail end treatments bridge end connectors and terminal sections behind lane closures or shoulder closures .
construct guardrail num inches to the top of the rail with a tolerance of plus or minus one inch above the theoretical pavement elevation .
compute these elevations from the proposed pavement edge elevations or from other methods to ensure construction of the guardrail to the true gradient and with no sags .
paint all damaged galvanizing with num coats of zinc dustzinc oxide paint conforming to federal specification ttpnum .
provide permanent or temporary guardrail where it presently exists throughout the winter closedown periods of the contract as the engineer directs .
proprietary end treatments shall be installed according to the manufacturers assembly or installation instructions .
prior to ordering guardrail materials meet the engineer on the job site to check the guardrail end treatments at locations designated in the plans to ensure they are appropriate for the actual field conditions .
adjustments will be made as appropriate and final location and end treatment types will be approved by the engineer .
the engineer will consult with the division of highway design when necessary .
num setting posts .
install posts according to the contract without damaging the road or shoulder .
provide extra length posts when the engineer directs to do so .
do not damage any portion of the driven posts .
if damage occurs discontinue driving .
remove the damaged post and replace with a new post in an excavated hole .
ram bottoms of dug post holes to provide a stable foundation .
set posts vertically with the rail faces in a straight line or when on a curve at a uniform distance from the pavement .
backfill post holes in layers not to exceed num inches and compact until the post is solid firm and in true alignment .
cut and set timber post tops to correct grade and bevel according to the standard drawings .
bore holes at proper places to attach the rails .
anchor posts according to the standard drawings .
repair all damaged pavement .
num do not drive guardrail posts within one foot of the outlet pipe for pavement edgedrains .
repair all damage to the outlet pipe for pavement edgedrains caused by guardrail installations .
if repair is not possible remove and replace damaged outlet pipe .
if a guardrail post is damaged when installing in rock or rock fill remove the damaged post .
drill a hole slightly larger than the post num inches into the rock or to the desired embedment depth whichever is less .
backfill around the post with num or num stone or with flowable fill for pipe backfill proportioned in accordance with subsection num .
wood guardrail posts that are cut or bored shall be retreated in accordance with subsection num .
if a guardrail post for a proprietary end treatment is damaged during installation into rock or rock fill utilize the manufacturers installation instructions to provide holes for placement of the guardrail posts .
num placing rail .
construct the guardrail to the alignment and at the locations shown in the contract .
splice rail element by lapping in the direction of traffic .
bolt rail element to each post through the holes provided in the rail .
where the holes are slotted for expansion erect rail with the bolt in the center of the slot .
install nuts on the backside of all bolts either through splices or through rail and posts .
draw bolts tightly .
extend the bolt at least num inch beyond the nut .
do not tighten bolts so tightly through expansion members that they prevent functioning of the members .
erect rail so it appears smooth uniform continuous and closely parallels the line and grade of the pavement .
provide the type of end treatments terminal sections and guardrail bridge end connectors specified in the contract .
the department will not allow field cutting punching burning or welding .
num remove rail .
remove the existing guardrail system which includes bridge end connectors terminal sections or guardrail end treatments including all associated concrete components and incidentals .
fill all voids left from pulling guardrail posts with dry sand .
do not damage guardrail .
num relocate the existing guardrail system .
relocate the existing rail and posts to the alignment and at the locations shown in the contract .
spot paint edges of all holes punched in the existing rail and posts that are to be reused .
spot paint all scratches or marred areas in completed installations where the galvanizing has been damaged .
spot paint with num coats of zinc dustzinc oxide paint conforming to federal specification ttp num .
do not intermix new pieces of guardrail with pieces of existing rail at any installation .
add new pieces as needed on one or both ends of an installation .
the department will retain ownership of all items in the existing system not suitable for reconstruction except concrete .
remove and dispose of existing concrete off the rightofway .
if additional guardrail is needed to replace damaged guardrail furnish and install new guardrail .
num adjust existing guardrail .
adjust existing guardrail to the alignment and at the locations shown in the contract .
remove existing rail elements and offset blocks from the existing posts .
install new modified offset blocks .
reinstall rail elements .
realign guardrail both vertically and horizontally at the raised elevation .
when new end treatments terminal sections or bridge connectors are not specified connect adjusted rail to the existing installation in a smooth transition .
when new end treatments terminal sections or bridge connectors are specified construct at new shoulder elevation or new grade condition .
num temporary guardrail .
conform to the same construction requirements for temporary guardrail as for permanent guardrail .
the department will show temporary guardrail locations in the contract .
maintain the temporary guardrail system for the num duration of its use .
retain ownership of damaged or surplus components .
the contractor may use undamaged components in permanent installations .
num salvaged material .
the department will retain ownership of the existing guardrail guardrail post and hardware .
stack wbeam rail num per bundle num wide num high overlapped .
stack and band metal posts num per bundle num wide num high overlapped .
bag nuts bolts and washers .
salvage a minimum of num percent of the nuts bolts and washers .
deliver existing guardrail and components to the bailey bridge lot located at num wilkinson blvd in frankfort kentucky .
contact the lot supervisor at num num to schedule delivery of material a minimum of num working days in advance of delivery .
deliver the material between the hours of numam and numpm eastern time monday through friday .
dispose of all removed concrete off the rightof way .
num measurement .
num guardrail .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet along the actual length of the rail between the limits for end treatments terminal sections and bridge end connections and crash cushions .
the department will measure the quantity of shop curved guardrail in linear feet at num times the actual length .
num guardrail terminal sections .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num extra length post .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
the department will still measure guardrail at locations where extra length post are required as this item represents only the added work and material required by the extra length .
num guardrail end treatment .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit that is not a part of the guardrail .
pay limits for proprietary end treatments will in accordance with standard drawings .
num crash cushion .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit that is not a part of the guardrail .
num guardrail bridge end connector .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit including their end treatment .
num guardrail connector to concrete median barrier .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit according to standard drawing rbc num .
num remove guardrail .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
the department will not measure the delivery and stacking of guardrail posts and its hardware for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num relocate guardrail system .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
num adjust guardrail .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
num temporary guardrail .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
the department will not measure maintenance and removal for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num num nested guardrail .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
the department will still measure guardrail at locations where nested guardrail is required as this item represents only added work and materials required by the nested guardrail .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num guardrail steel w beam single face linear foot pay unit num guardrail steel w beam single face install linear foot num guardrail steel w beam double face linear foot num num num guardrail terminal section type each num extra length post each num num num num guardrail end treatment type each num num num num crash cushion type each num num num num num num num num num guardrail bridge end connector type each num guardrail connector to concrete median barrier each num remove guardrail linear foot num relocate guardrail system linear foot num adjust guardrail linear foot num temporary guardrail linear foot numec gr steel w beams facenested linear foot numec gr steel w beams facenum ft linear foot post nested the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num metal handrails num description .
furnish and install metal handrails .
num materials .
num handrails .
for materials for metal handrails for bridges conform to the requirements specified in the contract .
for other handrails conform to the following subsections handrail type a num handrail type b num handrail type c num num chain link fence .
when constructed as part of the handrail conform to section num type a using aluminum coated steel fabric and tension wire .
num paint .
conform to section num .
num construction .
fabricate all handrails according to the details specified in the plans or on standard drawings .
when erected ensure that all posts except on bridges are vertical and the rails are true to the alignment indicated .
set bridge railing posts at right angles to the fascia line perpendicular to grade and erect tubing parallel to the fascia line .
use washer shims not exceeding num inch in thickness between the concrete and post base to obtain post or tubing alignment .
fasten railing to the concrete as specified in the plans .
where aluminum is in contact with concrete thoroughly coat the contacting surfaces with alumilastic compound or approved equal so as to completely insulate the aluminum from the concrete or where bond between aluminum and concrete is desired coat the aluminum with commercially available zinc chromate paint and allow it to dry before installing it .
paint plain steel handrail according to subsection num .
the department will not require painting of galvanized handrail except paint all exposed threads as required for plain handrail .
the department will not require painting of aluminum handrail .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity of each type in linear feet along the top of the rail from center to center of end posts .
the department will not measure posts pipe channel pickets fittings chain link fence or painting for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num num num num handrail type linear foot pay unit the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num fence num description .
furnish and erect fence and gates of the height and type specified in the plans supported by steel concrete or timber posts along the inside limits of the rightofway or at other locations shown or otherwise designated and at grades designated during construction .
num materials .
num woven wire fencing .
conform to section num .
num chain link fencing .
conform to section num .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num construction .
before starting fencing operations remove all brush stumps logs and debris that will interfere with the proper construction of the fence .
remove or trim sound standing trees in the fence line as directed .
construct fence with new materials according to the standard drawings and as specified in this section .
install fence as one of the first construction operations .
where it is impractical to install fence initially in its final form or location obtain written permission from adjacent property owners either to permit construction of a suitable temporary fence or to delay fence erection until such time as the permanent fence may be erected .
where tying fence to a new structure erect a temporary fence until such time as the structure is complete and the permanent fence can be anchored to the structure in the manner specified in the plans .
install fence num inches inside the rightofway line or in other locations specifically indicated .
install fence facing the property owner except on horizontal curves .
on horizontal curves install the fence to pull against all posts .
apply sufficient tension between pull posts to make the fence stock tight .
install pull posts at all breaks in horizontal alignment of the fence and at sharp breaks in vertical alignment .
for tangents and curves up to one degree space pull posts a maximum of num feet on centers ensure that curves over one degree to num degrees have pull posts spaced a maximum of num feet on centers and curves over num degrees have pull posts installed each time the angle of deflection increases num degrees .
use any class concrete according to subsection num .
num setting posts .
set all posts at the required depths and intervals designated in the contract .
set posts plumb and in true alignment on the side where the wire is attached .
dig holes for posts to full depth and with sufficient diameter to allow proper tamping and compaction of the backfill .
use sound earth for the backfill and tamp it in place until the post is firm and rigid in its position .
set wood posts with the butt end down .
when encountering solid rock at grade or below drill a hole one foot deep and slightly larger than the outside dimensions of the post or brace in the rock and grout in the post .
at line posts where top of rock is num inches or less below grade remove the anchor plate .
backfill all excavation above rock below grade in num to numinch layers and tamp each layer thoroughly in place .
field cut posts and braces to fit maximum depth whenever encountering solid rock .
set all end gate corner and pull posts and anchor them in concrete placed to the top of the ground finished smooth and sloped to drain .
brace all end gate and corner posts .
brace pull posts in num directions .
brace corner posts in the direction of each line of the fence .
anchor the metal braces from the metal posts in concrete that is crowned at the top to shed water .
brace wood or concrete posts with a pole or bar of the same type of material as the post .
when using wood posts notch the braced post and adjacent line posts one inch deep at one foot from the top of the num finished post to receive the brace pole .
secure the brace pole to the posts by spiking or other means .
loop galvanized smooth wire having a minimum diameter of num inch around the braced post near the ground and then loop it around the line post at num inches below its top continuing between the posts until num strands of wire are in place and the ends of the wire are securely fastened together .
then twist the strands of wire together until the brace pole is in compression .
do not allow the compression to be great enough to cause lateral springing in the brace pole .
allow concrete anchors to cure for at least num days before erecting the fence .
num fencing .
tie any intersecting fence to an independent pull post .
stretch woven wire fabric taut and securely fasten it to each post .
accomplish stretching with a stretcher that will produce equal tension in each line wire .
stretch fabric until the tension is just below the point of producing displacement in the tension crimps .
at each end corner or gate post cut and turn each strand of line wire around the post and tie it back to itself with no less than num turns .
when it is necessary to splice num sections of fence make the splice by placing together the end stay wires of each section and twist the end of each line wire around the stay wires and back onto itself with no less than num turns or splice the fence by using engineer approved splicing sleeves designed for that purpose .
attach the fence to each wood post with a staple for each line wire and as many additional staples as necessary to firmly secure the wire .
furnish galvanized staples having a nominal diameter of num inch and a length of no less than one inch in length for hardwood posts .
when using treated softwood posts furnish staples that are num num inches long .
securely attach the woven wire fabric as shown on the standard drawings .
use tension wires and rails in erection of chain link fences as shown on the standard drawings .
when shown on the standard drawings place stretch taut and secure at ends the top or bottom tension wires to all posts in a manner before placing fabric .
when a top rail is required secure the bar at each end before stretching and tying the fabric .
secure ends of the fabric with stretcher bars threaded through the loops of the fabric and secured to the posts by means of clamps with bolts and nuts .
use the number of clamps as indicated .
place the fabric by securing one end and applying sufficient tension to remove all slack before making attachments elsewhere .
fasten the fabric to the line posts and to the top tension wire or to the top rail with tie wires or bands as called for in section num or as the contract designates .
determine the number of tension bands required per post of chain link fence by taking the height of the fence in feet and subtracting one .
space tie wires for attaching chain link fence to the top tension wire or top rail on numinch centers .
space tie wires for attaching chain link fence to intermediate or line posts on numinch centers .
space tie wires on chain link gates on numinch centers .
install the chain link fence around utility installations facing the highway with the barbed wire arms at a num degree angle extending toward the highway .
design and install post caps for all tubular posts so as to exclude moisture from inside the posts and install socket type brace end connections so as to exclude moisture from inside the rails .
num gates .
erect gates at locations specified in the plans or as the engineer directs .
erect the gate plumb with its hinges firmly attached to the post and to the gate .
allow the gate to swing freely when opened .
install the latch so it works easily and secures the gate when closed .
furnish water gates of the specified type that conform to the plans and standard drawings .
num finishing .
ensure that the tops of all posts are at a uniform height above the ground or at a uniform distance above the top of the woven wire fabric .
after erecting the fence saw the tops of wood posts uniformly at least num inches above the strand of barbed wire .
make the cut at an angle of num degrees to the vertical on the side of the post away from the wire .
num ensure that the finished fence is true to line taut and solid at all points .
dispose of all surplus excavated material and other debris resulting from construction and leave the fence line with a neat and orderly appearance .
num measurement .
num fence .
the department will measure the quantity of each type and height in linear feet along the top of the fence from outside to outside of end posts of fence installed with deductions for all gates .
the department will not measure material removal and disposal drilling excavating or backfilling installation or removal of temporary fences or for connections to abutments or other structures for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num gates .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
the department will not measure excavation or concrete for water gates for payment and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num num num num fence type and height linear foot pay unit num num num gate type each the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num removing resetting or replacing fence num description .
remove remove and reset or remove and replace fences except masonry fences .
num materials .
num posts .
use the same type of posts existing in the original fence and comply with applicable requirements .
num woven wire fencing .
conform to section num .
num chain link fencing .
conform to section num .
num concrete .
conform to section num and num .
select any class concrete specified in section num .
num construction .
num resetting fence .
reset the fence to the location designated in the contract using material from the original fence and leave all fences in as good condition as before removal .
reset all posts using the same type of construction that was used on the original fence and furnish any new material necessary to set these posts in the manner used on the original fence .
where any posts are set in concrete reconstruct the fence in the same manner .
ensure that reconstructed fences are true to line and vertical .
ensure that all wires are taut and well stapled .
remove and restore gates for service at the new location .
repair or replace fence and gates damaged during moving or resetting .
num remove fence .
when listed as a bid item remove the designated fence and dispose of the materials off the rightofway .
num removing and replacing fence .
remove the fence as described above .
replace the fence according to section num .
num measurement .
the department will not measure repair or replacement of fence or gates damaged during moving or resetting for payment and will consider it incidental to the work item being performed .
the department will not measure concrete or new material necessary to set posts in the manner used on the original fence for payment and will consider it incidental to resetting fence and replacing fence .
num removing and resetting fence .
the department will measure the quantity including gates in linear feet along the top of the fence and gates from outside to outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence .
num removing fence .
the department will measure the quantity including gates in linear feet along the top of the fence and gates before removal from outside to outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence .
num resetting fence .
the department will measure the quantity including gates in linear feet along the top of the fence and gates from outside to outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence .
num removing and replacing fence .
the department will measure the quantity including gates in linear feet along the top of the fence and gates from outside to outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence .
num num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num remove and reset fence linear foot pay unit num remove fence linear foot num reset fence linear foot num remove and replace fence linear foot the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num signal systems num description .
furnish install and connect traffic control devices with accessories according to the plans .
num materials .
num traffic control device materials .
conform to section num .
obtain the engineers approval for all materials before installation .
submit for material approval an electronic copy of descriptive literature drawings and any requested design data .
do not make substitutions for approved materials without written permission as described above .
num paint .
conform to sections num and num .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
num construction .
perform the work according to num the contract num kentucky department of highways standard drawings num national fire protection association nfpa num national electrical code num institute of electrical and electronic engineers ieee national electrical safety code num aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals num edition num aashto roadside design guide num manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways current edition and num the standards of the utility company serving the installation .
the plans indicate the extent and general arrangement of the proposed signal installation and are for general guidance .
advise the engineer in writing and obtain written approval for any necessary modifications before beginning the work .
stake pole locations and obtain the engineers approval .
num utility requirements .
conform to section num .
num poles and bases installation .
regardless of the station offset noted located all polesbases behind guardrail a minimum of num feet behind the face of the guardrail .
orient the handhole door away from traffic travel path .
install pole bases num to num inches above grade .
if pole base is installed within a sidewalk the top of the pole base shall be the same grade as the sidewalk .
a steel strain and mastarm poles installation .
top nuts shall be tightened to onesixth turn beyond snugtight .
snugtight is defined as the condition where the nut is in full contact with the base plate .
it is assumed that the full effort of a workman on a numinch wrench results in a snugtight condition .
the clearance between the bottom of the leveling nuts and the top of the concrete foundation shall not exceed one bolt diameter .
if any pole needs to be relocated from stations indicated division of traffic operations shall be contacted .
poles shall not be installed on break away supports .
see section num a num with exception of the drilled shaft data table .
construct pole bases to the dimensions in the pole base chart shown below num maximum service forces drilled shaft data max service moment ftkips depth feet vertical bars ties or spiral num ground slope num ground slopenum size spacing or pitch soil rock soil rock size total num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num do not construct drilled shafts on ground slopes steeper than num without the approval of the division of traffic .. for maximum service moment use the service moment provided by the pole manufacturer or the calculated service moment provided on the plans whichever is greater .
b pedestal or pedestal post installation .
ensure that concrete bases for poles up to num feet high have a minimum depth of num feet and a minimum diameter of num feet .
if over num feet high the base shall have the minimum depth and diameter as section num a num .
construct a level base with no more than a numinch gap existing between the concrete base and the transformer base when the pole is plumbed .
for breakaway supports conform to section num of the standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals num edition .
grade the surrounding surface appropriately to meet the numinch breakaway support stub height .
this stud height includes the pole base conduits and the anchors bolts .
c splicing of reinforcement .
see section num .
splicing of vertical reinforcement shall be class c. when a drilled shaft is lengthened in the field the splice location shall be made at the bottom of the reinforcement cage .
d require time to apply loads on concrete structures .
see section num num trenching .
lay conduit not subjected to traffic to a depth of no less than num inches below grade .
a under roadway .
on transverse crossings under roadway surfaces and shoulders place the conduit as specified in contract at a depth of no less than num inches below grade .
make all pavement crossings by placing conduit in the subgrade before paving or by boring and jacking under existing pavements .
when it is necessary to bore under roadways and ramps obtain the engineers approval of the boring procedure .
do not cut any pavement without obtaining the engineers prior approval .
num conduit installation .
see section num .
num num conduit requirements in junction boxes .
see section num a .
see section num for junction box placement .
num coupling installation .
see section num d. num bonding requirements .
see section num e. num painting .
see section num f. num underground warning tape .
see section num .
num backfilling and disturbed areas .
see section num .
num wiring installation .
affix each wirecable in the controller cabinet with a permanent identification label .
where installing more than one loop leadins cable imsa num within the same conduit affix permanent identification per loop schedule to the cables wherever the wiring emerges including junction boxes and polespedestal .
affix each splice between loop wire imsa num and loop leadin with a permanent identification label per loop schedule .
use heat shrink tape or vinyl to wrap all wires where they pass through holes .
deburr all holes and provide a grommet at each opening .
the contractor shall install all cable or wire runs splicefree from the controller to each loop wire signal head pedestrian headdetector camera blankout sign and audible pedestrian headdetector the cable or wire is feeding .
connectioncolor code for all wiring according to the following chart numconductor imsa num numconductor imsa num numconductor imsa num numsection heads numsection heads numsection heads connection color connection color connection color red ballarrow red red ball red red ball red yellow ballarrow orange yellow ball orange yellow ball orange green ballarrow green green ball green yellow arrow whitetracer neutral white green arrow black green ball green not used black neutral white green arrow blue neutral white not used black numconductor imsa num ped signal and button connection color walk green dont walk red button black button orange not used white num connectioncolor code for flashing yellow arrow signal heads according to following chart numconductor imsa num numconductor imsa num numconductor imsa num num numsection heads numsection heads numsection heads connection color connection color connection color red arrow red red arrow red red arrow red steady yellow arrow orange steady yellow arrow orange steady yellow arrow orange flashing yellow arrow black flashing yellow arrow black flashing yellow arrow whitetr acer not used green green arrow green green arrow green neutral white neutral white neutral white not used blue not used black num loop installation .
twist unshielded loop wire imsa num with three to five turns per foot before placing in saw slots conduits junction boxes or cabinets .
extend loop wires splicefree to poles pedestals or junction boxes as shown on the plans .
splice loop wires imsa num to loop leadin cable imsa num in poles pedestals or junction boxes as shown on the plans .
extend loop leadin cable splicefree from the pole pedestal or junction box to the controller .
provide an extra num foot of loop wire and loop leadin past the installed conduit in poles pedestals and junction boxes .
make splices accessible from the handholes of poles .
on projects involving new asphalt pavement install loops in the base course of asphalt pavement before the final surface in constructed .
coordinate the installation of the loops with the paving contractor and the engineer .
num grounding installation .
ground all conduits poles pedestals the controller cabinet and the service according to the standard detail sheets .
separate all ground rods by a minimum of num feet .
ensure the top of the ground rod is a minimum of num inches below finished grade .
num splicing .
when indicated on the plans or with approval of the division of traffic operations splice only in poles pedestals and junction boxes .
place splices to minimize possibility of water intrusion .
use only butt splices .
use copper wire of the correct wire range .
cover splices with a numm mastic pad or approved equal .
the mastic pad must cover at least num inches past each end of the butt splice and shall extend at least one inch onto the outer insulation of the leadin wire imsa num .
tape splices with numm num electrical tape or approved equal .
encase each conductor including the ground in a separate splice kit .
num painting .
see section num .
num drawings .
before final inspection of the traffic control device provide a complete set of reproducible asbuilt drawings that show the arrangement and locations of all equipment included i.e .
junction boxes conduits spare conduits etc .. num acceptance and inspection requirements .
energize traffic control device as soon as it is fully functional and ready for inspection .
ensure that the traffic control device remains operational until the division of traffic operations has provided written acceptance of the electrical work .
after the work has been completed conduct an operational test demonstrating that the system operates in accordance with the plans in the num presence of the engineer .
the department will also conduct its own tests with its own equipment before final acceptance .
traffic operations will conduct an inspection of the installation prior to calling the job complete .
the inspection will include but not limited to the following num .
induction loop conductors shall test free of shorts and unauthorized grounds and shall have an insulating resistance of at least one hundred megaohms when tested with a num volt direct current potential in a reasonably dry atmosphere between conductors and ground .
num .
ground rods shall have a resistance to ground not to exceed num ohms .
if the resistance to ground is greater than num ohms two or more ground rods connected in parallel shall be installed .
num measurement .
num conduit .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet furnished and installed .
the department will not measure conduit fittings pipetest plugs expansion joints clamps or weatherheads for payment and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num junction box .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure concrete if required num aggregate or backfilling and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num trenching and backfilling .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
the department will not measure underground utility warning tape if required and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num open cut roadway .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
the department will not measure concrete reinforcing steel or asphalt and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num loop wire .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet furnished and installed .
the department will not measure splice boots cable rings or other hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num cable .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet furnished and installed .
the department will not measure splice boots cable rings or other hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num pole wooden .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure excavation backfilling or restoring disturbed areas and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num steel strain pole .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure anchor bolts or other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num mast arm pole .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure anchor bolts arms mounting brackets or other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num signal pedestal .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure excavation num concrete conduit fittings ground rod ground wire backfilling restoring disturbed areas or other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num post .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure excavation backfilling or restoring disturbed areas and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num anchor .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure downguy messenger clamps guy guard or insulators if required and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num messenger .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet furnished and installed .
the department will not measure dead ends bolts washers or other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num install signal led .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit installed and connected to signal conductors .
num loop saw slot and fill .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
the department will not measure the loop sealant material and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num pedestrian detector .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure sign rnum numbrnume with arrow and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num signal .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished installed and connected to signal conductors .
the department will not measure the mounting brackets if necessary and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num signal controller type num .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure constructing the concrete base or mounting the cabinet to the pole providing electrical service connecting the signal and detectors furnishing and connecting the induction loop amplifiers pedestrian isolators load switches model num modem card electrical service conductors electrical service conduit fused cutout ground rods any necessary pole mounting hardware or electrical inspection fees and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num beacon controller num circuit .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure the controller housing mounting equipment snum school zone sign and time clock if necessary nema flasher ground rods ground wires metering and disconnect hardware or electrical inspection fees and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num install signal controller type num .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit installed including induction loop amplifiers pedestrian isolators and load switches .
the department will not measure constructing the concrete base or mounting the cabinet to the pole providing electrical service connecting the signal and detectors ground rods or electrical inspection fees and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num install steel strain pole .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit installed .
the department will not measure any necessary clamp assemblies and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num num remove signal equipment .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit removed .
the department will not measure the disposal or transportation of the material and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num install spanpole mounted sign .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit installed .
the department will not measure the hanger or any other hardware necessary to install the sign and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num install pedestrian head led .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit installed and connected to signal conductors .
num install signal led .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit installed and connected to signal conductors .
num install coordinating unit .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit installed and including the radio modem cable antenna and repeater .
the department will not measure any other hardware to complete the installation and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num video camera .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure video modules mounting bracket truss type arm if necessary power cable coaxial cable and any other hardware necessary to complete the installation and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num install ped detector audible .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit installed and connected to polepedestal .
the department will not measure sign rnumbrnume with arrow and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num audible pedestrian detector .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished installed and connected to polepedestal .
the department will not measure sign rnumbrnume with arrow and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num bore and jack conduit .
the department will measure the quantity in linear feet .
this item does not include furnishing and installing the conduit .
num install pedestrian detector .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished installed and connected to polepedestal .
the department will not measure sign rnumbrnume with arrow and will consider it incidental to this item of work .
num install mast arm pole .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit installed .
the department will not measure arms signal mounting brackets anchors or any other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num pedestal post .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure excavation concrete conduit fitting ground rod ground wire backfilling restoration or any other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num span mounted sign .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit furnished and installed .
the department will not measure the hanger num or any other necessary hardware and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num remove and reinstall coordinating unit .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit removed and reinstalled .
num traffic signal pole base .
the department will measure the quantity in cubic yards furnished and installed .
the department will not measure excavation reinforcing steel ground rods ground wires backfilling anchor bolts or spare conduits and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num install signal pedestal .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit installed .
the department will not measure excavation concrete conduit fittings ground rods ground wires or backfilling and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num install pedestal post .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit installed .
the department will not measure excavation concrete conduit fittings ground rods ground wires or backfilling and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num install antenna .
the department will measure the quantity as each individual unit installed .
the department will not measure any other materials necessary to complete the installation and will consider them incidental to this item of work .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num conduit size linear foot pay unit num junction box type each numnsnumnsnum num trenching backfilling linear foot num open cut roadway linear foot num loop wire linear foot num cable type linear foot num polewooden size each num steel strain pole each num mast arm pole each num signal pedestal each num post each num anchor each num messenger strength linear foot num loop saw slot and fill linear foot num pedestrian detector each num signal each num signal controllertype num each num beacon controllernum circuit each num install sig controllertype num each num install steel strain pole each num remove signal equipment each num numnd install spanpole mounted sign each numnsnum install pedestrian head led each num numnsnum install signal led size each numnsnum numesnum install signal led size each numnsnum install signal led size each numnsnum install coordinating unit each num numnsnum video camera each numnsnum install ped detector audible each numnsnum audible pedestrian detector each numen bore and jack conduit linear foot numnn install pedestrian detector each numnn install mast arm pole each numnn pedestal post each numnn span mounted sign each numnn remove reinstall coordinating each unit numen traffic signal pole base cubic yard numec install signal pedestal each numec install pedestal post each numec install antenna each the department will consider payment as full compensation for installing and placing the complete traffic control device in satisfactory operation .
num section num planting vines shrubs and trees num description .
furnish and plant trees shrubs vines seedlings and other materials in the areas and in the arrangement specified in the plans or as the engineer directs .
dig and prepare beds and planting holes prune plants furnish and place backfill fertilize mulch water brace and perform all other incidentals required for planting .
additionally care for plants during the period required to demonstrate the plants have become established in a healthy growing condition replace plants found defective as prescribed and perform all other incidentals necessary to complete the work as specified in the contract and as provided in this section .
num materials .
num plants .
conform to the requirements of the american standard for nursery stock as published by the american nursery and landscape association .
provide num calendar days notice before obtaining nursery stock vines shrubs or trees to allow department personnel to inspect the stock at the source .
the department will inspect all vines shrubs and trees at the work site .
obtain the engineers approval of the plants before planting .
num mulch .
conform to subsection num .
num construction .
num times permissible for planting .
perform the initial planting operation between the dates of november num and april num .
perform initial planting when the temperature is a minimum of num f and the ground is not frozen .
regardless of the calendar date plants must be dormant when they are dug at the nursery source and when they arrive at the project site .
perform the replacement planting operation between the dates of november num and may num .
num transportation .
transport all plants from the nursery sources to the project site by covered vehicle .
num layout of planting .
before digging of planting holes or beds lay out by suitable staking the location of all planting holes and beds and obtain the engineers approval .
when the contract specifies planting at locations that will not sustain healthy growth submit a written request to the engineer for approval to relocate the plants .
if the engineer can not find a suitable site to relocate the plants they will be deleted from the contract .
num backfill for planting .
backfill with the best available material from the site .
when desired use topsoil from an offsite source .
exclude any soil with significant amounts of rock shale or clay material .
num surplus excavation .
dispose of surplus excavation from the planting holes as the engineer directs .
num mulching .
use either hardwood wood chips or shredded bark for mulching material and place it around the plants as quickly as possible after planting .
apply it uniformly over the planting area to a depth of num inches and to a distance of one foot outside the periphery of the plant hole or planting bed .
num bracing .
brace evergreens and shade trees .
the department will not require bracing on other plants except when the engineer directs .
when bracing is num required brace according to the standard drawings .
num period of establishment .
the department will require a period of establishment to follow the completion of the initial planting .
during this time perform the following maintenance items to ensure that optimum growing conditions for the plant material are maintained during the life of the contract .
these maintenance items include but are not limited to the following weeding beds mowing perimeter of beds watering plants insect and disease control periodic bracing adjustments .
when the total of the combined plant materials would constitute a major item the department will require a num growing season period of establishment .
when the total of the combined plant materials would not constitute a major item the department will require a one growing season period of establishment .
the department will require a one growing season period of establishment for plant material used along channel changes regardless of total .
the department will consider the period from april numth until september numth of the same year to be one growing season .
num inspection schedule .
when all planting is complete notify the engineer and the initial inspection will be made .
the department will make replacement inspections by september numth following each growing season to determine if replacement planting is required .
perform all required replacement planting before april num .
when all replacement planting is complete notify the engineer .
if no replacement plantings are required at the last replacement inspection the department will consider the replacement inspection to be the final inspection .
num replacement planting .
ensure the plant materials remain in a healthy growing and vigorous condition at all times throughout the life of the period of establishment .
the department will consider plant materials to be unacceptable when any of the following conditions occur num plants are dead or missing from the planting site .
num plants that have experienced injury and show obvious signs of damage from drought sun scald insects or disease .
num dieback of central leader and or lateral branches which disfigures the plant rendering it unacceptable .
num plants that have been damaged by physical or mechanical injury .
for numinch or shorter trees perform replacement planting when the number of acceptable trees of that species and size falls below num percent .
ensure the replacement plantings raise the quantity of acceptable trees of that species and size to at least num percent .
for all other plant materials perform replacement planting when the number of acceptable plants of that species and size falls below num percent .
ensure the replacement plantings raise the quantity of acceptable trees of that species and size to num percent .
num removal of stakes tags and bracing .
remove stakes tags and bracing materials after the first replacement inspection and no later than num months after initial planting .
dispose of removed material off of the rightofway .
num restoring disturbed areas .
restore all disturbed areas .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity of plants vines shrubs and trees by each individual unit .
the department will not measure bracing mulching furnishing topsoil or maintenance for payment and will consider it incidental to the plant .
the department will not measure replacement planting including that necessitated by a third party for payment and will consider it incidental to the plant .
num num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities according to the warranty payment schedule under the following code pay item plants vines and shrubs species and size each pay unit trees species and size each warranty payment schedule one growing season completion date initial inspection num payment sept num numst year replacement inspection april num num warranty payment schedule num growing seasons completion date initial inspection num payment sept num numst year replacement inspection april num num sept num numnd year replacement inspection april num num sept num final inspection num any replacement work not done by the scheduled completion date and all work found unacceptable during final inspection shall receive full deduction of its unit bid price from the payment .
the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required under this section .
num section num crash cushions num description .
furnish and install crash cushion systems of the designated types and configurations at the locations shown on the plans and furnish replacement items in quantities designated on the plans .
install each type of crash cushion according to the standard drawings and according to the manufacturers instructions .
num materials .
conform to the most current specifications and details recommended by the manufacturer of the crash cushion designated for use except as otherwise specified herein .
num type vi class b bt .
use either of the following num the quadguard system as developed by energy absorption systems inc. of chicago illinois .
for all miscellaneous metal work conform to astm a num and hotdip galvanize according to astm a num .
hotdip galvanize the quadbeam guardrail sections quadbeam to wbeam connectors and quadguard transition panels after fabrication according to astm a num .
num the tracc system as developed by trinity industries syro steel of girard ohio .
for all miscellaneous metal work conform to astm a num and hotdip galvanize according to astm a num .
for the tracc fender panels conform to aashto num .
hotdip galvanize the tracc fender panels and traccbeam connectors after fabrication according to astm a num .
num type vi class c ct. use either of the following num the quadguard elite system as developed by energy absorption systems inc. of chicago illinois .
for all miscellaneous metal work conform to astm a num and hotdip galvanize according to astm a num .
hotdip galvanize the quadbeam guardrail sections quadbeam to wbeam connectors and quadguard transition panels after fabrication according to astm a num .
num the scinumgm system as developed by sci products inc. of st. charles illinois .
for all miscellaneous metal work conform to astm a num and galvanize according to astm a num .
for the scinumgm fender panels conform to aashto num .
galvanize the scinumgm fender panels and scinumgm beam connectors after fabrication according to astm a num .
num type vii class b .
use either of the following num the quadguard wide system as developed by energy absorption systems inc. of chicago illinois .
for all miscellaneous metal work conform to astm a num and hotdip galvanize according to astm a num .
hotdip galvanize the quadbeam guardrail sections and quadbeam to wbeam connectors after fabrication according to astm a num .
num the widetracc system as developed by trinity industries syro steel of girard ohio .
for all miscellaneous metal work conform to astm a num and hot dip galvanize according to astm a num .
for the tracc fender panels conform to aashto num .
hotdip galvanize the tracc fender panels and tracc beam connectors after fabrication according to astm a num .
num type vii class c. use either of the following num the quadguard elite wide system as developed by energy absorption systems inc. of chicago illinois .
for all miscellaneous metal work conform to astm a num and hotdip galvanize according to astm a num .
hotdip galvanize num the quadbeam guardrail sections and quadbeam to wbeam connectors after fabrication according to astm a num .
num the scinumgm system as developed by sci products inc. of st. charles illinois .
for all miscellaneous metal work conform to astm a num and galvanize according to astm a num .
for the scinumgm fender panels conform to aashto num .
galvanize the scinumgm fender panels and scinumgmbeam connectors after fabrication according to astm a num .
num type viii .
furnish a tma conforming to nchrp num at the appropriate test level for the projects posted speed limit .
for all miscellaneous metal work conform to astm a num and hotdip galvanize according to astm a num .
num type ix .
use the catnum as developed by trinity industries syro steel of girard ohio or fleatmt as developed by the road systems inc. of big spring texas .
connect to a wall pier or other fixed object .
for all miscellaneous metal work conform to astm a num and hotdip galvanize according to astm a num .
num type ixa .
use the catnum as developed by trinity industries syro steel of girard ohio or fleatmt as developed by the road systems inc. of big spring texas .
connect to guardrail .
for all miscellaneous metal work conform to astm a num and hotdip galvanize according to astm a num .
the department may allow a higher crash cushion class type to be used in lieu of a lower class type of cushion that is specified in the contract .
num concrete .
furnish aa concrete conforming to section num .
num construction .
submit to the engineer for approval installation drawings that accurately depict all details necessary for completing the installation .
do not start work until the engineer approves the drawings .
furnish to the engineer items such as manufacturers brochures or specifications that completely outline the crash cushion manufacturers current recommendations for materials and installation methods before beginning installation .
all workmanship and materials are subject to the engineers approval .
furnish and install type num object markers according to the plans and standard drawings .
the department may specify various components of the system on the plans or in the proposal as replacement elements .
furnish the specified quantity of replacement elements and deliver to the storage area designated in the proposal or by the engineer .
num type vi class b c and vii class b c. install at the locations shown on the plans or where the engineer directs .
construct a concrete pad when the contract requires or when the engineer directs .
construct the pad according to section num for rigid pavement or section num for sidewalk except use class aa concrete .
num type vi class bt ct .
type vi class bt ct are temporary crash cushions at the end of temporary concrete barriers .
install at the locations shown on the plans or where the engineer directs and connect to the temporary concrete barrier according to the plans or standard drawings .
construct a concrete pad when the contract requires or when the engineer directs .
construct the pad according to section num for rigid pavement or section num for sidewalk except use class aa concrete .
the plans or the engineer may require a crash cushion type vi class bt or ct to be used at more than one location on the project .
when required relocate the crash cushion at the time and in the sequence designated by the plans or by the engineer .
maintain and keep operative each crash cushion type vi class bt or ct until its usefulness has ended .
stock at all times the necessary materials to repair a damaged crash num cushion .
repair damaged crash cushion as soon as practical not to exceed num hours after the damage occurs .
after the usefulness of each crash cushion type vi class bt or ct has ended dismantle and store on the rightofway at a site the engineer approves .
previous kytc approved nchrp report num crash cushions can continue to be used in temporary locations only until the end of their normal service life .
num type viii .
mount on a truck of the size and in a manner recommended by the crash cushion manufacturer .
during the course of the work deploy operate and maintain the truckmounted crash cushion at locations the engineer directs .
stock enough cells to restore one crash cushion after one impact and repair all damaged crash cushions as soon as practicable after damage occurs .
after its usefulness has ended remove the crash cushion from the truck and store the crash cushion together with mounting hardware on the rightofway at a site the engineer approves .
the crash cushion and mounting hardware will become the property of the department .
the department will not take ownership of the truck .
num type ix and ixa .
install at the locations shown on the plans or where the engineer directs .
num measurement .
num crash cushion types vi class b c vii class b c ix and ixa .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
when the plans or proposal specifies that the crash cushion is to be used in a temporary manner the department will measure as specified for crash cushion type vi class bt ct .
the department will not measure the work necessary to anchor crash cushion types vi class b c vi class bt ct and vii class b c to existing pavement or bridge decks for payment and will consider it incidental to the crash cushion .
num crash cushion type vi class bt ct .
the department will measure the quantity of crash cushion type vi class bt ct units furnished installed dismantled and stored on the rightofway .
the department will not measure furnishing and installing the wbeam to crash cushion connectors furnishing and installing rear unit plates and front unit plates work or materials necessary to repair damaged crash cushions materials kept in stock or used to repair damaged crash cushions or dismantling the units and storing them on the rightof way for payment and the department will consider them incidental to the crash cushion .
num relocate crash cushion .
the department will measure the quantity by each unit and will consider it to include the units removal and reinstallation at a different location .
num crash cushion type viii .
the department will measure the quantity by each unit and will consider it to include furnishing deploying operating maintaining and storing on the rightofway .
num crash cushion replacement elements .
the department will measure the quantity by the lump sum and will consider it to include all replacement elements the contract specifies and their delivery to the designated storage area .
num concrete class aa for pads .
the department will measure the quantity used for crash cushion type vii in cubic yards .
the department will not measure excavation or steel reinforcement for payment and will consider it incidental to the class aa concrete .
the department will not measure the quantity for payment when used for crash cushion type vi or vit and will consider it incidental to the crash cushion bid item .
num num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num crash cushion type each pay unit num relocate crash cushion each num crash cushion replacement elements lump sum num concrete class aa cubic yard the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required in this provision .
num section num right of way monuments num description .
furnish and install rightofway monuments at the location and with the type shown on the plans .
num materials .
furnish aluminum alloy monuments specified on the standard drawing .
num construction .
install rightofway monuments at the earliest opportunity on a project as determined by the engineer .
install rightofway monuments under the direct supervision of a kentucky licensed professional land surveyor .
establish rightofway monuments from existing primary or supplemental control monuments with an accuracy of num or greater .
place rightofway monument information on a control monument information sheet exhibit num of the highway design manual provided by the department .
place the completed control monument information sheet in a final survey report .
completely fill out the control monument information sheet including the signature and registration number of the kentucky licensed professional land surveyor in charge of the monumentation .
submit the final survey report to the kytc survey coordinator in the division of highway design and the engineer .
reset all monuments disturbed or destroyed during or prior to construction with the same accuracy as stated previously .
update the control monument information sheet with any new data and include in the final survey report .
ensure the kentucky licensed professional land surveyor in charge of the remonumentation signs and places his registration number on the updated control monument information sheet .
submit the updated final survey report to the kytc survey coordinator in the division of highway design the engineer and the kentucky licensed professional land surveyor who set the original monuments .
rightofway monuments that can not be established at the planned location due to inaccessibility should be witnessed by a witness rightofway monument on both lines and labeled as such see standard drawing .
use a numfoot long orange witness post to aid in locating rightofway monuments .
set the witness post within the public rightofway and within one foot of the monument location .
label the witness post to denote that the point is kytc rightofway see standard drawing .
num measurement .
the department will measure the quantity by each individual unit .
num payment .
the department will make payment for the completed and accepted quantities under the following code pay item num rightofway monument type num each pay unit num rightofway monument type numa each num witness rw monument type num each num witness post each the department will consider payment as full compensation for all work required in this provision .
division num materials details num section num cement num requirements .
provide portland cement from approved mills listed in the departments list of approved materials .
mills obtain approval by furnishing the department samples and certified mill test data developed over the previous num months .
approved cement mill laboratories are aashto accredited in astm cnum test methods .
foreign cements are added to the approved list based upon testing by the sponsoring approved cement mill laboratory along with submittal and approval of verification samples .
when supplying cement with a sonum content above the value in table i of astm c num include supportive astm c num numday expansion test data for the supplied sonum content on the certification .
the department will require a signed certification from the supplier for each shipment of cement stating that the cement complies with the applicable astm standard and all additional requirements of this subsection .
conform to the following requirements for cement num type i ii iii and iv conforms to astm c num .
state on the mill certification the nature amount and identity of any processing addition and its compliance with astm c num .
num type k conforms to astm c num .
num type ip or type ipa conforms to astm c num and the following additional requirements to type ip and ipa a the pozzolan constituent shall be fly ash .
ensure that the loss on ignition of the fly ash does not exceed num percent .
b ensure that the fly ash does not exceed num percent of the portlandpozzolan cement by weight .
the cement manufacturer shall furnish a statement to the engineer stating the actual fly ash content in each shipment .
c the cement manufacturer shall furnish to the engineer reports showing the results of tests performed on the fly ash used in the manufacture of the type ip cement shipped to the project .
the tests shall cover the chemical and physical properties listed in astm c num. d the cement manufacturer shall have a qualified technical representative readily available for consultations on the project at any time the engineer deems necessary at no expense to the department .
e use only one brand of type ip cement throughout the project unless the engineer approves a change in brand in writing .
num types is or ism conforms to astm c num and the following additional requirements a use grade num or num ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbf slag conforming to the requirements of astm c num. b ensure that the ggbf slag does not exceed num percent by weight of the portland blast furnace slag for type is .
c the cement manufacturer shall furnish to the engineer reports showing the results of the tests performed on the ggbf slag used in the manufacturing of the type is and ism shipped to the project .
the tests shall cover the chemical and physical properties required in astm c num. d the cement manufacturer shall have a qualified technical representative readily available for consultation on the project at anytime the engineer deems necessary at no expense to the department .
e use only one brand of type is or ism cement throughout the project unless num the engineer approves otherwise .
even when tested and approved do not mix cement from different mills in individual batches or use cement from different mills in alternate batches of concrete .
subject to the above restrictions the engineer may allow the use of cements from different mills for any structure or individual elements of a structure provided color contrasts resulting from their usage is minimal or is otherwise unobjectionable and identification of the location of concrete containing the different cements is satisfactorily maintained .
store cement to prevent damage from the elements .
provide weatherproof storage facilities with sufficient storage capacity that cements from different mills or of different types will not become intermixed .
provide an acceptable means for obtaining samples from either the cement silo weigh hopper or truck .
the engineer will reject cement that for any reason has become damaged through contamination partial set or which contains lumps of caked cement .
the engineer may reject the entire contents of a container when it contains damaged cement .
the engineer may accept cement producing an air content of mortar between num and num percent when it is to be used in airentraining concrete and the air content of the concrete is controlled at the mixer .
num nonspecification cement .
the department accepts cement on the basis of manufacturers certification attesting to type and conformance to the applicable astm specification .
the engineer will take check samples .
when the check samples do not conform to these specifications the department will make deductions as shown in the following table .
when a sample fails more than one test the department will make the total deduction as the sum of deductions up to a maximum of num percent .
num test maximum deviation from requirement percent deduction rate based on invoice cost of cement autoclave expansion num num per num deviation fineness by air permeability num num per num deviation air content for air entrained cement num num per num deviation air content for non air entrained cement num num free thereafter num per num deviation compressive strength num num per num deviation time of set num num per num deviation magnesium oxide mgo num num per num deviation sulfur trioxide sonum num num free and then num per num deviation loss on ignition num num per num deviation insoluble residue num num per num deviation tricalcium aluminate cnuma num num per num deviation silicon dioxide sionum num num per num deviation aluminum oxide anumonum num num per num deviation ferric oxide fenum num num per num deviation num section num admixtures for concrete num requirements .
provide admixtures conforming to the following requirements num airentraining .
aashto m num except the chloride content as cl shall not exceed one percent by weight .
the department may require tests for bleeding time of setting and length change .
num waterreducing and retarding .
aashto m num type d except the relative durability factor shall not be less than num and the chloride content as cl shall not exceed one percent by weight .
num waterreducing .
aashto m num type a except the relative durability factor shall not be less than num and the chloride content as cl shall not exceed one percent by weight .
num waterreducing and accelerating .
aashto m num type e except the relative durability factor shall not be less than num and the chloride content as cl shall not exceed one percent by weight .
use water reducing and accelerating admixture only when the engineer has reviewed proposed procedures for mixing handling and placing the concrete and has given written permission to proceed .
num waterreducing high range .
aashto m num type f except the relative durability factor shall not be less than num and the chloride content as cl shall not exceed one percent by weight .
num waterreducing high range and retarding .
aashto m num type g except the relative durability factor shall not be less than num and the chloride content as cl shall not exceed one percent by weight .
num accelerating .
aashto m num type c except the relative durability factor shall not be less than num and the chloride content as cnum shall not exceed one percent by weight .
num approval .
select admixtures from the departments list of approved materials .
the department places admixtures on the list based on evidence of compliance with requirements when determined by either tests performed by the department certified test data furnished by a recognized laboratory providing such laboratory shall be one regularly inspected by the cement and concrete reference laboratory of astm for air entraining admixtures that are aqueous solutions of vinsol resin manufacturers shall submit a certification in the following form this is to certify that the product trade name as manufactured and sold by company is an aqueous solution of vinsol resin that has been neutralized with sodium hydroxide .
the ratio of sodium hydroxide to vinsol resin is one part of sodium hydroxide to number parts of vinsol resin .
the percentage of solids based on the residue dried at num c is number .
no other additive or chemical agent is present in this solution .
the engineer will not require testing of admixtures included on the departments list of approved materials at the time of their use unless there is indication in actual field use num of harmful effects on the properties of the concrete or when the engineer considers testing necessary for other reasons .
the department will continue to include an admixture on the list contingent upon satisfactory performance in actual project use and an annual certification containing the following information num a statement that the admixture to be furnished during the particular calendar year is of the same composition as that previously approved for inclusion on the approved list .
num a statement that the admixture conforms to the appropriate requirements of aashto m num or aashto m num as applicable .
num a statement that the chloride content as cl does not exceed one percent by weight .
num a statement that notification will be made to the division of materials of any changes in composition before furnishing the material to projects .
the department provides the specific details governing verification and documenting approved status of admixtures at the time of use in the departments manual of field sampling and testing practices .
num section num water num description .
this section describes the requirements for water used in mixing or curing concrete emulsified asphalt or other similar materials .
num general .
use water for mixing or curing concrete emulsified asphalt or other similar materials that is reasonably clean and free from oil salt acid alkali sugar vegetable or other substances injurious to the finished product .
the engineer may test the water at any time for its suitability for a particular use .
the engineer will ordinarily accept water supplied by public distribution systems without testing .
the engineer will require testing of mixing water for use in concrete when not from a public distribution system .
provide water that when tested by km num does not contain impurities in excess of the following limits acidity or alkalinity calculated num percent in terms of calcium carbonate total organic solids num percent total inorganic solids num percent chloride content as cl num parts per million ph num to num ph units num section num fine aggregates num general .
fine aggregates include but at the discretion of the engineer are not limited to natural sand crushed sand conglomerate sand mortar sand mineral filler and lightweight aggregates where permitted .
the departments list of approved materials includes the aggregate source list and the list of class a and class b polishresistant aggregate sources .
num natural sand .
provide fine granular material resulting from the natural disintegration of rock .
num crushed sand .
provide fine granular material resulting from crushing of stone or gravel .
includes slag where permitted .
num conglomerate sand .
provide natural materials primarily processed to the desired sizes without crushing .
conglomerate sand may include some material which has been produced by crushing larger pieces of the parent material .
num mortar sand .
provide natural crushed or conglomerate sand suitable for use in cement mortar .
num mineral filler .
provide limestone dust cement fly ash or other inert mineral matter .
num approval .
provide fine aggregates from sources included on the aggregate source list meeting the description and requirements specified in this section .
the department will consider a source for inclusion on the aggregate source list when the aggregate producer complies with km num and provides the following num a quality control plan .
num a satisfactory laboratory facility with all necessary testing equipment .
num a qualified aggregate technician to perform the required testing .
when a supplier wishes to supply sand only for asphalt mixtures items num num and num above will be waived .
the department may add the source to the aggregate source list and restrict its use to asphalt mixtures .
obtain the departments approval before furnishing aggregate from sources not on the aggregate source list .
the department will sample the aggregate during stockpiling and test according to the departments manual of field testing and sampling practices .
the department will reject aggregate when excessive variation of gradation or physical properties cause unworkable mixtures mixture control problems or non conformance to the finished product or mixture requirements .
the department will reject contaminated aggregate when the engineer deems it could be detrimental to the finished product .
num concrete .
provide natural crushed or conglomerate sand .
the department will allow any combination of natural crushed or conglomerate sand when the combination is achieved in the concrete plant weigh hopper .
the engineer may allow other sands .
use natural or conglomerate sands as fine aggregates in concrete intended as a wearing surface for traffic .
conform to the following num num sand equivalent num minimum .
num soundness num loss maximum .
num friable particles num maximum .
num coal plus lignite num maximum .
num uncompacted voidsnum num maximum .
num organic impurities not darker than the standard .
num mortar strengthnum num at num calendar days minimum .
num gradationnum sieve size num inch num percent passing no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num num the department will permit fine aggregates exceeding when they are used in a combination that meets requirements .
num the department will require testing for mortar strength only for sand not passing the test for organic impurities and will supersede the requirement for organic impurities .
the department will waive the requirements for gradation sand equivalent and uncompacted voids for concrete pipe .
num asphalt mixtures .
provide natural crushed conglomerate and slag sand with the addition of filler as necessary to meet gradation requirements .
the department will allow any combination of natural crushed conglomerate and slag sand when the combination is achieved using cold feeds at the plant .
num sand for mixtures .
num gradation num percent passing the num inch sieve with more than num percent passing the no .
num sieve .
num coal plus lignite num percent maximum .
num soundness num percent maximum .
num mineral filler .
ensure num percent passes the no .
num sieve and at least num percent passes the no .
num sieve .
num polishresistant aggregate .
provide fine aggregates required for polish resistant applications from a class a or b polishresistant aggregate source as required .
in addition to these listed sources the department will consider natural sand conglomerate sand and crushed gravel sand meeting the requirements of section num to be class a polishresistant .
provide a signed certification from the aggregate producer for the manufactured polishresistant fine aggregate stating that the aggregate is supplied from the approved parent material as found on the departments list of approved materials polishresistant aggregate source list and guidelines on the division of materials webpage .
num requirements for combined aggregates .
a uncompacted voids .
provide aggregates for superpave mixtures meeting the minimum voids content as listed in the superpave fine aggregate consensus property requirements table .
b sand equivalent .
provide aggregate having a sand equivalent value of num or num greater for the portion of the total combined aggregates passing the no .
num sieve .
provide aggregates for superpave mixtures meeting the minimum sand equivalent limits as listed in the superpave fine aggregate consensus property requirements table .
the sand equivalent limits specified in this section apply to aggregates in the final mixture .
the department will normally take samples from stockpiled aggregates or aggregate cold feeds including mineral filler for acceptance testing .
when these tests do not meet the required values make trial runs through the plant to provide material for sampling which is intended for the final mixture .
the department may waive the sand equivalent requirement provided the portion of the combined aggregate passing the no .
num sieve is nonplastic according to aashto t num .
superpave fine aggregate consensus property requirements uncompacted void content of fine aggregate percentnum sand equivalent esal design esals minimum percent class millions depth from surface minimum num mm num mm num num num num num num num to num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num performed according to aashto t num method a .
c friable particles .
limit friable particles excluding sandstone to a maximum of num percent of the total combined aggregates .
d absorption .
provide total combined fine aggregates having a water absorption of no more than num percent .
num mortar sand .
provide natural sand crushed sand or conglomerate sand conforming to subsection num with the exception of uncompacted voids and gradation .
conform to the following gradation sieve size no .
num num percent passing no .
num num no .
num num num epoxy seal coats .
provide either natural or conglomerate sand having an insoluble content of num percent or greater .
conform to the following gradation sieve size no .
num num percent passing no .
num num no .
num num num epoxy sand slurry .
provide silica sand containing no less than num percent insolubles .
ensure the sand is rounded to subangular clean dry and nonfriable .
conform to the following gradation num sieve size no .
num num percent passing no .
num num no .
num num the department may allow material not meeting this gradation if it produces a workable mixture and an acceptable slurry seal .
num pipe bedding .
provide natural crushed or conglomerate sand having a sand equivalent of num or greater .
the department may waive the sand equivalent requirement when the portion passing the no .
num sieve is nonplastic according to aashto t num .
conform to the following gradation sieve size num inch num percent passing no .
num num num underdrains embankment drainage blanket and natural sand for drainage and backfill .
provide natural sand having a sand equivalent of num or greater .
conform to the following gradation sieve size num inch num percent passing no .
num num no .
num num num gradation acceptance of nonspecification fine aggregate .
when reasonably acceptable work has been produced using the aggregate in question the department may accept the work according to subsection num .
when the engineer determines that the aggregate not conforming to gradation requirements may be left in place the department will accept the aggregate at a reduction in the contract unit bid price for the work containing the aggregate according to the following procedures .
the department will not consider these procedures a means to continue accepting nonspecification aggregates .
the department will base the reduction on the invoice price for the aggregate at the source .
when satisfactory invoices are not furnished the department will use current bin prices for that source on file with the cabinets division of purchases .
the maximum deduction for nonspecification material which is allowed to remain in place is num percent .
when aggregate fails to conform to gradation on more than one sieve the department will apply the largest payment reduction .
the department will define a lot based on the smallest definable quantity of material represented by acceptance test results either passing results or failing results or both .
normally the department will average all test results for the lot to determine the test result for payment according to the deduction tables .
however when test results are not reasonably uniform the department will not average the high and low test results within a lot .
the department will assign each test result to equal quantities in new smaller lots in proportion to the number of tests representing the original lot .
when daily tests are performed the lot will be a days production unless the department defines a smaller lot .
when num consecutive lots contain nonspecification material discontinue the use of the aggregate until the department makes a decision concerning the overall acceptability of the aggregate from that source .
the department will not impose a reduction in payment for quantities less than num tons unless the engineer deems it necessary .
num gradation concrete sand payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation mineral filler payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction no .
num no .
num num num num minimum num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation mortar sand payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num sampling and testing .
the department will sample and test according to the following methods when applicable absorption fine aggregate km num chemical analysis km num coal and lignite km num dry sieve analysis aashto t num friable particles aashto t num insoluble content fine aggregate astm d num mortar strength aashto t num organic impurities aashto t num plastic limit and plasticity index aashto t num sampling aashto t num sand equivalent aashto t num sieve analysis of mineral filler aashto t num gradation sand for epoxy seal coat payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation pipe bedding payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation underdrains embankment drainage blanket and natural sand for drainage and backfill payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num sodium sulfate soundness km num uncompacted voids method a aashto t num wet sieve analysis km num or aashto t num procedure bt num num section num coarse aggregates num general .
coarse aggregates include but at the discretion of the engineer are not limited to crushed stone and crushed or uncrushed gravel .
includes lightweight aggregates or slag where permitted .
the departments list of approved materials includes the aggregate source list the list of class a and class b polishresistant aggregate sources and the concrete aggregate restriction list .
num approval .
provide coarse aggregates from sources included on the aggregate source list meeting the description and requirements specified in this section .
the department will consider a source for inclusion on the aggregate source list when the aggregate producer complies with km num and provides the following num a quality control plan .
num a satisfactory laboratory facility with all necessary testing equipment .
num a qualified aggregate technician to perform the required testing .
obtain the departments approval before furnishing aggregate from sources not on the aggregate source list .
the department will sample the aggregate during stockpiling and test according to the departments manual of field testing and sampling practices .
the department will reject aggregate when excessive variation of gradation or physical properties cause unworkable mixtures mixture control problems or non conformance to the finished product or mixture requirements .
coarse aggregates are subject to preliminary source approval .
num general requirements .
provide coarse aggregates that are free of objectionable amounts of clay lumps dirt coatings and foreign material .
the department will reject contaminated aggregate when the engineer deems it could be detrimental to the finished product .
num soundness and shale .
conform to the following shale soundness aggregate use permittednum requirement maximum maximum aggregate for bridge decks bridge deck overlays portland cement concrete mixtures and bridge barrier walls num num all other concrete classes and uses num num aggregate for polish resistant surfaces and asphalt asphalt mixtures surface under ogfc limestone and dolomite num num other aggregate types num num all other asphalt mixtures num num sizes no .
num or num when used for aggregate other uses surfacing traffic bound base and maintenance num num riprap and channel lining num num num dga csb num num all other uses num num num the department will determine shale quantity by visual estimation for riprap and channel lining and according to km num for all other aggregate .
num physical properties .
conform to the following wear except slag and sandstone num maximum wear sandstone num maximum wear slag num maximum friable particles num maximum unit weight slag num lbsftnum minimum num gradation .
where the department specifies or permits designated sizes of coarse aggregates provide aggregates meeting the grading limits indicated for the various sizes listed in the sizes of coarse aggregates table .
when the contract does not specify sizes or combinations of aggregate for various types of construction furnish aggregate according to the aggregate size use table .
the department will allow blending of same sourcesame type aggregate to achieve designated sizes when precise procedures are used such as cold feeds belts weigh hoppers or equivalent .
num erodible or unstable material .
treat as applicable .
the department considers size no .
num or larger aggregate except crushed or uncrushed gravel non erodible .
the department considers the following materials to be erodible or unstable num friable sandstone .
the engineer determines when sandstone is friable or nonfriable .
num crushed or uncrushed gravel any size .
num crushed coarse aggregate smaller than size no .
num .
num any material with num percent or more passing the no .
num sieve .
num concrete .
provide crushed stone or crushed or uncrushed gravel .
the department will allow any combination of crushed stone crushed or uncrushed gravel when the combination is achieved in the concrete plant weigh hopper .
conform to the following max .
pct .
by wt friable particles num .
finer than no .
num num coal and lignite num lightweight particles gravel num sp .
gr .
less than num lightweight particles limestone num sp .
gr .
less than num the department will waive the requirements for gradation and finer than no .
num for concrete pipe .
do not use aggregate produced from an individual production lift until the department obtains the finished product results from the concrete beam expansion test method km num .
if beam expansion is greater than num percent at num months the department will reject the production lift for use in concrete applications .
the department will not require tests for concrete beam expansion from an individual production lift if the individual ledges are accessible for hand sampling and the lift is acceptable based on petrographic examination of the hand samples .
the department num will accept a production lift if no more than num percent of the total lift footage is considered potentially alkali carbonate reactive upon petrographic inspection .
num jpc base jpc pavement jpc shoulders concrete for bridge decks and precast products .
the department will subject coarse aggregates that are to be used in jpc base jpc pavement jpc shoulders bridge decks concrete overlays and precast products to freezethaw testing according to km num .
the department will allow sources having expansions of num percent or less and a minimum of num percent durability factor to supply any size coarse aggregate listed in the aggregate size use table providing that size or a larger size has tested satisfactorily .
when sources have expansions of more than num percent or a durability factor of less than num percent the department will num reject the material .
num limit to the permitted sizes determined from acceptable freezethaw testing .
num allow the submittal of a proposal to the engineer for production of acceptable coarse aggregate .
the department will require acceptable freezethaw test results before approving any proposal .
provide a signed certification from the aggregate producer for the approved freeze thaw coarse aggregate stating that the aggregate is supplied from the approved parent material as found on the departments list of approved materials and concrete aggregate restriction list .
num lightweight aggregate .
when the department allows lightweight aggregate conform to the following num dry loose unit weight .
as appropriate or as specified aashto m num table num .
num gradation by weight .
provide size specified aashto m num table num .
num wear .
num percent maximum .
num soundness .
num percent loss maximum .
num friable particles .
num percent maximum .
num deleterious particles .
num percent maximum .
num freezethaw resistance .
num percent minimum durability factor and num percent maximum length change according to km num .
num provide creep shrinkage and tensile splitting strength test data made on concrete produced from the lightweight aggregate when the engineer requests .
num if lightweight aggregate from an unapproved source is proposed for use notify the engineer of the aggregate source and proposed concrete mix design at least num weeks before any lightweight aggregate concrete is placed so the department may subject the lightweight aggregate to testing as outlined above plus any additional testing as deemed necessary and indicated in aashto m num .
at the departments option suitable documentation of such testing by an independent testing laboratory may be accepted .
num asphalt mixtures and seals .
provide crushed stone crushed gravel or blast furnace slag .
the department will allow any combination of crushed stone crushed gravel or blast furnace slag when the combination is achieved using cold feeds at the asphalt plant .
the engineer may allow other coarse aggregates .
num absorption .
provide aggregates having a water absorption of no more than num percent for each size and type .
when blast furnace slag is used provide total combined aggregates having a water absorption of no more than num percent .
num num crushed particles .
applies to the total combined aggregates retained on a no .
num sieve including the material from the fine aggregate .
conform to the following a superpave mixtures .
minimum percent crushed requirements as listed in the superpave coarse aggregate consensus property requirements table .
b opengraded friction courses .
minimum num percent one or more crushed faces and num percent num or more crushed faces .
c seal coats .
minimum num percent one or more crushed faces .
d other mixtures .
unless otherwise specified minimum num percent one or more crushed faces .
superpave coarse aggregate consensus property requirements coarse aggregate angularity flat and percent elongatednum esal design esals minimum depth from surface percent class millions num mm num mm maximum crushed faces crushed faces num num num num num num num num num num num to num num num num num num to num num num num num num num num num num num num num num criterion based on a num maximumtominimum ratio .
num flat and elongated .
provide aggregates for superpave mixtures not exceeding the flat and elongated maximum as listed in the superpave coarse aggregate consensus property requirements table .
num finer than no .
num seals .
provide coarse aggregates having no more than num percent passing the no .
num sieve .
num polishresistant aggregate .
provide coarse aggregates required for polishresistant applications from a class a or class b polishresistant aggregate source as applicable based on mixture designation of aggregate type .
provide a signed certification from the aggregate producer for the manufactured polishresistant coarse aggregate stating that the aggregate is supplied from the approved parent material as found on the departments list of approved materials polishresistant aggregate source list and guidelines on the division of materials webpage .
num dense graded aggregate dga and crushed stone base csb .
provide crushed stone having a sand equivalent value of num or greater with mineral filler as needed to meet gradation requirements .
the department may waive the sand equivalent requirement when the portion passing the no .
num sieve has a plasticity index of num or less according to aashto t num .
num free draining bedding and backfill .
provide crushed stone or crushed or uncrushed gravel .
the department will allow a shale content of num percent providing the combined shale friable particles and minus no .
num content does not exceed num percent .
conform to the following gradation num sieve size num num inch num percent passing no .
num num num coarse aggregates for underdrains .
furnish crushed or uncrushed aggregate including pea gravel meeting the quality requirements of section num with the following exception the department will allow a shale content of num percent providing the combined shale friable particles and minus no .
num content does not exceed num percent .
conform to the following gradation sieve size num num inch num percent passing no .
num num no .
num num num coarse aggregate for rock drainage blanket .
provide crushed or uncrushed aggregate including pea gravel meeting the quality requirements of this section with the following additional requirement ensure the minus no .
num content does not exceed num percent .
when the material includes a significant amount of individual fragments greater than num num inches the engineer may accept the minus no .
num portion based on visual inspection .
conform to the following gradation sieve size num inch num percent passing no .
num num num granular embankment .
provide granular material up to numinch maximum size with a maximum shale content of num percent .
use either num engineer approved shot limestone or sandstone from roadway excavation borrow excavation or another approved source .
num crushed stone crushed or uncrushed gravel or crushed or natural sand meeting general requirements of section num and this section with a minus no .
num content not exceeding num percent .
num structure granular backfill .
provide crushed or uncrushed aggregate meeting the quality requirements of this section .
when the material includes a significant amount of individual fragments greater than num num inches the engineer may visually accept the minus no .
num portion .
conform to the following gradation sieve size num inch num percent passing no .
num num no .
num num num reinforced fill material .
obtain the engineers approval for material quality before use .
ensure the material is reasonably free of shale or other deleterious material .
conform to the following a gradation .
conform to subsection num .
b resistivity .
greater than num ohmcm applicable only when granular fill has more than num percent passing the no .
num sieve .
c ph .
between num .
d chlorides .
less than num parts per million .
num e sulfates .
less than num parts per million .
f angle of internal friction .
greater than or equal to num degrees .
when providing gapgraded materials single size aggregates uncrushed gravel or blends including uncrushed gravel furnish a test report showing the num degree minimum internal friction angle is met .
test sample according to aashto t num compacted to num percent of aashto t num methods c or d at optimum moisture content .
when such materials are approved the engineer will perform sampling and testing on the project as necessary to assure that the material furnished is closely similar to that approved .
num slope protection and channel lining .
num cyclopean stone riprap andor channel lining class iii .
provide material meeting the general requirements of section num .
ensure that num percent passes through a square opening of num inches by num inches and no more than num percent passes through square openings of num inches by num inches .
the department may allow stones of smaller sizes for filling voids in the upper surface and dressing to the proper slope .
num crushed aggregate slope protection .
provide aggregate meeting the general requirements of section num .
conform to the following gradation coarse aggregate sizes no .
num and no .
num conform to this requirement sieve size num inch num percent passing num num inch num num num inch num num channel lining class ia .
provide crushed stone meeting the general requirements of this section .
use a crusher grizzly or sieve with openings to produce a grading that num percent passes the num inch sieve no more than num percent of the finished product passes through square openings num num by num num inches .
num channel lining class ii .
provide crushed stone meeting the general requirements of this section .
use a crusher grizzly or sieve with openings to produce a grading that num percent passes the numinch sieve and no more than num percent of the finished product passes through square openings num by num inches .
num channel lining class iv .
provide material excavated and prepared according to section num .
num stone for gabions .
provide aggregate meeting the general requirements of this section and be of such gradation that num percent passes through a square opening of num by num inches and num percent is retained on a num inch sieve .
num aggregate surfacing trafficbound base and maintenance .
when providing size no .
num or num coarse aggregate for aggregate surfacing shoulders entrances mailbox turn outs or similar items traffic bound base and maintenance operations furnish aggregate meeting the grading requirements in sizes of coarse aggregates table with no more than num percent finer than a no .
num sieve .
when providing dga for aggregate surfacing traffic bound base and maintenance operations conform to the grading requirement in sizes of coarse aggregates table .
num gradation acceptance of nonspecification coarse aggregate .
it is intended that all aggregate purchased for department work meet the requirements of this section .
when reasonably acceptable work has been produced using num the aggregate in question the department may accept the work according to subsection num .
when the engineer determines that the aggregate not conforming to gradation requirements may be left in place the department will accept the aggregate at a reduction in the contract unit bid price for the work containing the aggregate according to the following procedures .
the department will not consider these procedures a means to continue accepting nonspecification aggregates .
the department will base the reduction on the invoice price for the aggregate at the source .
when satisfactory invoices are not furnished the department will use current bin prices for that source on file with the cabinets division of purchases .
the maximum deduction for nonspecification material which is allowed to remain in place is num percent .
when aggregate fails to conform to gradation on more than one sieve the department will apply the largest payment reduction .
the department will define a lot based on the smallest definable quantity of material represented by acceptance test results either passing results or failing results or both .
normally the department will average all test results for the lot to determine the test result for payment according to the deduction tables .
however when test results are not reasonably uniform the department will not average the high and low test results within a lot .
the department will assign each test result to equal quantities in new smaller lots in proportion to the number of tests representing the original lot .
when daily tests are performed the lot will be a days production unless the department defines a smaller lot .
when num consecutive lots contain nonspecification material discontinue the use of the aggregate until the department makes a decision concerning the overall acceptability of the aggregate from that source .
the department will not impose a reduction in payment for quantities less than num tons unless the engineer deems it necessary .
gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch num num inch num num inch num num inch num inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch num num inch num inch num num inch num inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch num inch num inch num inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num num inch num inch num num inch num inch num inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num num inch num inch num inch num inch no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch num num inch num inch num inch num inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch num num inch num inch num inch no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num num inch num inch num inch num inch num inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment reduction sieve sizepercent passing num num inch num inch num inch no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num num inch num inch num inch no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch num inch num inch no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch num inch num inch no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch num inch num inch no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch num inch num inch no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch num inch no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
numm payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch num inch no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation size no .
num payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation dense graded aggregate payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch num inch num inch no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation crushed stone base payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num num inch num num inch num inch num inch no .
num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation free draining bedding and backfill payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num num inch no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation coarse aggregates for underdrains payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num num inch no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation coarse aggregate for rock drainage blanket payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gradation crushed aggregate slope protection payment sieve sizepercent passing reduction num inch num num inch num num inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num sizes of coarse aggregates sieve amounts finer than each laboratory sieve square openings percentage by weight aggregate size nominal num maximum aggregate size num inch num num inch num inch num num inch num inch num num inch num inch num inch num inch num inch no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num num num  inch num num num num num num num  inch num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num  inch num num num num num num num  inch num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num num inch num num num num num num inch num num num num num num num num inch num num num num num numm num inch num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num dense graded aggregate num num inch num num num num num num crushed stone base num num  inch num num num num num num num num gradation performed by wet sieve km num or aashto t numt num .
num sizes shown for convenience and are not to be considered as coarse aggregates .
num nominal maximum size is the largest sieve on the gradation table for an aggregate size on which any material may be retained note the department will allow blending of same sourcesame type aggregate when precise procedures are used such as cold feed belt or equivalent and combining of sizes or types of aggregate using the weigh hopper at concrete plants or controlled feed belts at the pugmill to obtain designated sizes .
num .
num sampling and testing .
the department will sample and test coarse aggregates at locations and frequencies that the engineer determines .
the department will sample and test according to the following methods when applicable absorption coarse aggregate aashto t num angle of internal friction aashto tnum and t num methods c or d chlorides calif .
dot num clay lumps and friable particles aashto t num coal and lignite km num concrete beam expansion test km num dry sieve analysis aashto t num finer than no .
num km num or aashto t num procedure b flat and elongated particles astm d num by mass freezethaw km num insoluble residue km num lightweight particles aashto t num percent crushed particles astm d num by mass ph calif .
dot num plastic limit and plasticity index aashto t num resistivity calif .
dot num sampling aashto t num sand equivalent aashto t num shale km num sodium sulfate soundness num cycles km num sulfates calif .
dot num unit weight aashto t num wear aashto t num wet sieve analysis km num or aashto t num procedure btnum aggregate size use type of construction sizes to be used asphalt mixtures see subsection num trafficbound base num num num or dga jpc base and class p concrete num num num num num or numm with fine aggregate as specified in section num .
cement concrete structures and incidental construction num num num num num numm for classes a aa d d modified mnum mnum and b num num also for class b .
num or numm for waterproofing overlays .
num num num num numm for all other overlays and classes aaa and a modified with fine aggregate as specified in section num .
num section num asphalt materials num decription .
the asphalt materials section covers performancegraded pg binders emulsified asphalts cutback emulsions and liquid asphalt for coldpatching mixtures .
provide the specified grade of material conforming to the requirements in this section from suppliers listed in the departments list of approved materials .
inclusion on the list of approved suppliers is obtained by following the guidelines of the approved supplier certification asc program contained in kentucky method km num by following the guidelines of the emulsified asphalt supplier certification easc program contained in km num or by pretesting and approval .
the department may approve other types of asphalt materials provided they conform to the requirements of the type specified in the contract .
num sampling .
the department will sample all asphalt materials according to km num .
num pg binders .
this subsection covers the requirements and pay schedules for pg binders .
num general requirements .
provide pg binders conforming to aashto m num except the intermediate dynamic shear will be tested at num c for all material .
additionally the material must have a minimum solubility of num percent when tested according to aashto t num and pg num must exhibit a minimum elastic recovery of num percent when tested according to aashto t num .
num if allowed to remain in place the department will review materials performing in this range on a projectbyproject basis to determine if removal of the material is warranted .
num results are for certification purposes only .
num age sample according to aashto t num and then condition and test the sample at num num f. elongate the sample to num cm .
elongation recovery numx x num where x is the final reading in cm after bringing the two severed ends of the specimen back together .
pg binder requirements and price adjustment schedule test specification num pay num pay num pay num pay num paynum original binder dynamic shear gsin num kpa min .
num num num num num viscosity num num pas rtfo residue mass loss num max .
num num num num num dynamic shear gsin num kpa min .
num num num num num elastic recovery num aashto t num num min .
num num num num num pav aging bbr creep stiffness num mpa max .
num num num num num mvalue num min .
num num num num num dynamic shear gsin num kpa max .
num num num num num num num handling requirements .
submit written instructions to the division of materials for handling requirements .
submit the suppliers written instructions and requirements for the proper use and handling of the asphalt binder to the engineer .
include tank requirements construction equipment requirements and storage and mixing temperature requirements .
submit material test data and a certification of conformance prior to shipping material .
num modification .
use only styrenebutadiene sb or styrenebutadiene styrene sbs modifiers .
all binders are to be homogeneous blends .
include a statement of the type of modification with all samples submitted to the division of materials for testing and certification .
circulate or agitate the modified asphalt binders in the storage tank as specified in the suppliers handling procedures .
obtain the engineers approval for the means of circulation .
do not use inline blending at the asphalt plant .
num emulsified asphalts .
this subsection covers emulsified asphalts of the following grades rsnum ssnum ssnumh aenum hfrsnum hfmsnum num general requirements .
furnish emulsified asphalts that are homogeneous showing no separation of asphalt during normal handling or storage .
the engineer will reject emulsified asphalt that has been frozen .
num specific requirements for grades rsnum ssnum ssnumh hfrsnum hfmsnum .
conform to aashto m num with the following exceptions and requirements of the emulsified asphalt requirements and price adjustment schedule except the cementmixing test is not required .
num testing of grades rsnum ssnum ssnumh hfrsnum and hfmsnum .
perform tests according to aashto t num .
use tyrone formation limestone as the reference aggregate for the coating test .
num emulsified asphalt requirements and price adjustment schedule test grade specification num pay num pay num pay num pay num pay viscosity num num num num saybolt furol ssnum ssnumh num num num num num num num f s hfmsnum num num num num num num aenum num num num num num num viscosity rsnum num num num num saybolt furol hfrsnum num num num num num num num f s residue by ssnum ssnumh num num num num num num distillation hfmsnum num num num num num num hfrsnum rsnum num num num num num num aenum num num num num num num oil distillates aenum num num num num num num demulsibility rsnum hfrsnum num num num num num num residue num num num num penetration ssnumh num num num num num num ssnum hfmsnum num num num num rsnum hfrsnum num num num num num num float test aenum hfrsnum num num num num num num num f s hfmsnum coating test aenum hfmsnum num num num num num num sieve rsnum hfrsnum ssnum ssnumh num num num num num num ductility cm ssnum ssnumh num f rsnum hfmsnum num num num num num num hfrsnum storage ssnum ssnumh stability num rsnum hfrsnum num aenum solubility in ssnum ssnumh trichloro rsnum aenum num ethylene num hfrsnum num results are for certification purposes only .
num specific requirements for grade aenum .
conform to the emulsified asphalt requirements schedule .
num testing of grade aenum .
perform tests according to aashto t num .
num polymer asphalt emulsions crsnump .
these materials are designed to be used in seal coats and stressabsorbing membrane interlayers sami .
num make the polymer modification to the base asphalt before the emulsification process .
ensure that polymermodified asphalt emulsions conform to aashto m num and the following polymer asphalt emulsion crsnump requirements and price adjustment schedule .
polymer asphalt emulsion crsnump requirements and price adjustment schedule testnum specification num pay num pay num pay num pay num pay viscosity num f sfs num num num num num num num num num num evaporation residue num num num num num num sieve num num num num num num residue penetration num f num num num num num num num num num num residue ductility num f cm num num num num num num recovery num f num num num num num num num num num num aashto t num demulsibility num num num num num num particle charge positive num test according to aashto t num except where noted .
num condition the sample and test the sample at num num f. elongate the sample to num cm .
elongation recovery numx x num where x is the final reading in cm after bringing the two severed ends of the specimen back together .
num asphalt coating and paving for metal pipe pipe arches and arches .
these requirements apply to all corrugated metal pipe pipe arches and arches that are required to be asphaltcoated or coated and paved except field assembled structural plate pipe and pipe arches as specified in section num .
num asphalt coating material .
furnish asphalt coating material conforming to aashto m num and in addition the following physical properties num penetration at num f aashto t num num minimum at num g for num seconds .
num penetration at num f aashto t num num to num at num g for num seconds .
num flash point aashto t num num f minimum .
num specific gravity aashto t num num minimum .
num softening point aashto t num num f. num perform the loss of heating test in a standard forceddraft oven .
the department will obtain random samples of the asphalt coating material for analysis .
the department will reject all material not conforming to aashto m num and this subsection .
num liquid asphalt for coldpatching mixtures .
ensure that the num liquid asphalt material furnished under this subsection provides satisfactory coating properties workability and adherence characteristics for patching during cold and damp weather in either asphalt or concrete pavement surfaces .
furnish patching mixtures made with liquid asphalt or kpnum that is capable of being stored for at least num months before being used and that is readily workable at all ambient temperatures above num f. with each shipment of material provide test results certifying that the materials furnished conform to the following kpnum requirements table .
additionally take a one gallon sample from each transport as specified in the materials field sampling and testing manual from the departments division of materials .
ship the sample to the division of materials by any expedient means of transport .
obtain the division of materials approval before using the liquid asphalt .
kpnum requirements property test method value kinematic viscosity num f cst astm d num num to num flash point tag open cup f astm d num num min .
percentage of water astm d num num max .
distillation to num f astm d num see values below temperature f volume of total distillate minimummaximum volume of original sample minimummaximum to num num num to num num num to num num num residue from distillation num f volume by difference num tests on residue from distillation absolute viscosity num f poises astm d num num to num modified penetration with conenum astm d num num min .
ductility num f num cmminute astm d num num min .
solubility in trichloroethylene astm d num num min .
num ensure the cone conforms to astm d num except that the interior construction may be modified as necessary .
ensure the total moving weight of the cone and attachments is num num g. num field tolerances .
the department according to established criteria allows tolerance limits to be applied to field samples .
these limits are incorporated into the price adjustment schedules .
these tolerances are for field samples only and will not apply to certification samples .
num acceptance .
the department will normally perform field quality acceptance testing on samples obtained at the project site or contractors storage facility .
when required by the department the asphalt supplier shall send at his expense representative samples of materials stored at the source terminal or refinery to the departments division of materials .
when the department accepts asphalt materials by pretesting and certification provide two copies of the billofladingload ticket with each hauling unit .
the billof ladingload ticket will contain the materials lot number a statement of the quantity of materials within each load by weight and volume and other information as required by km num or km num .
the contractor and departments representative will each receive copies at the point of delivery .
also forward a copy of the billofladingload ticket directly to the departments division of materials as soon as practical following shipments .
do not use asphalt materials that are not properly covered by certification or otherwise tested and approved by the department .
when asphalt materials not of the num specified grade not appropriately certified or not conforming to the applicable requirements when tested become incorporated into projects the engineer will according to section num evaluate the work affected and require adjustment of pay quantities or corrective work as deemed appropriate .
num acceptance of nonspecification asphalt materials .
furnish asphalt materials purchased for department work conforming to the requirements of this section .
the department will apply the following procedures only when reasonably acceptable work has been produced using the material in question as provided in subsection num .
when the use of nonspecification material results in an inferior or unsatisfactory product remove and replace the material at no expense to the department or at the vendors expense when materials are purchased directly by the cabinet .
the department may accept at a reduced contract price asphalt materials not of the specified grade not appropriately certified or not conforming to the applicable requirements when checktested after an evaluation of the work .
however the department will not consider these procedures as a means to continue accepting non specification material .
the department will determine the price adjustment based on the delivered cost of the material .
if the liquid asphalt has been incorporated into the project as an asphalt mixture the deduction will be applied to the posted price of asphalt item .
when the material is not of the specified grade or not appropriately certified the department may deduct the full cost of the material .
when the material fails to conform to the applicable requirements the department will normally make deductions according to the pay schedules in this section .
as provided in subsection num the department has established field tolerances for determining the acceptability of failing material at no price deduction .
the department will determine the frequency of checksampling and testing on pretested material .
the department will make deductions for failing test results based on the average of two check samples representing the material in question .
when a sample fails on two or more tests the department may add the deductions but the total deduction will not exceed num percent .
num time limitation on approvals .
the department will test materials in storage at the terminal as deemed necessary .
additionally the department will require the retesting and reapproval of materials not incorporated into the work within one month num months for pg binders of the shipment date .
num section num joint materials num description .
this section covers joint sealers and joint fillers of various types .
the department may approve other types of joint materials provided they conform to the requirements of the type specified in the contract .
num sampling .
the department will sample all materials according to the materials field sampling and testing manual from the departments division of materials .
num joint sealers .
num hotpoured elastic joint sealers .
furnish hotpoured elastic joint sealers that meet or exceed the requirements of astm d num type ii and the following table .
provide a certification of conformance with each lot of sealer .
hotpoured elastic joint sealer requirments and price adjustment schedule test specification num pay num pay num pay num pay num pay cone penetration num max .
num num num num num softening point c num min .
num num num num num resilience num min .
num num num num num bond nonimmersed pass num preformed compression joint sealers with lubricant .
furnish preformed compression joint sealers of approved shapes and sizes for the applicable joints to be sealed .
furnish sealers and lubricant that conform to the following requirements as applicable .
a sealers .
furnish sealers that conform to astm d num with the following exceptions and additions num the departments division of materials and division of bridge design will approve the configuration of compression joint sealers .
approved sealers will be placed on the departments list of approved materials .
obtain the departments approval for sealers not on the list of approved materials before shipping to the project .
num furnish sealers designed to be substantially solid at closure when fully compressed .
closure of a sealer should occur at num to num percent of its original width .
num ensure that the manufacturer provides sealers accurately marked at numinch intervals to determine elongation after installation .
num ensure that sealers are designed so that when compressed the center portion of the top surfaces will not protrude upward above the original elevation of the sealer .
num the department will subject sealers to a compressiondeflection test according to km num .
ensure that the sealer displays a minimum force per unit area of num psi at numpercent deflection and a maximum force per unit area of num psi at numpercent deflection .
num ensure that the sealers used in jpc pavement comply with the applicable standard drawings .
num num ensure that the uncompressed depth of all sealers is at least equal to the uncompressed sealer width unless the design of the sealer prevents twisting or misalignment of the sealer during or after installation .
num ensure each lot number is accompanied by a certification stating conformance with this subsection .
b lubricant .
as recommended by the sealer manufacturer provide lubricant that is compatible with the sealer concrete and steel .
ensure conformance to astm d num when utilizing lubricant with sealers on concrete pavements .
num preformed expansion joint strip seals with lubricant adhesive .
furnish preformed expansion joint strip sealers of approved design for the applicable joints to be sealed .
furnish sealers and lubricant adhesives that conform to the following requirements as applicable .
a sealers .
furnish sealers that conform to astm d num with the following exceptions and additions num the departments division of materials and division of bridge design will approve the design of the expansion joint strip sealers .
approved sealers will be placed on the departments list of approved materials .
obtain the departments approval for sealers not on the list of approved materials before shipping to the project .
num ensure that the manufacturer provides sealers accurately marked at numinch intervals to determine elongation after installation .
num ensure that the sizes of sealers used in jpc pavement comply with the applicable standard drawings .
num ensure each lot number is accompanied by a certification stating conformance with this subsection .
b lubricant .
as recommended by the sealer manufacturer provide lubricant that is compatible with the sealer concrete and steel .
ensure conformance to astm d num when working with concrete pavements .
num joint sealer for rigid pipe .
a asphalt mastic .
furnish asphalt mastic joint sealing material consisting of a smooth uniform mixture of asphalt material solvent and filler .
use filler that consists essentially of cellulose fiber .
ensure that the mixture is applicable by means of a trowel or caulking gun without pulling or drawing and does not sag or flow when applied to metal concrete or vitrified clay surfaces .
furnish a compound capable of withstanding freezing and not exhibiting any tendency to separate or otherwise deteriorate while in storage .
ensure each lot number is accompanied by a certification stating conformance with this subsection .
when tested according to km num ensure that the compound sets to a tough plastic coating and does not shrink crack or loosen from the surface .
in addition furnish material conforming to the following table num asphalt mastic requirements and price adjustment schedule test test method specification num pay num pay num pay num pay num paynum grease cone astm num num num num penetration d num num num num num num num unworked num g weight per aashto num min .
num min .
num num num num gallon lbs t num nonvolatile km num num min .
num min .
num num num num ash aashto num num num num num num t num num num num num num if allowed to remain in place the department will review materials in this range on a projectbyproject basis to determine if removal of the material is warranted .
b butyl rubber sealants .
furnish butyl rubber sealants conforming to the requirements in astm cnum section num .
ensure each lot number is accompanied by a certification of conformance .
butyl rubber sealant requirements and price adjustment schedule test test method specification num pay num pay num pay num pay num paynum cone penetration astm num num num num num f d num num num num num num num cone penetration astm num f d num num num num num num num specific gravity aashto num num num min .
num num num num num f t num num max .
num num num num ductility num f aashto tnum num min .
num min .
num num num num volatile matter aashto t num num max .
num max .
num num num num ash aashto tnum num min .
num min .
num num num num bitumen astm d num num min .
num min .
num num num num flash point f astm d num num min .
num min .
num num num num num if allowed to remain in place the department will review materials in this range on a projectbyproject basis to determine if removal of the material is warranted .
c rubber gaskets .
furnish rubber gaskets conforming to the requirements in astm c num class c. ensure each lot number is accompanied by a certification of conformance .
num rubber gasket requirements and price adjustment schedule test test method specification num pay num pay num pay num pay num paynum tensile strength psi astm d num num min .
num min .
num num num num elongation astm d num num min .
num min .
num num num num hardness shore a astm num num num num d num num num num num num num oven aged tensile reduction astm d num num max .
num max .
num num num num oven aged elongation reduction astm d num num max .
num max .
num num num num compression set astm dnum num max .
num max .
num num num num water absportion astm d num num max .
num max .
num num num num num if allowed to remain in place the department will review materials in this range on a projectbyproject basis to determine if removal of the material is warranted .
num silicone rubber sealants .
provide material conforming to the following requirements and tables .
a nonsag and selfleveling silicone sealant .
furnish sealant in a onepart silicone formulation which does not require a primer for bonding to concrete .
use a compound that is compatible with the surface to which it is applied .
do not use acidcure sealants on concrete .
apply the sealant with a pressure applicator that forces it into the joint .
ensure selfleveling silicone which is suitable for joints of oneinch width or less exhibits a smooth level surface with no indication of bubbling .
ensure each lot number is accompanied by a certification stating conformance to this subsection .
provide material that conforms to astm d num with the following exceptions and additions num nonsag tensile stress and elongation samples will be cured for num days .
num nonsag durometer hardness will be determined at num num f. num the nonsag tackfree time requirement is num num minutes .
num the selfleveling relative tackfree time according to astm c num will be a maximum of num minutes .
b rapidcure silicone sealant .
use sealant that is num furnished as a twopart rapidcure coldapplied ultralowmodulus selfleveling numpercent silicone rubber sealant num flexible over a wide temperature range and num suitable for use in concretetoconcrete concretetosteel and steeltosteel joints .
provide material meeting the requirements of the following table .
ensure each lot number is accompanied by a certification stating conformance with this subsection .
c accessory items .
use a closedcell polyethylene foam backup rod that is compatible with the sealant .
ensure no bond or reaction occurs between the backup rod and sealant .
d approvals .
ensure that each lot of sealant is delivered in containers plainly marked with the manufacturers name or trademark and a lot number .
ensure num that the manufacturer furnishes certified test results of each lot of joint sealant shipped to each project .
the department does not require tests for ozone and uv resistance or movement capability and adhesion on every lot but ensure that every lot is accompanied by certified results of the latest tests performed .
ensure that the manufacturer indicates the date of shipment on each lot .
do not use material after six months from the date of shipment from the manufacturer without first having the material sampled and tested .
the department will take routine check samples of silicone sealant during application and test it to verify the materials acceptability .
provide equipment suitable for obtaining representative check samples from the silicone sealant at a frequency determined by the materials field sampling and testing manual from the departments division of materials .
the engineer may accept the foam backup rod on the project by visual inspection .
use rapidcure silicone sealant conforming to the following table num allow a cure time of num hours at num f and num relative humidity .
num joint fillers .
num general .
furnish preformed fillers in a single piece for the full depth and width required for the joint unless otherwise authorized .
when the engineer authorizes the use of more than one piece for a joint fasten the abutting ends securely and hold them accurately to shape .
num preformed sponge rubber and cork expansion joint fillers .
furnish preformed sponge rubber and cork joint fillers that conform to aashto m num for type i sponge rubber type ii cork or type iii selfexpanding cork as specified .
ensure each lot number is accompanied by a certification of conformance .
num preformed asphalt expansion joint fillers .
furnish preformed asphalt joint fillers that conform to aashto m num .
ensure each lot number is accompanied by a certification of conformance .
num ensure that the asphalt filler is free from water and does not foam when heated to the flash point .
ensure each lot number is accompanied by a certification of conformance .
num field tolerances .
the department according to established criteria will allow tolerance limits to be applied to field samples .
these limits are incorporated into the rapidcure silicone joint sealant requirements test test method specification extrusion rate gminute astm c num num num nonvolatile content astm c num num min .
relative tackfree time minutes astm c num num max .
elongation num astm d num num min .
tensile stress num elongation psinum astm d num num num tensile adhesion astm d num num min .
bond num cycles at numand num astm c num no failure accelerated weathering astm c num no change num price adjustment schedules .
these tolerances are for field samples only and will not apply to certification samples .
num acceptance .
the department will normally perform field quality acceptance testing on samples obtained at the project site or contractors storage facility .
when required by the department the sealer supplier shall send at his expense representative samples of materials stored at the source to the departments division of materials .
when the department accepts materials by pretesting and certification provide two copies of the billofladingload ticket with each delivered unit .
the billofladingload ticket at a minimum will contain the materials lot number and a statement of the quantity of materials within each load .
in addition materials pretested by the department will include the assigned kmims identification number in the shipment documentation .
the contractor and departments representative will each receive copies at the point of delivery .
do not use materials that are not properly covered by certification or otherwise tested and approved by the department .
when materials not appropriately certified or not conforming to requirements when tested become incorporated into projects the engineer will according to section num evaluate the work affected and require adjustment of pay quantities or corrective work as deemed appropriate .
num acceptance of nonspecification joint materials .
furnish joint materials purchased for department work conforming to the requirements of this section .
the department will apply the following procedures only when reasonably acceptable work has been produced using the material in question as provided in subsection num .
when the use of nonspecification material results in an inferior or unsatisfactory product remove and replace the material at no expense to the department or at the vendors expense when materials are purchased directly by the cabinet .
the department may accept at a reduced contract price joint materials not appropriately certified or not conforming to the applicable requirements when check tested after an evaluation of the work .
however the department will not consider these procedures as a means to continue accepting nonspecification material .
the department will determine the price adjustment based on the delivered cost of the material .
when the material is not appropriately certified the department may deduct the full cost of the material .
when the material fails to conform to the applicable requirements the department will normally make deductions according to the pay schedules included in this section .
as provided in subsection num the department has established field tolerances for determining the acceptability of failing material at no price deduction .
the department will determine the frequency of checksampling and testing on pretested material .
the department will make deductions for failing test results based on the average of two check samples representing the material in question .
when a sample fails on two or more tests the department may add the deductions but the total deduction will not exceed num percent .
num nonsag and selfleveling silicone sealant requirements and price adjustment schedule test specification num pay num pay num pay num pay num pay tackfree time minutes nonsag num num num num num num num num num num num selfleveling num max .
num num num num num relative tackfree time minutesnum num max .
num num num num num durometer hardness num num num num num shore anum num num num num num num tensile stress num elongation numday cure psi num max .
num num num num num elongation numday cure num min .
num num num num num slump inchesnum num max .
num num num num num nonvolatile content num min .
num num num num num flownum no flow extrusion rate inchesnumminutenum num accelerated weatheringnum no change bondnum no failure shelf life num months numfor selfleveling silicone only .
numseven day cure for nonsag and twentyone day cure for selfleveling material .
numfor nonsag silicone only .
numfor certification purposes only .
num num time limitation on approvals .
the department will test materials in storage at the contractors site as deemed necessary .
additionally the department will require the retesting and reapproval of materials not incorporated into the work according to the time limitations specified in the materials field sampling and testing manual from the departments division of materials .
num section num waterproofing materials num description .
this section covers materials for use in waterproofing .
the department may approve other types of waterproofing materials provided they conform to the requirements of the type contract specifies .
num sampling .
the department will sample all materials according to the materials field sampling and testing manual from the departments division of materials .
num asphalt mop coat .
furnish material that conforms to astm d num as specified in the asphalt mop coat requirements and price adjustment schedule .
use type i ii or iii material as the contract specifies .
num asphalt primer .
furnish material that conforms to astm d num and ensure the supplier provides certification of conformance .
num fiberglass waterproofing membrane .
furnish a fiberglass waterproofing membrane that is a onestep waterproofing and reflectivecrack suppression system for bridge decks .
the onestep system is comprised of a high strength fiberglass reinforced factory coating with an asphalt polymer and a strongly bonding contact adhesive on one side that bonds to the surface being treated .
ensure the supplier provides certification that the fiberglass waterproofing membrane conforms to the following table num layered fiberreinforced waterproofing membrane .
furnish a plastic film and meshreinforced mastic membrane for sealing open expansion joints concrete expansion joints cracked culverts or for waterproofing in backfill situations .
ensure the supplier provides certification that this material conforms to astm c num type ii excluding the steel straps .
num polypropylene waterproofing membrane .
furnish a polypropylene fabric that is bonded to a selfadhesive polymer modified asphalt membrane .
ensure the material conforms to the following table fiberglass waterproofing membrane requirements property test method specification tensile strength lbfin astm d num num min .
longitudinal and transverse pliability astm d num pass moisture astm d num num max .
permeability perms astm e num num max .
num polypropylene waterproofing membrane requirements property test method specification grab tensile strength lb astm d num num min .
elongation astm d num num min .
pliability num c astm d num pass puncture resistance lb .
astm e num num min .
permeability perms astm e num num max .
num field tolerances .
the department according to established criteria will allow tolerance limits to be applied to field samples .
these limits are incorporated into the price adjustment schedules .
these tolerances are for field samples only .
num acceptance .
the department will normally perform field quality acceptance testing on samples obtained at the project site of contractors storage facility .
when required by the department the supplier shall send at his expense representative samples of materials stored at the source to the departments division of materials .
when the department accepts materials by pretesting and certification provide two copies of the billofladingload ticket with each delivered unit .
the billofladingload ticket at a minimum will contain the materials lot number and a statement of the quantity of materials within each load .
in addition materials pretested by the department will include the assigned kmims identification number in the shipment documentation .
the contractor and departments representative will each receive copies at the point of delivery .
do not use materials that are not properly covered by certification or otherwise tested and approved by the department .
when materials not appropriately certified or not conforming to the applicable requirements when tested become incorporated into projects the engineer will according to section num evaluate the work affected and require adjustment of pay quantities of corrective work as deemed appropriate .
num acceptance of nonspecification waterproofing materials .
furnish waterproofing materials purchased for department work conforming to the requirements of this section .
the department will apply the following procedures only when reasonably acceptable work has been produced using the material in question as provided in subsection num .
when the use of nonspecification material results in an inferior or unsatisfactory product remove and replace the material at no expense to the department or at the vendors expense when materials are purchased directly by the cabinet .
the department may accept at a reduced contract price waterproofing materials not appropriately certified or not conforming to the applicable requirements when check tested after an evaluation of the work .
however the department will not consider these procedures as a means to continue accepting nonspecification material .
the department will determine the price adjustment based on the delivered cost of the material .
when the material is not appropriately certified the department may deduct the full cost of the material .
when the material fails to conform to the applicable requirements the department will normally make deductions according to the pay schedules included in this section .
as provided in section num the department has established field tolerances for determining the acceptability of failing material at no price deduction .
the department will determine the frequency of checksampling and testing on pretested material .
the department will make deductions for failing test results based on the average of num check samples representing the material in question .
when a sample fails on two or more tests num the department may add the deductions but the total deduction will not exceed num percent .
num time limitation on approvals .
the department will test materials in storage at the contractors site as deemed necessary .
additionally the department will require the retesting and reapproval of materials not incorporated into the work according to the time limitations specified in the materials field sampling and testing manual from the departments division of materials .
num asphalt mop coat requirements and price adjustment schedule property specification numpay num pay num pay num pay numpaynum type i softening point f num num num num num num num num num num num penetration num f num min .
num num num num num num f num num num num num num num num num num num num f num min .
num num num num num flash point f num min .
num num num num num ductility cm num min .
num num num num num solubility num min .
num num num num num type ii softening point f num num num num num num num num num num num penetration num f num min .
num num num num num num f num num num num num num num num num num num num f num max .
num num num num num flash point f num min num num num num num ductility cm num min .
num num num num num solubility num min .
num num num num num type iii softening point f num num num num num num num num num num num penetration num f num min .
num num num num num num f num num num num num num num num num num num num f num max .
num num num num num flash point f num min .
num num num num num ductility cm num min .
num num num solubility num min .
num num num num num num if allowed to remain in place the department will review materials performing in this range on a projectbyproject basis to determine if removal of the material is warranted .
num section num structural plates for pipes pipe arches and arches num corrugated steel structural plate and accessories .
conform to aashto m num .
coat with asphalt material conforming to subsection num .
the department will sample and test the material according to its current practices .
num aluminum alloy structural plate and accessories .
conform to aashto m num .
the department will sample and test the material according to its current practices .
num section num pipe and pipe arches num description .
this section covers the various types of pipe and pipe arches for use on highway projects .
num approval .
select pipe or pipe arches supplied by a producer that is listed on the list of approved materials .
all producers of pipe and pipe arches must conform to km num .
these requirements may be obtained from the division of materials .
num reinforced concrete pipe .
num pipe class .
a circular .
furnish circular reinforced concrete pipe conforming to aashto m num for class i class ii class iii class iv and class v. furnish a dload pipe conforming to aashto m num when specified in the contract .
b elliptical .
furnish horizontal and vertical elliptical reinforced concrete pipe conforming to aashto m num for class hea class hei class heii class heiii class heiv class vev class vevi class vii class veiii and class veiv .
c arch .
furnish reinforced concrete pipe arch conforming to aashto m num for class aii class aiii and class aiv .
num aggregates .
conform to section num and num .
num cement .
use any type conforming to section num .
num concrete .
submit concrete mix designs to central office materials .
num extra protection .
furnish concrete pipe with extra protection to inhibit corrosion when required by the standard drawings for culvert pipe storm sewer pipe and entrance pipe .
furnish concrete pipe with extra protection for all other types of pipe when specified in the contract .
use reinforced concrete pipe conforming to subsection num a for classes iii iv and v subsection num b for classes heii he iii heiv veii veiii and veiv and subsection num c for classes aii a iii and aiv .
use concrete having a minimum compressive strength of num psi at the time of acceptance .
use wall b or wall c as necessary .
when using one line of reinforcement place it num of the shell thickness from the inner surface of the pipe .
when using num lines of reinforcement place each line so that the nominal protective covering of concrete is one inch from the outer surface of the pipe and num num inches from the inner surface .
the department will allow a variation tolerance of num inch with a minimum protective covering of one inch from the inner surface in all cases .
num identification and markings .
mark pipe sections according to aashto m num or m num as applicable for identification .
additionally mark ep on each section of pipe manufactured by the extra protection requirements .
provide shipment approval form containing the following information num project number and county .
num name of contractor .
num the size class and quantity of pipe shipped .
num the dates of manufacture of the pipe .
num num a signed statement that the pipe is from a tested and approved lot .
the engineer will check pipe joints to determine if the information on the approval form or shipping ticket corresponds to the pipe actually received .
correct all discrepancies before using pipe .
num defects .
the department will reject pipe for any of the following reasons .
num exposed steel in walls fractures or cracks passing through the wall except for a single end crack that does not exceed the depth of the joint .
num defects that indicate imperfect proportioning mixing or molding .
num surface defects indicating honeycombed or open texture .
num damaged or cracked ends that prevent a satisfactory joint .
num a continuous crack regardless of its position in the wall of the pipe having a surface width of numinch or more and extending num inches or more .
num corrugated metal pipe .
num coating requirements .
use asphalt coating and paving as extra protection to inhibit corrosion for the ph values shown on the standard drawings for culvert pipe storm sewer pipe and entrance pipe .
coat and pave sanitary sewer pipe and all other pipe when specified in the contract .
coat and pave the invert according to subsection num .
use asphalt material conforming to subsection num .
coat and pave the pipe according to aashto m num .
use polymer precoated galvanized corrugate metal pipe when the ph is greater than num or less than num according to the standard drawings .
manufacture according to aashto m num with a minimum grade of num .
fabricate the sheets into pipe sections according to aashto m num .
the department will allow exceptions for coating on storm sewer pipe and entrance pipe as specified in the standard drawings .
num inlet and outlet requirements .
finish all pipe ends in a neat manner to allow safe handling and contact with the pipe .
unless the pipe is asphalt coated paint the ends with inorganic zinc primer .
when using num gauge or thinner sheets to fabricate helical lockseam or welded seam pipe reroll the inlet and outlet end with at least num complete corrugations .
match mark all pipe that is num inches or larger in diameter .
num pipe type .
furnish steel pipe conforming to aashto m num and aluminum alloy pipe conforming to aashto m num for types shown below a circular .
type i or type ir .
b arch .
type ii or type iir .
c underdrain .
type iii .
num coupling bands .
furnish bands with annular or helical corrugation conforming to aashto m num and the requirements of num .
num slotted drain pipe .
furnish pipe according to subsection num a with the addition of a grate assembly to provide openings in the top of the pipe as specified in the plans .
apply asphalt coating after slotted drain pipe is fabricated .
provide material for slotted drain pipe from a supplier on the departments list of approved materials .
furnish one of the following types of grate assemblies a type i .
the grate assembly is fabricated from structural steel galvanized according to aashto m num after fabrication and forms a continuous drain num slot when num or more joints of pipe are banded together .
b type ii .
the grate assembly is fabricated from num gauge steel galvanized according to aashto m num and laterally supported by a minimum of one foot measured laterally of concrete on each side .
num defects .
the department will reject pipe for any of the following reasons .
num variation from centerline .
num elliptical shape in pipe intended to be round .
num dents or bends in the metal .
num lack of rigidity .
num low asphalt coating thickness on coated pipe .
num cracks or lack of coating adhesion on coated pipe .
num insufficient coating to provide a smooth level flow line on fully lined pipe and pipe with a paved invert .
num paved sections with less than num percent coverage of the pipe circumference .
num concrete .
submit concrete mix design to the central office materials .
num smooth metal pipe .
num cast iron pressure pipe .
conform to astm a num .
num welded and seamless steel pipe for bridge floor drains .
furnish num inch diameter round standard weight pipe conforming to astm a num astm a num or astm a num with a minimum wall thickness of num inches .
num black and hotdipped galvanized welded and seamless steel pipe for ordinary uses .
furnish pipe conforming to astm a num of the size and weight specified in the contract .
the department will allow plain or threaded end finish .
num aluminum alloy extruded structural pipe .
for pipe with internal connections conform to astm b num schedule num alloy numtnum for railing and astm bnum schedule num alloy numtnum for posts .
for pipe with welded connections conform to astm bnum schedule num alloy numtnum or astm bnum schedule num alloy numtnum .
num thermoplastic pipe .
num polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe .
a pipe underdrain .
furnish perforated pipe for underdrains conforming to aashto m num .
ensure all fittings and pipe are made from the same base material .
submit a manufacturers certification that the pipe conforms to aashto m num to the division of materials annually .
use integral bell and spigot type joints with elastomeric seal joints and smooth inner walls .
b culvert pipe storm sewer and entrance pipe .
furnish pipe and pipe fittings conforming to aashto m num .
manufacture from low filler pvc plastic having a minimum astm num cell classification of num .
use pipe fittings furnished by the pipe manufacturer .
c sliplining pipe rehabilitation .
furnish pipe conforming to astm fnum .
manufacture from low filler pvc plastic having a minimum astm num cell classification of numb or numc .
use integral bell and spigot type joints with a stabjoint bell coupler filling flush with the outer wall surface .
num num corrugated high density polyethylene hdpe pipe .
a pipe underdrain .
furnish perforated pipe for underdrains conforming to aashto m num .
use only type s for edge drain outlet pipe .
use caps bands and other fittings that are of the same material as the pipe .
submit a manufacturers certification that the pipe conforms to aashto m num to the division of materials annually .
use a length that minimizes the number of joints in a run or line and facilitates shipment handling and installation .
use snapin place bands or a split band taped in place with polyethylene tape for pipetopipe connections as the engineer directs .
cap remote ends with a snapinplace cap .
use nonperforated pipe when specified in the contract or when the engineer directs .
b culvert pipe storm sewer and entrance pipe .
provide pipe from a manufacturer that participates in the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep for hdpe pipe .
ensure the pipe and pipe fittings conform to aashto m num type s or d. use pipe fittings furnished by the pipe manufacturer .
use pipe couplings conforming to aashto m num and that are department approved .
when corrugations are spiral use match marks specially cut ends or other acceptable methods to facilitate alignment of the corrugations at connections .
provide a minimum gap between adjacent sections of pipe .
submit a manufacturers certification that the pipe conforms to resin requirements of aashto m num to the division of materials annually .
provide certification from the manufacturer with each shipment that the pipe conforms to aashto m num .
use only department approved pipe .
the department will perform all sampling and testing deemed necessary either at the plant or on the project .
num section num steel reinforcement num classification and condition .
this specification covers bars welded steel wire fabrics bar mats steel wire prestressing strands and load transfer assemblies .
ensure that these materials when incorporated into the work are reasonably free from dirt paint oil grease loosethick rust or other foreign substance and when deemed necessary are cleaned to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the department will not require cleaning when these materials exhibit tight thin or powdery rust .
reject reinforcement rusted sufficiently to cause it to fail specified physical properties or prestressing strands displaying pits visible to the naked eye .
num bars .
for all bar reinforcement use grade num deformed bars except as indicated for the following items a jpc pavement tie bars paved ditches steps flume inlets integral curb rightofway markers transverse bars for bar mats piles cribbing small drainage structures pipe headwalls or manhole tops .
use grade num num or num deformed bars .
b steel piling encasement and spiral reinforcement for precast nonprestressed piling .
use grade num num or num plain or deformed bars .
c spiral reinforcement excluding piles .
use grade num deformed or plain bars .
num requirements .
furnish bar reinforcement for bridges castinplace culverts and castinplace retaining walls that conforms to astm a num billet or astm a num rail .
astm a num steel is acceptable with prior approval of the division of materials .
do not weld any steel bar reinforcement unless it is astm a num rebar .
the engineer will accept rail steel bar reinforcement in straight lengths only .
do not use rail steel reinforcement where field bending is allowed or required .
furnish bar reinforcement for other uses that conform to either astm a num weldable astm a num billet astm a num rail or astm a num axel .
num testing and acceptance .
identify all shipments of steel reinforcement by the producers heat or test identification numbers .
obtain bar reinforcement from manufacturers included on the departments list of approved materials .
to be included on this list fabricators shall conform to km num .
num hook bolts and anchor bolts .
conform to the design and dimensions provided in the standard drawings .
furnish hook tiebolts that when assembled as a unit are capable of sustaining an axial load of num pounds or greater .
num welded steel wire fabric wwf .
conform to aashto m num .
num welded deformed steel wire fabric .
conform to aashto m num .
num bar mats .
conform to astm a num and fabricate by welding deformed grade num weldable bars .
num steel wire .
conform to aashto m num .
num prestressing strands .
ensure that uncoated sevenwire stress relieved strand for prestressed concrete conforms to aashto m num grade num or low relaxation strand grade num as specified .
num num load transfer assemblies contraction and expansion .
the department will approve the design of assemblies before delivery to the project .
the department will approve assemblies incorporating the typical features depicted by the standard drawings .
the department will reject assemblies at any time that deviate from previously approved designs and manufacturing procedures .
shop fabricate all assemblies .
where chair bars fit over ends of dowel bars form them to obtain a snug fit over the end of the dowel bar not welded to the chair bar .
control welding to prevent a significant reduction in the areas of the dowel bars or the wires .
modify the loadtransfer assemblies furnished for slip form construction to allow for approximately num inches of clearance between the assemblies and the slip forms .
accomplish this by welding the outer leg of the chair at an angle of approximately num degrees with the upper and lower spacer bars .
num chair spacer aligning bars and upper tie bars .
furnish steel for these items that conforms to aashto m num .
num dowel bars .
furnish dowel bars that are plain round bars conforming to astm a num a num a num or a num with respect to mechanical properties only .
provide either grade num num or num steel .
saw cut the free ends of the dowels and ensure that they are free of burrs or projections .
broken or sheared ends are acceptable with prior approval of the division of materials .
coat dowel bars according to aashto m num with the following exceptions for type b coatings num ensure that the thickness is num num mils num subject the coated dowel bars to a bend test km num num use a bond breaker from the departments list of approved materials for load transfer assemblies num the maximum pullout load shall not exceed num pounds use any type b coatings that are on the departments list of approved materials for epoxy coating materials and apply them except for thickness according to subsections num and num .
the department will inspect and accept dowel bars with type b coatings as specified in subsection num .
obtain a certificate of compliance as specified in subsection num .
num dowel bar sleeves .
furnish a sleeve for each dowel bar used with expansion joints .
place these sleeves on alternate and opposite ends of the dowels .
furnish sleeves manufactured from sheet metal or metal tubing having a minimum thickness of .num inch num gage .
ensure that they are of such length as to cover no less than num inches nor more than num inches of the dowel have a closed end fit the dowel bar snugly and are of such design as to provide an unobstructed expansion space of no less than one inch to allow movement of the dowel bar .
num fabrication tolerance .
ensure that the longitudinal alignment of dowel bars in load transfer assemblies is within num inch in num inches of the specified alignment .
when checked along the total length of the dowels allow the deviation to be num num inch for assemblies on a zero degree skew and num num inch for assemblies on a num degree skew .
num epoxy coated steel reinforcement .
conform to astm a num .
num uncoated bars .
ensure that the deformed steel bars conform to the num applicable requirements of subsections num and num .
in addition blast clean all surfaces of the steel bars to a nearwhite surface finish according to sspcsp num .
blast clean to produce a surface having a profile no greater than num mils .
immediately before application of the coating ensure that the blast cleaned surface corresponds with either pictorial standard a sp num b sp num or c sp num of sspcvis num and the surfaces are free of all dust and grit .
num epoxy coating material .
select the epoxy coating material for reinforcing steel from the departments list of approved materials .
ensure that the coating material conforms to the prequalification requirements of aashto m num .
submit documentation in the form of test results from a private testing laboratory verifying that the coating material conforms to aashto m num to the division of materials to gain approved list status .
select and furnish the powdered epoxy resin of the same material and quality as the resin which has been previously submitted for prequalification .
ensure that the resin manufacturer annually furnishes a written certification to the division of materials that attesting to the sameness of the powdered epoxy resin .
obtain the approval of the engineer for epoxy material for touchup and repair work .
ensure that the epoxy material furnished by the epoxy manufacturer is compatible with the coating material and inert in concrete and is suitable for use in the field .
num application of epoxy coating material .
ensure the epoxy application is performed by an epoxy coater that is certified and participating in the crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute certification program .
apply the powdered epoxy resin to the blast cleaned steel bars within num hours after blast cleaning and before any visible rusting of the nearwhite surfaces appears .
apply the resin as an electrostatically charged dry powder sprayed onto the grounded steel bars by electrostatic sprays .
ensure that the steel bars are at the temperature recommended by the powdered epoxy resin manufacturer at the time of the application of the coating .
after coating the bars give them the thermal treatment recommended by the manufacturer of the powdered epoxy resin to provide fully cured coating on the bars .
touch up all uncoated areas of electrical contact points as directed .
ensure that the epoxy coating applied to the bars is uniform and smooth with num percent of the film thickness measurements falling between num and num mils after curing when checked according to km num .
the department will reject the coated bars for either an insufficient or excessive film thickness or a partially cured coating .
num properties of the coated bars .
ensure that the coated bars after curing display a continuous flexible and abrasion resistant coating as determined by the following .
a continuity of coating .
after curing check all bars visually for defects in the coating such as holes voids delaminations contamination and damaged areas .
in addition check for holidays pinholes not visually discernible according to km num .
when any bar has more than num defects or holidays per linear foot or a total defective area exceeding num percent of the surface area per linear foot repair the defects or holidays with the touchup material .
when any bar has more than num defects or holidays per linear foot or a total defective area exceeding num percent of the surface area per linear foot the department will reject the bar .
b flexibility of coating .
the department will evaluate the flexibility of the coating by bending tests according to km num .
ensure that the coated bars are capable of being bent num degrees after rebound over a mandrel without any visible evidence of cracking the coating .
num c recleaning .
do not remove the coating from rejected bars for the purpose of recoating by any process involving temperatures higher than num f. d color of coating .
for all epoxy coatings use a light color that will provide a distinct contrast with the color of cleaned steel and the color of rusted steel .
num fabrication of coated bars .
fabricate the steel bars into the shapes and lengths specified on the bridge plans either before or after coating .
when performing fabrication after coating the bars repair any damage to the coating .
repair the coating on straight portions of the bars when damaged or bare areas exceed num percent of the coated area per linear foot or when individual damaged areas are in the order of num square inch num inch by num inch or larger .
when repairing coating clean and repair all damaged and bare areas on the straight portion of the bar .
when the amount of repair in the straight portion of a bar exceeds num percent of the surface area per linear foot the department will reject the bar .
repair coating within each bent area of the bar when bond loss and damage exceed num percent of the surface area within each bent area or when individual damaged areas are in the order of num square inch num inch by num inch or larger .
when repairing coating clean and repair all damage within each bent area .
when the amount of repair in a particular bent portion of a bar exceeds num percent of the surface area the department will reject the bar .
it is not necessary to repair hairline cracks that do not have bond loss or other minor damage on fabrication bends .
do not allow the amount of touchup area for repair of defects and necessary overlap to exceed num percent of the surface area of the bar per meter for straight bars .
do not allow the amount of touchup area for repair of defects and necessary overlap to exceed num percent of the surface area of the bar per linear foot for bent portions of bars .
the department will approve of all cleaning and repair methods and materials .
coat the ends of the coated bars cut during fabrication with the epoxy used for repairs .
repair the damaged areas and the coating of the ends of cut bars within num hours and before any visible rusting appears .
obtain the departments approval for any additional requested splices to accommodate lengths suitable for coating .
make requested additional splices at no additional expense to the department .
coat all areas receiving touchup material including ends with a minimum thickness of num mils .
the department will allow a maximum thickness of num mils in repair of overlap areas .
extend touchup material applied to sheared or sawn bar ends to coat the resulting damaged area up to a maximum of num inches from the end of the bar .
when the sheared or sawn surface conforms to the specifications after touchup the department will not count the bar end and first num inches from the bar end in determining the percent of repair area .
num inspection and acceptance .
before subjecting them to blast cleaning and coating with the powdered epoxy resin confirm that uncoated steel bars are from a manufacturer on the departments list of approved materials for reinforcing steel manufacturers .
the department may inspect and test all materials at the coating plant and after delivery to the project .
use an epoxy coater to apply the coating that is on the departments list of approved materials .
to be approved epoxy coaters must conform to km num and km num .
if the departments inspection or testing indicates that material furnished to a department project materially differs from the specification requirements the department will review and reconsider the approval of the epoxy coaters quality control program .
num documentation .
ensure that each shipment of epoxy coated steel reinforcement is accompanied by documentation prepared by the epoxy coater according to km num .
num num acceptance procedures for nonspecification rein forcing steel .
ensure that all reinforcing steel conforms to the requirements of this section .
however when nonspecification reinforcing steel is inadvertently incorporated into the work before completion of testing the department may accept the material with a reduction in pay provided the failure is marginal and will not cause poor performance .
when the failure is excessive then remove the reinforcing steel and replace it unless the engineer determines that the reinforcing steel can remain in place with a num percent reduction rate .
the department will apply the largest payment reduction when the material fails to meet more than one specification requirement .
the department will calculate the payment reduction on the invoice cost of the material delivered at the project site .
the department will reject reinforcing steel that fails and has not been incorporated into the work .
yield strength of requirement num num or more num num num num num or less reduction rate num num num num tensile strength of requirement num num or more num num num num num or less reduction rate num num num num elongation of requirement num num or more num num num num num or less reduction rate num num num num weight per foot of requirement num num or more num num num num num or less reduction rate num num num num epoxy coating thickness thickness mils num num num num num num over num reduction rate num num num num remove and replace the reinforcing steel unless the engineer determines that the steel can remain in place at a num reduction rate .
num section num structural steels num structural steel shapes plates bars and fasteners .
conform to charpy vnotch toughness requirements for structural steel for load carrying members in bridges when specified in the plans .
num structural steel all types .
conform to aashto m num astm a num grades num num numw numw hpsnumw num and numw .
when the supplementary requirement of this specification are specified they exceed the requirements of astm a num a num a num a num and astm a num .
a structural steel .
conform to aashto m num grade num astm a num grade num or astm a num .
b highstrength lowalloy columbiumvanadium steels of structural quality .
conform to aashto m num grade num or astm a num grade num or astm a num .
c highstrength lowalloy structural steel with num mpa minimum yield point to num inches thick .
conform to aashto m num grade numw astm m num grade numw or astm a num .
d quenched and tempered lowalloy structural steel plate with num mpa minimum yield strength to num inches thick .
conform to aashto m num grade numw astm a num grade numw or astm a num .
e highyieldstrength quenched and tempered alloy steel plate suitable for welding .
conform to aashto m num grade numw astm a num grade numw or astm a num .
f highstrength lowalloy quenched and tempered structural steel plate .
conform to astm a num grade hpsnumw .
num hotrolled carbon steel sheets and strip of structural quality grade num corrugated steel plank for bridge floors .
conform to astm a num .
num cold rolled carbon steel sheet of structural quality grade d num ksi corrugated steel plank for bridge floors .
conform to astm a num .
num steel sheet piling .
conform to aashto m num astm a num .
num frames and grates for catch basins inlets outlets and manholes .
use steel in these items that conforms to the following properties yield strength num ksi .
minimum tensile strength num ksi minimum elongation in numinch specimen num percent minimum the department will accept steel for frames and grates according to the manual of field sampling and testing practices .
num section num miscellaneous metals num pins and rollers .
use steel specified in the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges conforming to aashto m num astm a num or aashto m num astm a num .
num steel casting .
conform to aashto m num grade num astm a num .
num expanding steel manhole risers .
use an approved type that expands to fit tightly and rigidly within the existing frame .
num gray iron castings .
conform to aashto m num class numb .
num malleable castings .
conform to astm a num .
use the grade specified .
num castings for rightofway markers .
provide aluminum alloy conforming to astm b num alloy num .
num lead plates .
manufacture plates from lead conforming to astm b num .
num aluminum .
num cast aluminum sand castings .
conform to astm b num alloy numtnum .
num aluminum alloy permanent mold castings .
conform to astm b num .
num aluminum alloy sheet and plate .
conform to astm b num .
num aluminum alloy extruded bars rods shapes and tubes .
conform to astm b num alloy numt num or alloy numt num .
num aluminum alloy rolled or extruded shapes .
conform to astm b num alloy numtnum .
num aluminum alloy seamless pipe .
conform to astm b num alloy numt num and numt num .
num aluminum and aluminum alloy bars rods and wire bolts .
conform to astm f num alloy numt num .
give finished bolts a minimum anodic coating of num inch .
num aluminum nuts .
conform to astm f num alloy numtnum or numt num .
give finished nuts a minimum anodic coating of num inch .
num welding rods .
conform to aws anum .
num steel bolts nuts and washers .
num carbon steel bolts and nuts .
conform to astm a num .
nuts conform to aashto m num .
num num highstrength steel bolts nuts and washers .
.mark all bolts nuts and washers according to the appropriate astm specifications .
if using galvanized bolts nuts or washers measure the thickness of the zinc coating .
take measurements on the wrench flats or top of bolt head .
submit mill test reports for all steel used in the manufacture of the bolts nuts or washers to the department for approval .
include with the mill test reports the place where the material was melted and manufactured .
the department will take field samples for testing to verify compliance with this section .
ship bolts nuts and washers where required from each rotationalcapacity lot in the same container .
if there is only one production lot number for each size of nut and washer the department will allow shipping of the nuts and washers in separate containers .
permanently mark each container with the rotationalcapacity lot number to allow identification at any stage before installation .
supply the appropriate mill test report manufacturers certified test report or distributors certified test report to the engineer before beginning installation .
for bolts nuts and washers conform to the following dimensions numansi standards b num and b num shall govern tolerance to these dimensions .
bolt and nut dimensions num bolt dimensions nut dimensions in in heavy hexagon heavy nominal structural bolts hexagon nuts bolt width height thread width height size across length across in flats flats d f h t w h num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numansi standard b num type a washer tolerances apply to the nominal dimensions for outside diameter and hole diameter .
nummay be exceeded by num inch .
num inch nominal .
a bolts .
conform to aashto m num astm a num .
do not use bolts conforming to aashto m num astm a num .
hardness for bolt diameters num to num inch inclusive are as noted below perform proof load testing according to astm f num method num at the minimum frequency specified in astm a num .
perform wedge testing on full size bolts according to astm f num paragraph num at the minimum frequency specified in astm a num .
if bolts are to be galvanized perform tests after galvanizing .
plain bolts must be oily to touch when delivered and installed .
b nuts .
conform to aashto m num astm a num as applicable or aashto m num .
if nuts are to be galvanized hot dip or mechanically galvanized use heat treated grade numh dh or dhnum .
for plain ungalvanized nuts use grades num c d or cnum with a minimum rockwell hardness of num hrb or brinell hardness num hb or heat treated grades numh dh dhnum .
for nuts that are to be galvanized overtap the nuts the minimum amount required for proper assembly allowing the nut to assemble freely on the bolt in the coated condition .
overtap the nuts according to the mechanical requirements washer dimensions in millimetersnum square of rectangular beveled circular washers washers for american standard beams and channels nominal nominal minimum slope or bolt outside diameter thickness side mean taper in size diameternum of hole min .
max .
dimension thickness thickness num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num hardness number bolt size brinell rockwell c in min .
max .
min .
max .
num num num num num num num of aashto m num and the rotationalcapacity test requirements of this section .
lubricate galvanized nuts with a lubricant containing a dye that contrasts with the color of the galvanizing .
perform proof load testing according to astm f num paragraph num at the minimum frequency specified in aashto m num or aashto m num astm a num .
if nuts are to be galvanized perform tests after galvanizing overtapping and lubricating .
c washers .
conform to aashto m num .
if supplying galvanized washers perform hardness testing after galvanizing .
remove coating before taking hardness measurements .
d rotationalcapacity test .
.perform rotationalcapacity tests on all black or galvanized after galvanizing bolt nut and washer assemblies by the manufacturer or distributor before shipping .
perform additional rotational capacity tests on each lot at job sit .
use washers as part of the test even though they may not be required as part of the installation procedure .
perform the following num except as modified herein perform rotationalcapacity testing according to aashto m num .
num test each combination of bolt production lot nut lot and washer lot shipped as a rotationalcapacity lot as an assembly .
where washers are not required by the installation procedures the department will not require lot identification for them .
num assign a rotationalcapacity lot number to each combination of lots tested .
num test at least num assemblies per rotationalcapacity lot .
num assemble the bolt nut and washer assembly in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator or an acceptable equivalent device note this requirement supersedes the astm a num requirement that the test be performed in a steel joint .
for bolts too short to be assembled in the skidmorewilhelm calibrator test them according to num below .
num provide the minimum rotation from a snug tight condition num percent of the specified proof load as follows num degrees num turn for bolt lengths num diameters num degrees num turn for bolt lengths num diameters and num diameters num degrees num turns for bolt lengths num diameters num ensure that the tension reached at the above rotation is num times the required installation tension .
the installation tension and the tension for the turn test are as noted below num num after exceeding the required installation tension listed above take and record one reading of tension and torque .
ensure that the torque value conforms to the following torque num pd where torque measured torque footpounds p measured bolt tension pounds d bolt diameter feet num test bolts too short for assembly in a skidmorewilhelm calibrator in a steel joint .
disregard the tension requirement of num above .
for the maximum torque requirement of num above use a value of p equal to the turn test tension shown in the table in num above .
the department will not require an inspection agency present during testing however the manufacturer or distributor performing the tests shall certify that the results recorded are accurate .
the engineer reserves the right to witness testing on request .
ensure that the lot number appearing on the shipping package for bolts washers and nuts corresponds to the lot number identified on the distributors and manufacturers certification .
provide the engineer with the certified test report from the manufacturer or distributor performing the rotationalcapacity test .
include the following information a the lot number of each of the items tested .
b the rotationalcapacity lot number .
c a statement that the items conform to this section and the contract .
d the results of the tests .
e the location and date of the tests .
f the location where the bolt assembly components were manufactured .
num corrosionresisting steel bolts and set screws .
fabricate bolts and screws from bars conforming to astm a num .
use types num or num for steel machine bolts to attach aluminum posts to concrete and for steel set screws for aluminum railings .
num stainless steel hardware bolts nuts and washers .
conform to astm a num .
tension diameter req .
installation turn test tension inches tension kips kips num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num cadmium coatings for steel anchor bolts nuts and washers .
conform to astm b num class num type ii .
num welding material procedures and inspection .
for bridges comply with the ansiaashtoaws dnum bridge welding code with modifications and additions as specified in the plans .
for other steel structures comply with the aws structural welding code dnum with modifications and additions as specified in the plans .
for aluminum structures comply with the aws structural welding codealuminum dnum .
num stud shear connectors .
conform to aashto m num astm a num grade num .
num handrail .
num type b. fabricate the channel picket and posts using hot rolled steel conforming to aisi m num astm a num grade num astm a num grade m num or astm a num grade num .
for the lambs tongue use either a gray iron casting or a commercial grade steel .
after fabrication and cleaning paint the handrail with num coats of commercial grade primer paint and one coat of commercial grade black enamel .
repaint damaged areas as directed .
num type c. furnish aluminum posts and rails conforming to astm b num alloy num temper tnum .
provide rails with a polished finish and posts and fittings with a satin finish .
use aluminum alloy fittings for handrails as recommended by the handrail manufacturer .
num mattresses and gabions .
conform to astm a num style num or astm a num style num or num .
use wire with a minimum elongation of num percent of the length of the wire when tested according to astm a num without reducing the diameter or tensile strength of the wire .
supply lacing wire in sufficient quantity to ensure that all required tying connecting and lacing can be performed .
for department direct purchases supply an amount of lacing wire equal to or greater than num percent of the weight of the units .
fabricate the mattress units to the dimensions required by the contract .
the department will accept mattresses with dimensions within num percent of the ordered width .
num mattress units .
as an alternate to lacing wire the engineer will allow mattress unit fasteners from the departments list of approved materials that conform to mattress unit manufacturers recommended assembly and connection instructions .
subdivide the mattress units into compartments a maximum of num feet in length extending over the full width of the mattress unit by inserting diaphragms made of the same mesh as the rest of the mattress unit .
secure the diaphragms in position on the bottom with a continuous spiral wire at the factory so no additional tying at this joint is necessary .
num gabion baskets .
as an alternate to lacing wire the engineer will allow gabion unit fasteners from the departments list of approved materials that conform to mattress unit manufacturers recommended assembly and connection instructions .
supply diaphragms of the same material composition as the gabion to form individual cells of equal length and width when the gabion length exceeds its width .
num acceptance .
the department will test each shipment for wire size and num zinc coating and will perform any other engineer ordered tests .
the department will accept shipments based on laboratory testing and the engineers visual inspection .
num section num guardrail systems num description .
this section covers material requirements for corrugated sheet steel beams and accessories for guardrail terminal sections guardrail posts offset blocks end treatments and timber guard posts .
num beams and accessories .
conform to aashto m num .
hardware for type i ii or iii beams may be either hotdip galvanized electrogalvanized or mechanically galvanized .
galvanize hardware according to aashto m num .
galvanize beams according to aashto m num .
the engineer will reject beams with zinc oxide white rust in amounts deemed objectionable .
furnish type ii beams of either class a num inch thick or class b num inch thick as specified in the contract .
num terminal sections .
conform to aashto m num and the details shown on the standard drawings .
galvanize sections after fabrication .
furnish type num sections of either class a num inch thick or class b num inch thick as specified in the contract .
num guardrail posts .
provide either steel or timber and use the same type throughout the project .
num steel guardrail posts .
fabricate from steel conforming to astm a num for the wide flange shapes .
punch or drill holes for connector bolts before galvanizing .
galvanize all posts according to aashto m num .
num timber guardrail posts .
.furnish either square sawn or round timber guardrail posts .
conform to the nominal dimensions shown on the standard drawings .
the engineer will allow a minus numinch tolerance from the specified nominal length .
saw the butts of all posts square and finish the tips as specified in the contract .
bore bolt holes to a driving fit for the bolts .
frame bore and trim as much as is practical before giving the posts a preservative treatment .
when it is necessary to bore or cut the posts after treatment or when any treated surface has been badly scarred treat the cut or scarred surface according to awpa mnum .
treat the posts with preservative according to awpa c num as applicable for guardrail posts .
use only one type throughout the project unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
use any of the species of wood for round guardrail posts covered under awpa c num .
use any of the softwood species for square sawed posts covered under awpa c num .
when furnishing oak posts treat with creosote or creosote solution according to awpa c num for above ground soil or fresh water exposure .
see subsection num for inspection testing and acceptance procedures for timber guardrail posts .
a square sawed posts .
ensure the posts in the direction parallel to the axis of the bolt holes do not exceed the dimensions specified in the contract by more than num inch .
use posts that have straight grain and that have a slope of the grain not deviating more than one inch in num inches from being parallel to any face when measured over the middle onehalf of the length .
the engineer will not accept posts having a crook exceeding num inch in num feet .
limit wane to one end of the post only and do not allow it to extend more than num feet from that end .
do not reduce the flat width of any face by more than num percent at the point of most wane .
do not use wood with ant tunnels woodpecker holes plugged holes or num any large unsightly gaps .
the department will allow wood with grub and worm holes less than num inch in average diameter provided that the sum of the diameters of all holes in any num inches of post length does not exceed num the nominal width of the face .
do not use posts showing signs of powder post beetle infestation .
the engineer will not limit the use of posts that have grub holes appearing entirely on the surface of the post and that do not penetrate to more than num inch in maximum depth .
do not use posts with knots greater than num the nominal width of the face measured by the smallest diameter .
do not allow the sum of the diameters of all knots in any num inches of post length to exceed num the nominal width of the face .
do not allow the sum of the diameter of all knots appearing within the middle half of the length of any face to be greater than num times the size of the largest knot allowed in that face .
the department will allow posts with unsound knots no larger than half the maximum allowable size for sound knots and no more than num num inches in depth provided that the surrounding wood is not affected by the decay .
do not use posts that have clusters of knots where the maximum distortion of the grain around the cluster exceeds the maximum allowable size for one knot .
entirely confine shakes within the ends of the post without extending to any face .
measure the shake as the sum of the num adjoining sides of the smallest rectangle that will completely enclose the shake .
measure the sides of the rectangle parallel to the faces of the post .
do not allow shakes to occur in more than one annual ring or to extend to more than num of the circumference of the annual ring in boxed heart .
do not allow total shake measurement to exceed onehalf the width of the face .
do not use posts with splits greater in length than the width of the face .
do not use posts with a check or series of contiguous checks having a width of num mm or greater at the surface and more than num inches in depth at any point and extending more than num of the length of the post from one end .
the engineer will determine the depth of checks by the penetration of a probe num inch thick and num inch wide .
the engineer will consider the extent of a check or series of contiguous checks to end at the last point where the opening does not exceed num inch in width and is no more than num inch in depth .
do not use any post having a shake that does not exceed the maximum limits for shakes as specified herein but contains a check which penetrates to the annual ring in which the shake occurs .
b round posts .
peel all posts for their full length and remove all outer and inner bark .
shave all knots and projections smooth and flush with the surface of the surrounding wood .
ensure that the posts are a constant diameter not less than num inch under the nominal diameter .
do not use posts that have short or reverse bends one way sweeps exceeding one inch and winding twists that are unsightly and exaggerated .
the engineer will not allow more than num percent of the number of pieces of any shipment to contain the maximum sweep .
do not use posts with unsound loose or hollow knots .
the department will allow use posts that have sound knots when the diameter of any one knot or when the combined diameters of num or more knots occurring in the same cross section are no greater than num of the diameter of the post at that cross section .
ensure that posts are close grained and do not show spiral grain exceeding num turn in num feet .
do not use posts with seasoning checks that penetrate the interior of the post to a depth greater than num of the diameter at any point or which measure more than num inch in width at any point .
do not use posts that have ring shakes sap rot bird pecks insect holes num pitch pockets or pitch streaks and other defects that will impair the strength of the post or give it an unsightly appearance .
num offset blocks .
use the size and when specified the type the contract specifies .
num wood .
conform to num for material properties .
num composite plastic .
use blocks that are uniform in composition throughout the product and consist of at least num percent plastic by weight .
rubber is an acceptable alternative to plastic in their composition .
use sufficient additives to inhibit photo degradation .
the department will consider num percent carbon black to be a minimum .
ensure the blocks conform to the national cooperative highway research program nchrp num or the manual for assessing safety hardware mash test level num requirements .
submit a written manufacturers certification to the engineer stating the material composition conforms to this subsection and is the same that was tested and approved under nchrp num or mash .
num materials for end treatments .
conform to subsections num through num for common components and except where otherwise provided ensure they are of the same class and type as required for the guardrail to which they are attached .
galvanize all noncorrosionresistant metals used in end treatments according to aashto m num or aashto m num as applicable .
for proprietary end treatments all materials shall conform to the manufacturers specifications .
for other materials comply with the following requirements a anchorage systems .
furnish anchorage systems that have a minimum breaking strength of num pounds .
the anchorage system may employ either a cable assembly or continuous steel rod or other system of equal or greater strength when approved .
for cable assemblies use cable that is numinch num by num wire rope conforming to aashto m num class c. provide swage fittings as required by the standard drawings and include studs as required .
ensure that eye bolts conform to astm a num and are of either type num or type num .
for wire rope clips use a commercial grade capable of being torqued to a minimum of num footpounds .
use commercial grade wire rope thimbles .
b anchor and miscellaneous plates .
fabricate from steel conforming to subsection num .
c miscellaneous hardware .
bolts astm a num nuts astm a num grade a or better d steel sheet for rail plates and mounting brackets .
conform to astm a num type ss grade num e tubular sections for posts and blocks .
conform to astm a num grade b or astm a num .
f concrete .
conform to section num class a. g welded wire fabric .
use welded wire fabric for concrete reinforcement that is wnum by wnum num by numinch conforming to subsection num .
the department may allow other approved types of steel reinforcement .
num section num cast aluminum bridge railing posts num chemical composition .
conform to astm b num alloy a num .
contrary to astm b num heat treat to a tnum temper instead of tnum to produce the following tensile properties numfor the purposes of design in the tension test ensure that the specimens conform to the minimum yield strength of num psi acceptance testing for this property is not required .
numminimum tensile properties based on separately cast test bars are num psi tensile strength and num percent elongation .
numgage length num times the diameter of the specimen .
num test specimens .
machine the tension test specimens from integrally cast test coupons extending from one side of the base of the posts sufficiently large enough to obtain an numinch diameter test specimen as defined in astm e num .
num testing .
sample a minimum of one percent of the posts in any lot but not less than one for tensile testing .
for the purpose of sampling a lot shall consist of not more than num pounds of clean castings when produced from a batch type furnace charged with one heat of ingot of known analysis or not more than num pounds of clean castings when produced from one continuous furnace in not more than num consecutive hours .
determine tensile properties according to astm e num .
when the results of any tensile test do not conform to the requirements prescribed perform num additional tests on the same group of castings .
the average of the num tests must conform to the requirements .
num heat treatment .
heat treat the castings to produce material with the utmost uniformity conforming to the properties specified in this section .
perform heat treatment on the whole casting never on a portion only .
num workmanship and finish .
ensure that castings are uniform in quality and condition free from cracks blowholes porous places hard spots shrinkage defects or other defects that may detrimentally affect the suitability of the castings for their intended use .
ensure that the castings are smooth and well cleaned before inspecting .
produce castings under radiographic control .
radiographically examine castings to establish proper foundry technique for each mold that will produce castings commercially free from harmful internal defects and examine production castings to ensure maintenance of satisfactory quality .
provide a normal mill finish .
num inspection .
the department may inspect the manufacturers work either where the castings are made or at the point at which they are received .
the department will either visually inspect the castings or compare the castings by a method adopted as standard to determine compliance with the requirements of subsection num .
when the department elects to have inspection made at the manufacturers works the tensile properties num properties minimum typical tensile strength psi num num num elongation in numx diameter num num num num manufacturer shall afford the inspector representing the department all reasonable facilities to verify that the material is being furnished according to this section .
the department will conduct all tests and inspection in a manner not interfering unnecessarily with the operation of the works .
num inspection reports .
when requested by the department furnish certified inspection reports certifying compliance with the requirements of this section .
num section num wovenwire fencing materials num description .
this section covers the materials for use in construction of wovenwire fences .
num general .
galvanize all ferrous materials used in a complete installation of fence except aluminum coated fabric aluminum coated posts and braces or aluminum coated barbed wire .
galvanize all iron and steel hardware according to aashto m num .
galvanize other components as designated .
where it is not practical to secure a specimen of measurable area or uniform thickness for determining the weight of zinc coating ensure that all such galvanizing withstands num dips of the preece test as set out in astm a num .
ensure that post caps and socket type brace connections are galvanized malleable iron or other approved type and designed to exclude moisture from inside posts or rails .
num woven wire fabric .
ensure that the woven wire fabric is either zinc coated steel or aluminumcoated steel .
provide the size and style of fabric specified in the contract .
use zinccoated steel fabric that conforms to astm a num and that has a class num coating .
use aluminumcoated steel fabric that conforms to astm a num .
num barbed wire .
use either zinccoated steel aluminumcoated steel or aluminum alloy .
use barbs of numpoint pattern spaced at intervals of num inches .
the wire for barbs may be either round or halfround .
num zinccoated steel .
conform to astm a num .
use size numinch diameter or heavier with class num coating .
the department will allow high tensile strength barbed wire provided it conforms to astm a num and the following exceptions num nominal diameter of num inch for the coated line wires and num inch for the coated barbs num minimum weight of zinc coating of num ounces per square foot for line wires and num ounces per square foot for barbs and num minimum tensile strength of num pounds for each individual strand of the line wire .
num aluminumcoated steel .
use either type i or type ii conforming to astm a num .
use size num inch diameter or heavier .
num aluminum alloy .
use num strands of num inch nominal diameter or heavier wire strands having minimum tensile strength of num psi minimum yield strength of num psi and minimum elongation of num percent .
num brace wire .
conform to astm a num except provide a minimum weight of coating of num ounce per square foot .
use size numinch nominal diameter or larger .
num fabric ties .
use either a minimum numinch nominal diameter galvanized steel conforming to astm f num except ensure that the minimum weight of coating is num ounces per square foot or numinch nominal diameter aluminum alloy .
num fence posts and braces .
num steel posts and braces .
conform to astm f num astm f num and the standard drawings .
when the contract specifies a thermoplastic acrylic coating apply a chromate conversion coating at the manufacturers recommended rate .
ensure that the coating is num designed for pretreatment of galvanized coatings .
after pretreating electrostatically apply the thermoplastic acrylic coating with a minimum dry film thickness of num mils .
num wood posts and braces .
treat wood fence posts and braces with preservative and ensure that they are made of timber cut from live sound standing trees .
see subsection num for inspection testing and acceptance of wood products .
ensure that round or halfround posts and braces are preservative treated according to and are of the species covered by awpa c num .
ensure that sawed posts and braces are preservative treated according to and are of the species covered by awpa c num for soil or fresh water exposure .
use posts that are round halfround or squaresawed .
ensure that wood for fence posts is sound and free from decay excessive knots seasoning checks and end splits that will affect serviceability .
the department will allow sound knots provided the width of the knot does not exceed onethird the diameter of a round post at the point where it occurs or onethird the width of any face of a sawed post or a maximum of num num inches .
the department will reject wood with season checks that penetrate more than onethird of the diameter of the piece or which have a width of more than num inch .
use round posts and halfround posts that are free of multiple crooks .
the department will allow crooks in one plane only provided that a straight line between the centers of the butt and tip does not deviate more than num inches from the center of the post at any point .
ensure that crooks in squaresawed posts do not exceed one inch in num feet .
cleanly peel round posts and remove all bark .
strips of inner bark that are less than num inch wide and num inches long may remain on the peeled post .
trim all protruding knots flush with the sides and remove all spurs and splinters .
in machine peeling operations follow the natural taper of round posts .
manufacture halfround posts by sawing in half the round posts complying with the above manufacturing methods .
square cut the ends of all posts unless the engineer allows driving .
when driving is specified or allowed point the butt end before receiving preservative treatment .
do not allow the length of the point to exceed num times the diameter or width of face as applicable .
a line posts .
use line posts with a length of num feet and a minus oneinch tolerance .
use line posts that are either round halfround or squaresawed however furnish the same type section for all line posts throughout the project .
ensure that round posts have a minimum diameter of num inches .
ensure that halfround posts have a minimum face of num inches and a minimum radius of num num inches .
cut squaresawed posts to numinch by numinch num inch .
b end corner gate brace and pull posts .
do not use lengths less than num feet .
use either round or squaresawed posts however furnish the same type section for all of these types throughout the project .
ensure that round posts have a minimum diameter of num inches .
cut squaresawed posts to numinch by numinch num inch .
c braces .
conform to all requirements for line posts except use braces that are either round or squaresawed and furnish them in the lengths specified in the plans .
num untreated wood posts .
furnish untreated wood posts of osageorange black locust red cedar white oak or of other approved species and ensure that posts conform to all applicable requirements of subsection num .
use untreated wood posts only when specified in the contract .
num gates .
fabricate gate frames to the size and dimensions specified in the contract .
ensure that pipe used in frames conforms to subsection num .
weld or otherwise construct all joints to form a rigid and watertight frame .
num furnish all gates complete with approved hinges latches and auxiliary braces as required .
fit gate frames with a fabric that conforms to the same requirements as the corresponding fence .
the department may approve the use of gates fabricated of other materials .
num section num chain link fencing materials num description .
this section covers materials for use in the construction of fences of chain link fabric .
the department will allow num optional types of fabric zinc coated steel aluminumcoated steel or aluminum alloy type i ii or iii fabric respectively .
use vinyl coated fabric type iv only when specified in the contract .
num requirements .
conform to aashto m num for all materials except steel posts and barbed wire .
num fabric .
use numinch nominal diameter wire woven in numinch mesh .
coat type i fabric to conform to class d. furnish fabric for fences num feet and num feet high that has the top selvages knuckled and bottom selvage knuckled or twisted and barbed .
furnish fabric for fences num feet high or higher with both top and bottom selvages twisted and barbed .
num barbed wire .
conform to subsection num .
num post caps and socket type brace connections .
use galvanized malleable iron or other approved type designed to exclude moisture from inside posts and rails .
num posts rails gate frames and expansion sleeves .
with zinccoated steel fabric or with aluminumcoated steel fabric use either zinccoated steel or zinc acrylic coated steel .
with aluminum alloy fabric use aluminum alloy .
furnish steel posts that comply with subsection num .
num fabric ties .
use either a minimum numinch nominal diameter aluminum alloy or numinch nominal diameter galvanized steel .
num hog rings and tension wire .
with zinccoated steel fabric or with aluminumcoated steel fabric use zinccoated steel wire or aluminumcoated steel wire .
ensure that steel ties and wire conform to astm f num except that the minimum weight of coating is num ounces per square foot .
with aluminum alloy fabric use aluminum alloy wire .
num miscellaneous fittings and hardware .
with zinccoated steel fabric or with aluminumcoated steel fabric use zinccoated steel .
with aluminum alloy fabric use aluminum alloy .
num section num wood products num inspection testing and acceptance .
the engineer will visually inspect and approve all treated wood products before use on the project .
the division of materials will grade inspect sample and test all treated wood products before their use on the project if the plant producing the wood materials is located within the commonwealth or a nummile driving distance of its borders .
when obtaining treated wood materials from a plant outside this nummile distance have an independent treatedwood testing company approved by the division of materials grade inspect sample and test the wood treated material at no expense to the department .
obtain a report prepared by the independent testing firm that grade inspected sampled and tested the treated wood material and submit it to the division of materials at least num days before using the wood materials on the project .
use only treated wood that has been cut to size before treating .
treat field sawn surfaces according to awpa mnum .
num boards .
boards are defined as being less than numinch in nominal thickness and one inch or more in width .
only use boards that are one of the available grades established by either the southern pine inspection bureau spib or the west coast lumber inspection bureau wclib .
the contract will designate the grade and applicable inspection bureau .
num dimension lumber .
dimension lumber is limited to surfaced softwood lumber of nominal thickness from numinch through numinch .
only use dimension lumber for framing members such as joists planks rafters studs and small timbers .
use only dimension lumber boards that are one of the available grades established by either the spib or the wclib .
the contract will designate the grade and applicable inspection bureau .
num timbers numinch by numinch and larger .
use only timbers that are of one of the available grades established by either the spib or the wclib .
the contract shall designate the dimensions grade species and applicable inspection bureau .
num structural lumber .
conform to the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
num bridge planking and rough local hardwoods .
num species .
use only bridge planking that is white oak red oak or southern yellow pine .
the term white oak includes white oak chestnut oak post oak burr oak swamp chestnut oak swamp white oak live oak chinquapin oak and other less known varieties of oak of this character .
the term red oak includes red oak black oak southern red oak willow oak water oak pin oak cherrybark or swamp red oak and other less known varieties of oak of this character .
southern yellow pine may be any species except field or loblolly .
num quality of white oak or red oak .
the engineer will not approve wood for use that has splits rot or unsound knots .
use only pieces that are sawed full to specified sizes and lengths with square edges except wane bark or the lack of wood as follows .
the engineer will allow wane on one corner on num percent of the pieces in any shipment not to exceed num percent of the width of the face on which it appears .
the num engineer will allow this grade with sound stains scattered worm holes or grub holes not materially affecting the strength of the piece and sound bird pecks or their equivalent sound knots or their equivalent not exceeding in diameter num percent the width of the face in which they appear .
use only boxed heartcenter wood products .
cut pieces not large enough to box the heartcenter outside the heart except that sizes num to num inches in thickness num inches wide and wider may show heart on one face only in num percent of the pieces in any shipment .
num quality of southern yellow pine .
conform to the spib grades as follows a structural light framing numinch by numinch to numinch by numinch .
provide no .
num dense .
b structural joists and planks numinch by numinch or numinch by numinch .
provide no .
num dense .
c stress rated timbers numinch by numinch and larger .
provide no .
num sr. num dimensions and tolerances .
use rough timber that is cut full size as specified sawed true with parallel faces .
the engineer will allow no more than num percent of a lot or shipment to be scant num inch in thickness and no more than num percent of a lot or shipment may be scant num inch in width .
ensure that dressed dimensions for both oak and pine material conform to southern pine inspection bureau thicknesses and widths for dimension lumber .
num rough local hardwood .
this subsection covers hardwood lumber and timber that is produced locally .
use only white oak red oak or beech hardwood .
where hardwood material is intended to be used inside the department will allow other species of hardwood that are suitable for the intended use when such species are specified .
num use only material that is cut from live standing trees and is free from any form of decay .
num the department does not require seasoned material .
num cut all pieces to a square edge with no less than num percent heart girth measurement for full length of the piece .
num saw all material to the full nominal dimensions .
num ensure that all knots are tight and sound .
do not allow any material with a knot of greater diameter than half of the width of the face on which it occurs .
allow only one maximum knot or small knots aggregating in diameter of one maximum knot in each onefoot length of timber .
num ensure that all material is reasonably free from crook and warp .
num do not allow any piece that has a shake crack or split which extends over half through the narrow face of the piece .
num do not allow any boxed heart in pieces less than num inches in thickness .
num the engineer will reject material having any defect or combination of defects that seriously impairs the strength or that renders it unsatisfactory for the intended use .
num preservative treatment .
when the contract specifies preservative treatment of wood products treat according to awpa cnum .
provide preservative conforming to awpa cnum as the contract specifies .
do not use creosote or creosote solutions with wood required to be paintable .
when the contract specifies pentachlorophenol preservative use heavy petroleum solvent when the contract does not require painting .
use light petroleum solvent when the contract requires that the wood is to be paintable .
num do not use waterborne preservatives where the wood will be in contact with water unless recommended by awpa specifications .
follow the guidelines set in awpa mnum for the care of preservative treated wood products .
num section num tunnel lining materials num description .
this section covers materials requirements for steel plates and fittings to be used for lining tunnels .
refer to the contract for sectional properties .
num steel plates .
use base metal for steel plates that conforms to the chemical requirements of astm a num .
ensure that the flat plate before cold forming conforms to the following minimum mechanical properties tensile strength num psi yield strength num psi elongation num inches num ensure that nominal plate dimensions provide the sectional properties shown in the current edition of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
for thickness tolerances conform to table num of aashto m num .
provide steel liner plates of additional thickness or protect by coatings or other means when specified in the contract for resistance to abrasion or corrosion .
num bolts and nuts .
do not use any bolts and nuts with lapped seams that are less than num inch in diameter .
provide bolts conforming to astm a num for plate thicknesses equal to or greater than num inch and a num for plate thickness less than num inch .
provide nuts conforming to astm a num grade a .
only use bolts and nuts with numflanged plates of no less than num inch in diameter for plate thicknesses to and including num inch and no less than num inch in diameter for plates of greater thickness .
num section num timber poles num requirements .
provide poles of southern pine conforming to ansi specification num .
provide poles of the length and ansi size classification specified in the contract .
the department will not allow sweep exceeding one inch in num feet or double sweep .
treated timber poles shall meet all the general requirements of this subsection and shall be treated with pentachlorophenol oil borne or cca water borne preservative as noted in aashto mnum in accordance with requirements of the current awpa standards .
for poles treated with pentachlorophenol conforming to awpa pnum according to awpa unum .
treat with a light petroleum solvent to provide an oilfree paintable finished product .
the engineer will allow other processes which produce the specified paintability .
ensure that net retention is no less than num pounds per cubic foot on the outer num inch and no less than num pounds per cubic foot in the num to oneinch zone with average retentions of no less than num and num pounds per cubic foot respectively .
follow the guidelines for the care of preservative treated wood products as set in awpa mnum .
num acceptance .
the department will inspect test and accept poles according to subsection num .
num section num structural steel coatings num description .
this section covers requirements for structural steel coating systems used in steel bridge construction and maintenance .
num general requirements .
select structural steel coatings systems conforming to this section and included on the departments list of approved materials .
use only coating system components that are factory mixed and delivered ready for use .
do not allow the use of partial kits .
sediment formed during shipment must be easily dispersed with a power mixer to produce a smooth uniform coating having good spreading characteristics .
reject coatings that excessively gel or cakes in the container .
ensure the coatings produce a smooth uniform finish without sags or streaks .
ensure successive coating applications i.e .
intermediate coat to prime coat differ in color a minimum of nume .
ensure each lot of finish coat complies within nume to the contract requirement .
store coatings at temperatures above num f and below the most restrictive maximum ambient air temperature for the coating system stated on the coating manufacturers product data sheets .
equip storage areas with highlow thermometers capable of measuring and recording the appropriate temperature range .
do not store coating systems in direct sunlight .
the engineer will reject or retest coatings exposed to temperatures outside this range .
num approval .
the department will approve structural steel coating systems based on performance data obtained in accordance with km num .
num sampling and testing .
the department will sample and test each shipment of each lot of coating delivered to the project in accordance with the departments materials field sampling manual .
allow the department num working days from the date received by the division of materials to test and approve samples .
retest coatings that are not used within num months from their approval .
additionally retest coatings that are stored between painting seasons .
remove rejected coatings from the job site before starting painting operations .
num certification .
submit manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for each shipment of approved structural steel coatings delivered for use on projects .
clearly state the manufacturer and product name as listed in the departments list of approved materials .
identify the lot numbers expiration date and quantity of each coating or coating component .
num acceptance .
the department will accept structural steel coating systems based on verification of inclusion on the departments list of approved materials compliance of the manufacturers certification verification the coatings will not exceed the expiration date and acceptable tests results obtained by the department in accordance with table num .
num acceptance of nonspecification compliant coatings .
the department may accept coatings found to be in nonconformance to the specification acceptance range at a reduction in pay see table num .
coatings with analytical test results not in conformance to the specification acceptance range but within the acceptance range with deduction may be accepted for incorporation into the project with applicable reductions in pay .
deductions are cumulative to a maximum of num reduction in pay applied to the contractors invoiced unit cost for the coating .
coatings with num or more analytical tests resulting in nonconformance to the specification acceptance range or num any analytical test result exceeding the acceptance range with deduction will be rejected and removed from the project .
num num table num .
coatings price adjustment schedule analytical test specification acceptance range acceptance range with deduction deduction applied to unit cost density astm dnum target value num lbsgal target value num to num lbsgal num viscosity astm dnum target value num ku weight solids astm dnum target value num target value num to num num volume solids astm dnum target value num target value num to num num pigment astm dnum astm d num target value num target value num to num num metallic pigment content astm dnum target value num target value num to num num volatile organic compounds astm dnum num gl maximum color astm dnum num emaximum num to num e maximum num color differential num eminimum num to num e minimum num gloss astm dnum target value num gloss units sag resistance astm dnum target value num drying schedule astm dnum target value num pot life target value num ku resin content astm dnum astm dnum aashto tpnum target value num target value num to num num num section num elastomeric bearing pads num elastomeric bearing pads .
furnish elastomeric bearing pads conforming to the design and dimensions as specified in the plans and to the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges division ii section num .
use bearings that are low temperature grade num with durometer hardness of num and that conform to the load test requirements corresponding to design method a .
num section num concrete curing materials num general .
this section lists the various types of curing materials allowed for concrete and the materials requirements applicable to each .
the department will provide specifications governing the particular type or types of curing materials allowed for specific classes of construction in the contract or other sections of these specifications .
num liquid membrane forming compounds .
products must have completed testing or been submitted for testing through the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep for concrete curing compounds in order to remain on or to be placed on the departments list of approved materials .
ensure that all curing compounds conform to aashto m num and are from a department approved manufacturer .
num type numd clear with fugitive dye or translucent with fugitive dye class a or class b .
num type num white pigmented class a or class b .
supply type num curing compounds in agitating type drums except the department will not require agitating type containers when type num curing compound is supplied in num gallon pails .
the department will accept curing compounds on the basis of certification of their conformance to this section and their being from an approved manufacturer .
the department will reject curing compounds from an unapproved manufacturer and require their removal from the project site .
num acceptance procedures for nonspecification curing compounds .
the department will test project samples .
when nonspecification curing compounds are inadvertently incorporated into the work the department will accept the material with a reduction in pay .
the department will apply the largest payment reduction when the material fails to meet more than one specification requirement .
the department will calculate the payment reduction on the invoice cost of the material delivered at the project site .
moisture loss payment reduction kgsquare meter num num num num or more reduction rate num num num num reflectance payment reduction reflectance num or more num num num or less reduction rate num num num num num burlap cloth .
conform to aashto m num class num .
num waterproof paper regular or white .
conform to aashto m num .
num white polyethylene film white opaque .
use white polyethylene film of either single sheet construction conforming to aashto m num or laminated construction consisting of num sheets of white polyethylene reinforced with synthetic fiber num cords providing the total thickness of polyethylene exclusive of the cords averages no less than num mils and the sheeting conforms to all other applicable requirements of aashto m num .
incorporate the reinforcing cords diagonally in num directions and ensure that the number of cords averages num per linear foot in each direction .
num white burlap polyethylene sheet .
conform to aashto m num .
num curing blankets .
use curing blankets that consist of a top layer of white copolymer material and a bottom layer of absorbent nonwoven synthetic fabric .
ensure that the layers are securely bonded together so there will be no separation of the layers during handling and curing of the concrete .
when tested according to aashto m num ensure that moisture loss does not exceed numgrams per square centimeter and that reflectance is at least num percent .
num section num masonry materials num concrete masonry units for construction of catch basins and manholes .
conform to astm c num .
num precast reinforced concrete manhole sections .
conform to astm c num km num and the standard drawings .
for flat top slabs a tongue and groove design is optional .
the department will allow the use of lightweight aggregate provided that it conforms to subsection num .
num concrete brick .
conform to astm c num .
use type ii grade n or s. num sewer and manhole leveling brick .
conform to aashto m num .
the department will waive the requirement for saturation coefficient for grades sm and ms .
ensure that the dimensions are of the specified standard size .
num sewer brick .
use grade ss or sm .
num manhole brick .
use grade ms or mm .
num hydrated lime .
conform to astm c num .
num section num deicers num description .
this section covers deicers used for icesnow removal and road conditioning purposes .
num general .
provide deicers which conform to this section .
provide independent analysis data and certification showing compliance to num cfr num for leachable heavy metals for each deicer annually .
report the total concentration of each heavy metal present and the test method used for each determination .
num calcium chloride .
conform to astm d num for the following a type s solid grade num .
class b. grade num .
class b .
b type l liquid .
ensure a minimum calcium chloride content of num .
num sodium chloride .
furnish sodium chloride in a free flowing condition and conforming to the following chemical and physical requirements num sodium chloride content .
ensure a minimum sodium chloride content of num .
num moisture content .
ensure the moisture content of the sodium chloride does not to exceed num .
num gradation .
sieve size mass passing num mm numin .
num mm numin .
num num mmnumin .
num to num num mm no .
num num to num num mm no .
num num to num num m no .
num num to num num ceritifcation .
submit manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for each shipment of deicer delivered for use .
clearly state the manufacturer product name actual test results showing conformance to the stated requirements date of compliance analysis to num cfr num for leachable heavy metals and quantity of deicer .
num acceptance .
the department will accept deicers based on compliance of manufacturers certification and visual inspection by the engineer .
the department reserves the right to sample and test deicers at the engineers discretion in accordance with the departments field sampling and testing manual .
the department will conduct testing of calcium chloride deicers in accordance with km num and of sodium chloride deicers in accordance with km num .
num section num epoxy resin systems num general .
conform to astm c num except as specified in subsections num num and num .
provide materials of all types of the grade and class required for the intended use .
types are as follows a type iii .
use in epoxysand slurry as a binder in epoxy mortars or epoxy concretes .
b type iv .
use for installing dowels into hardened portland cement concrete .
c type v. use for bonding plastic portland cement concrete to hardened portland cement concrete .
num epoxysand slurry for concrete bridge deck overlays .
conform to astm c num type iii or aashto m num class ii .
num reinforcing bar grout adhesives .
the department will allow reinforcing bar grout adhesives from the departments list of approved materials as an alternate to type iv epoxies for doweling reinforcing bars into hardened concrete .
a category i .
conform to km num utilizing a maximum onehour cure time .
b category ii .
conform to km num utilizing a maximum numhour cure time .
num structural adhesives with extended contact time .
the department will allow structural adhesives from the departments list of approved materials as an alternate to type v epoxies for bonding plastic portland cement to hardened portland cement concrete .
num approval .
the department will approve epoxy resin systems based on review of required independent laboratory data and department conducted testing .
submit independent laboratory data conducted within one year of the date of product submittal for department approval .
obtain department approval for each epoxy resin system every five years .
num astm cnum epoxy .
the department will approve astm cnum epoxy for type class and grade based on the manufacturers submission of independent laboratory data showing the actual test values for the astm specification requirements and submission of a product sample from a production lot .
num aashto m num .
the department will approve aashto mnum epoxy based on the manufacturers submission of independent laboratory data showing the actual test values for the aashto m num specification requirements for class ii and submission of a product sample from a production lot .
num reinforcing bar grout adhesives .
the department will approve non epoxy reinforcing bar grout adhesives based on testing conducted by the department in accordance with kmnum .
num structural adhesives with extended contact time .
the department will approve structural adhesives with extended contact time based on the manufacturers submission of independent laboratory data showing the actual test values for the astm cnum specification requirements for type v with the following modifications and submission of a product sample from a production lot .
a gel time minimum num minutes num b compressive strength astm cnum minimum numday num psi c bond strength astm cnum modified minimum numdays num hour contact time num psi num hours contact time num psi astm cnum is modified to allow for num hours contact time .
contact time is the time allowed between application of the bonding agent and placement of the plastic concrete .
num packaging .
package the num components in separate containers .
identify the containers as component a contains epoxy resin and component b contains hardener .
include on the container the following information num type mixing directions and usable temperature range .
num name of the manufacturer .
num lot or batch number .
num date of packaging .
num type of pigmentation .
num quantity contained in pounds and gallons .
num potential hazards according to the federal hazardous products labeling act .
num certification .
submit manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for each shipment of approved epoxy resin system delivered for use on projects .
clearly state the manufacturer product name type class grade and category as appropriate for each epoxy resin system as listed in the departments list of approved materials .
identify the lot numbers expiration date and quantity of each component of epoxy resin system .
num acceptance .
the department will accept epoxy resin systems based on verification of inclusion on the departments list of approved materials compliance of the manufacturers certification and verification the epoxy resin system has not exceeded the expiration date .
the department reserves the right to sample and test epoxy resin systems at the engineers discretion in accordance with the departments field sampling and testing manual .
num section num erosion control materials num description .
this section covers the requirements for various materials used for erosion control .
num agricultural limestone .
conform to the requirements and provisions of the kentucky department of agriculture .
the department of agriculture furnishes a test report and any required weight penalties to each agricultural limestone producer .
furnish the engineer with a copy of the test report current within num months as the basis of approval .
the engineer may sample any agricultural limestone that appears to be of questionable quality upon visual inspection .
num fertilizer .
provide commercial fertilizer that complies with the kentucky fertilizer law and contains the plant nutrients of nitrogen available phosphoric acid and soluble potash as specified in the contract .
ensure that bagged fertilizer displays the following information on the bag or on a sticker or tag attached to the bag num net weight num brand and grade num guaranteed analysis num name and address of manufacturer ensure that the manufacturer includes a statement with the bulk fertilizer dry or liquid that contains the same information required for the bagged fertilizer .
provide either bagged or bulk dry or liquid fertilizer manufactured and sold under the jurisdiction of the division of regulatory services of the university of kentucky agricultural experiment station .
select a supplier from the departments list of approved materials for fertilizer .
the department must sample test and approve any other fertilizer prior to its use .
num seed .
conform to the requirements outlined in the .
kentucky seed law and provisions for seed certification in kentucky and the regulations under the kentucky seed law with following exceptions num obtain seed only through registered dealers that are permitted for labeling of seed .
num ensure all deliveries and shipments of premixed seed are accompanied with a master blend sheet .
num ensure all bags and containers have an acceptable seed tag attached .
num the department may sample the seed at the job site at any time .
num do not use seed grasses native grasses and legumes if the weed seed is over one percent total germination including hard seed is less than num percent if the seed test date requirements for seeds purity germination hard seed min .
min .
max .
including allowed hard seed and in dormant seed germination grasses bentgrass argrostic palustris num num bermudagrass common cynodon dactylon num num bluegrass kentucky poa pratensis num num brome smooth bromus inermis num num canarygrass reed phalaris arundinacea num num fescue chewings festuca rubra var .
commutata num num fescue hard festuca trachyphlla num num fescue meadow festuca elatior num num fescue red festuca rubra num num fescue tall festuca arundinacca num num orchardgrass dactylis glomerata num num redtop agrostic alba num num ryegrass annual common or italian lotium multiflorum num num ryegrass perennial lolium perenne num num lovegrass weeping eragrostic curvula num num oat avena sativa num num rye secale cereale num num timothy phleum pratense num num wheat common triticum aestivum num num legumes alfalfa medicago sativa num num num clover alsike trifolium hybridum num num num clover ladino trifolium repens num num num clover white trifolium repens num num num crownvetch coronilla varia num num num lespedeza korean lespedeza stipulacea num num num lespedeza sericea lespedeza cuneata num num num sweetclover white melilotus alba num num num sweetclover yellow melilotus officinalis num num num partridge pea cassia fasciculate num num num trefoil birdsfoot lotus corniculatus num num num native grasses little bluestem schizachyrium scoparium num num big blustem andropogon gerardii num num indian grass sorghastrum nutans num num switchgrass panicum virgatum num num num is over num months old exclusive of the month tested or if the limits of noxious weed seed is exceeded .
ensure that noxious weed seeds contained in any seed or seed mixture does not exceed the maximum permitted rate of occurrence per pound .
max .
no .
seeds kind of noxious weed balloon vine cardiospermum halicacabum num per pound purple moonflower ipomoea turbinata num canada thistle cirsium arvense num johnsongrass sorghum halepense and sorghum almum and perennial rhizomatous derivatives of these species num quackgrass elytrigia repens num annual bluegrass poa annua num buckhorn plantain plantago lanceolata num corncockle agrostemma githago num dodder cuscuta spp .
num giant foxtail setaria faberii num oxeye daisy chrysanthemum leucanthemum num sorrel rumex acetosella num wild onion and wild garlic allium spp .
num seed or seed mixtures that contain in excess of num total noxious seeds per pound is prohibited wildflower seed shall not be planted until approved by the engineer .
num mulch materials .
use material for mulching that is baled wheat oat barley or rye straw or excelsior wood fibers .
ensure that mulch material is reasonably free from weed seeds stolons foreign matter or chaff and does not contain any johnson grass canada thistle quack grass or nodding thistle .
ensure that the mulch material is reasonably bright in color and not musty moldy or otherwise of low quality and does not contain chemicals toxic to plant growth .
use excelsior wood fibers that consist of fibers cut from sound green timber .
ensure that the cut is made in a manner to provide maximum strength of fiber but is at a slight angle to the natural grain of the wood so as to cause splintering of the fiber when weathering occurs .
use fibers with the following approximate physical properties width num to num inch thickness num to num inch and length num to num inches .
num asphalt materials for mulch .
.use either ssnum or ssnumh conforming to section num except that the department may waive retesting as provided by subsection num .
the engineer may reject asphalt materials that fail to disperse properly or otherwise fail to provide satisfactory results .
num erosion control blanket .
use a blanket from the departments list of approved materials .
blankets must be machine constructed with twosided netting filled with curled wood fiber mat straw or a straw and coconut fiber combination .
ensure the blanket is smolder resistant without the use of chemical additives .
a dimensions .
furnish in strips with a minimum width of num feet and length of num feet .
b weight .
num num curled wood fiber .
ensure a minimum mass per unit area of num ounces per square yard according to astm d num .
num straw .
ensure a minimum mass per unit area of num ounces per square yard according to astm d num .
num strawcoconut fiber .
ensure a minimum mass per unit area of num ounces per square yard according to astm d num .
c fill .
ensure the fill is evenly distributed throughout the blanket .
num curled wood fiber .
use curled wood fiber of consistent thickness with at least num percent of its fibers num inches or longer in length .
num straw .
use only weed free agricultural straw .
num strawcoconut fiber .
conform to the straw requirements above and ensure the coconut fiber is evenly distributed throughout the blanket and accounts for num or more of the fill .
d netting .
use photodegradable extruded plastic mesh or netting with a maximum spacing width of one inch square on both sides of the blanket .
secure the netting by stitching or other method to ensure the blanket retains its integrity .
e staples .
use steel wire ushaped staples with a minimum diameter of num inches num gauge a minimum width of one inch and a minimum length of num inches .
use a heavier gauge when working in rocky or clay soils and longer lengths in sandy soils .
provide staples with colored tops when requested by the engineer .
f performance .
num cfactor .
ensure the ratio of soil loss from protected slope to ratio of soil loss from unprotected is num for a slope of num when tested according to astm d num numinchhour for num minutes .
num shear stress .
ensure the blanket can sustain a minimum shear stress of num pounds per square foot without physical damage or excess erosion num inches soil loss when tested according to astm d num .
num temporary silt fence .
a posts .
use either hardwood or steel greater than num feet in height .
for hardwood provide a minimum num numinch by num numinch cross section that is straight enough to provide a fence without noticeable misalignment .
for steel provide a num num inch by oneinch tsection with projections to fasten wire and fabric in position .
b woven or welded wire fabric .
conform to section num or num .
provide fabric with a minimum height of num feet num inches .
require at least num horizontal wires spaced num num inches or closer with the top and bottom wires num inch or larger and all other wires num inch or larger .
require num inch or larger vertical wires spaced num inches or closer .
c geotextile fabric .
conform to aashto m num for temporary silt fence .
provide fabric with a height of num feet .
d fasteners .
use no .
num one inch long wire staples andor fabric ties that conform to subsection num .
num netting and staples .
conform to the standard drawings and the plans .
the engineer may accept netting and staples on the basis of visual inspection .
num topsoil .
topsoil is the portion of the soil profile defined technically as the a horizon by the soil science society of america .
use loose friable topsoil that is free num of stones num inch or greater in overall dimensions admixture of subsoil refuse stumps roots brush weeds and other material that prevent the formation of a suitable seed bed .
before stripping the topsoil inspect for existing vegetation .
do not use topsoil from sites having johnson grass canada thistle quack grass nodding thistle or excessive amounts of other noxious weeds or their rhizomes .
the department will sample the soil and determine the textural classification according to the us department of agriculture system the particle size according to km num the organic content according to km num and the ph according to astm d num .
acceptable topsoil composition is clay num maximum silt num maximum sand num maximum organic material num minimum num maximum ph num minimum num maximum num sod .
use sod that is either wellrooted kentucky bluegrass or tall fescue sod .
however obtain the engineers approval prior to using tall fescue sod in residential areas .
use sod that is completely free from noxious weeds and reasonably free from other objectionable grasses and weeds and stones or other foreign materials detrimental to the development and future maintenance of the sod .
obtain sod from sources that are covered with grass having a maximum height of num inches .
obtain approval of the selected source prior to cutting .
num section num masonry coating materials num description .
this section covers requirements for materials to be used as surface finishes for designated surfaces of cement concrete structures .
the masonry coatings must hide form marks patches and other minor irregularities and prevent deterioration spalling and other damage to the concrete due to the action of the weather and deicing chemicals .
num approval .
select masonry coatings from the departments list of approved materials .
use a material that is readily recognizable by its name trademark container or other feature .
conform to the departments testing criteria to be placed on or remain on the departments list of approved materials .
for initial approval submit representative samples color chips and duplicate copies of certified test reports to the division of materials for review and approval .
an independent testing laboratory acceptable to the department shall perform the tests described herein on representative samples of the material .
tests listed herein are the minimum testing requirements to be met .
when requested in writing the engineer may accept materials based on conformance to the same type of test but differing on minor procedural points .
attach copies of test procedures which differ from those stated herein .
in addition to the material provide brochures or booklets containing detailed instructions and explanatory remarks about surface preparation application procedures and other pertinent operations .
the department will continue to include the masonry coatings on the list contingent upon receiving an annual certification containing the following information num a statement that the masonry coating to be furnished during the particular calendar year is of the same composition as that previously approved for inclusion on the approved list .
num a statement that the masonry coating conforms to the appropriate requirements of the kentucky standard specifications for road and bridge construction .
num a statement that notification will be made to the division of materials of any changes in composition for review and approval before furnishing the material to projects .
num freezethaw test .
cast and cure num concrete specimens no less than num by num by num inches .
moist cure specimens for num days and then dry in room air at num to num f for num hours before applying masonry coating .
ensure that there is no excessive oil on specimen forms .
coat sides of specimens brush permitted according to the manufacturers directions at a rate of num num square feet per gallon and cure at room temperature for num hours after which num immerse in water at room temperature num to num f for num hours and remove .
num place in cold storage at num f for one hour and remove .
num thaw at room temperature num to num f for one hour .
num repeat steps num num and num to complete a total of num cycles .
at the end of num cycles of the freezethaw test ensure that the coated specimens shows no visible defects .
num accelerated weathering .
test according to astm d num .
apply at an application rate of num num square feet per gallon .
test for num hours in an atlas type xw sunshine arc weatherometer or for num hours in an atlas type dmc enclosed violet carbon arc weatherometer or equivalent .
perform the test in numminute cycles num consisting of num minutes of light and num minutes of light and demineralized water .
at the end of the exposure test ensure that there is no checking cracking or loss in film integrity and no other film defects .
ensure that the coating shows no more than very slight color change .
num salt spray resistance .
apply the masonry coating to concrete at a rate of num num square feet per gallon and test the coating according to astm b num .
expose the coating to a num percent sodium salt solution for num hours and maintain it at num num f during the period of exposure .
ensure that it shows no loss of adhesion or deterioration at the end of the num hours .
num fungus growth resistance .
ensure that the masonry coating passes a fungus resistance test as described by federal specification ttpnum .
after a minimum incubation period of num days ensure that no growth is exhibited on the coating .
num section num hardware for timber structures num general .
use only black nails spikes bolts dowels washers and lag screws .
num bolts .
use machine bolts having square heads and nuts and ensure that screw threads make a close fit in the nuts .
furnish machine bolts driftbolts and dowels of either wrought iron or medium steel .
designate the weight of bolts as american standard regular .
num washers .
furnish washers that either are cast ogee or malleable castings or are cut from medium steel or wroughtiron plate as specified in the contract .
num nails .
for nails use cut or round wire of standard form .
furnish cut or wire spikes or boat spikes as specified in the contract .
num section num retroreflective materials num description .
this section covers the requirements for retroreflective materials for use in delineators barricades traffic drum channelizing tapes cone collars signs and for other applications as required .
num general requirements .
ensure that all materials and prepared sign faces are free from cracks tears ridges humps discoloration or other objectionable blemishes .
when furnishing materials for the department or its agent to fabricate signs ensure compatibility with the manufacturers recommended fabrication procedures and the requirements of this section .
the department will reject material that prevents successful fabrication .
use sheeting materials that present a finished surface suitable for receiving stenciled messages paint overlays or film overlays .
provide only retroreflective sign sheeting materials that conform to federal specification lsnumc for solvent heat cold and humidity resistance .
num delineators .
provide the size and shape specified in the contract referenced standard drawing or sepia drawing .
a barrier wall delineator .
provide retroreflective sheeting conforming to astm d num type xi class num of the appropriate color attached to a non corrosive metal backing or approved equal rigid substrate .
b guardrail delineator .
provide retroreflective sheeting conforming to astm d num type xi class num of the appropriate color attached to a noncorrosive metal backing or approved equal rigid substrate .
c delineator post .
provide retroreflective sheeting conforming to astm d num type xi class num of the appropriate color attached to an approved delineator posts .
num barricade sheeting .
conform to astm d num type iii or iv class num .
num traffic drum channelizing tape .
conform to astm d num type iii or iv class num or num .
num cone collars .
conform to astm d num type vi class num or num .
num roll up sign sheeting .
conform to astm d num type vi class num .
num permanent sign sheeting .
conform to astm d num types iii iv viii ix and xi .
use the appropriate type and color of sheeting as specified in the division of traffic operations guidance manual .
num construction sign sheeting .
conform to astm d num types iv viii ix or xi for fluorescent orange .
num approval .
the department will approve reflective sheeting materials based on km num and conformance to this section .
num num field performance .
the using agency is responsible for requiring the dating of all signs at the time of installation .
the department will begin the field performance obligation period based on that date .
the department will consider the retroreflective sheeting defective if any of the following conditions are observed num when viewed from a moving vehicle under normal day and night driving conditions it has deteriorated due to natural causes to the extent that the sign is ineffective for its intended purpose .
num it no longer meets the minimum criteria for retained retroreflective after atmospheric exposure num fluorescent sheeting fails to retain num percent of the retroreflective requirements detailed in km num .
num warranty .
when the engineer determines that the retroreflective sign sheeting supplied and used according to the manufacturers recommendations have not met field performance requirements the manufacturer shall cover restoration costs as follows for sheeting num permanent sheeting .
within the first num years after application replace the sheeting and cover the cost of materials and labor required to restore the sign surface to its original effectiveness including stenciled messages paint overlays or film overlays .
within the numth through numth year after application replace the sheeting required to restore the sign surface to its original effectiveness including stenciled messages paint overlays or film overlays .
num construction sheeting .
within num years after application replace the sheeting required to restore the sign to its original effectiveness including stenciled messages paint overlays or film overlays .
num packaging .
ensure that all materials are suitably and substantially packaged and have the name and address of the manufacturer or vendor contract or purchase order number kind of material trade name date of manufacture lot and run number color and net contents plainly marked on each package or container .
ensure that if stored under normal conditions the retroreflective material as furnished is suitable for use for a minimum period of one year .
num certification .
submit manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for each shipment of reflective sheeting delivered for use by the department .
submit reflective sheeting manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for fabricated signs delineators barricades or other applications of reflective sheeting delivered for use on projects .
clearly state the manufacturer product name and product code as listed in the departments list of approved materials sheeting type sheeting color sheeting lot number sheeting expiration date and quantity .
num acceptance .
the department will accept reflective sheeting based on verification of inclusion on the departments list of approved materials and conformance of the manufacturers certification .
the department reserves the right to sample and test reflective sheeting at the engineers discretion in accordance with the departments field sampling and testing manual. . num section num construction zone temporary marking tapes num description .
this section covers pavement marking material designed to provide reflective delineation in construction zones .
this section covers the following types of marking material a type a. nonremovable pavement marking tape .
b type b. removable pavement marking tape .
num general .
num manufacture .
use a material consisting of a weather and trafficresistant reflective film on a backing precoated with a pressuresensitive adhesive .
num adhesive .
use a precoated pressuresensitive adhesive that does not require a liner or activation .
num application properties .
ensure that the material adheres to asphalt and concrete surfaces when applied according to the manufacturers recommendations at or above surface temperatures of num f. ensure that the material does not require any protective devices such as traffic cones or barricades after application .
do not allow re use of previously installed material .
num conformability and thickness .
use material that is thin flexible formable and remains conformed to the texture of the pavement surface following application .
ensure that the thickness of the material furnished is within num mils of the thickness of the material submitted for approval .
use tape with a minimum width of num inches .
num miscellaneous requirements .
ensure that the supplied material is of good appearance free from cracks with edges true straight and unbroken .
make the material available in rolls with no more than num splices per num yards of length .
package the material according to accepted commercial standards .
ensure that the supplied material is capable of being stored at temperatures up to num f for a period of one year after purchase without adversely affecting the physical properties stated in this section .
num approval .
the department will approve temporary marking tapes based on conformance to km num and the requirements of this section .
the department may remove temporary marking tapes from the departments list of approved materials for poor field performance in kentucky .
num certification .
submit manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for each shipment of approved temporary marking tapes delivered for use on projects .
clearly state the manufacturer product name product code and color as listed in the departments list of approved materials .
identify the lot numbers expiration date and quantity delivered .
num acceptance .
the department will accept temporary marking tapes based on verification of inclusion on the departments list of approved materials compliance of the manufacturers certification verification the expiration date will not be exceeded and visual inspection of the temporary marking tape installation .
the department reserves the right to sample and test temporary marking tape at the discretion of the engineer in num accordance with the departments field sampling and testing manual .
num section num sign posts num general .
furnish type i and ii posts .
type i posts are square tubular posts .
type ii posts are channels .
provide all posts in lengths as specified in one foot increments with a tolerance of one inch .
the department will require soil stabilizer plates for both type i and ii posts when they are not embedded in concrete .
when type i posts are specified the department may require sign bracing or type d breakaway supports .
ensure that posts are straight smooth and free from any defects affecting their strength durability or appearance .
ensure that all holes and ends are free from burrs and sharp edges and that ends are cut square .
num type i posts .
use hot rolled carbon sheet steel of structural quality that conforms to astm a num grade num .
yield strength after coldforming is num psi minimum .
num fabrication .
fabricate the post from square tube formed of steel rolled to size and welded directly in the corner by high frequency resistance welding and externally scarfed to agree with corner radii .
provide the following sizes provide numinch diameter holes on the centerline of all num sides space on oneinch centers along the entire post length beginning num inch from the top .
ensure holes are in true alignment and opposite each other directly and diagonally .
ensure consecutive sizes of square tubes will freely telescope for num feet or more of their length without the necessity of matching any particular face to any other face .
num finish .
conform to astm a num gnum structural quality grade num class num .
galvanize both the interior and the exterior of the post .
coat the corner weld with zinc after the scarifying operation .
coat the steel with a chromate conversion coating and a clear organic polymer topcoat .
num tolerances .
the department may reject material falling outside any of the following tolerances a outside dimensions .
num inch .
measure at least num inches from the end of the tube .
b wall thickness .
num inch .
c holes .
num inches in diameter .
d convexity and concavity .
ensure that no sides exceed num inch .
measure in the center of the flat side relative to the corner .
e square num numinch posts .
ensure sides are num degrees to each other within numinch .
f square numinch posts .
ensure sides are num degrees to each other within num inch .
g twist .
ensure twist does not exceed num inch in any onefoot length .
h straight .
ensure deviation does not exceed num inch in any onefoot length .
outside dimensions in .
corner radii in .
wall thickness gauge in .
weight lbft num by num num num num num num  by num  num num num num num  by num  num num num num num i corner radii .
num num inch .
num type d breakaway supports .
use supports from the departments list of approved materials and conforming to the details in the standard drawings .
num type ii .
use hot wrought steel conforming to the physical properties of astm a num grade num and conforming to the chemical requirements of astm a num for rails of nominal weight between num and num pounds per foot .
the contractor may request to furnish posts made of material not complying with the specified properties .
if desired submit the written request for approval and include a description of the physical and chemical properties of the proposed material .
include with the request a certified test report of a dynamic test by an independent laboratory substantiating that the posts when double mounted in an numfoot span conform to the breakaway requirements of aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
provide a manufacturers certification that the material was manufactured and tested according to the applicable specifications or approved alternate along with a report of the physical and chemical test results for each shipment .
num fabrication .
fabricate posts from uniform modified flanged channel sections .
provide numinch diameter holes on the centerline space on oneinch centers along the entire post length beginning one inch from the top .
align holes horizontally and vertically to accommodate back to back post installations .
ensure that the area of contact between the posts and sign is symmetrical about the vertical axes of both sign and post and that the back side furnishes a solid bearing surface the entire length of the post for back to back installation .
conform to the following typical section   num d d num inch num deflection .
test for deflection as simple beams with the flanges in compression on nonrestricting supports num feet apart .
apply a load of num pounds at the center of the span at a deflection rate not to exceed num inch per minute .
transmit the load to the beam through a oneinch minimum diameter pin laid across the flanges .
with the designated load applied ensure that the deflection at the center does not exceed num inch .
one minute after removal of the load ensure that the deflection does not exceed num inch .
num finish .
galvanize according to aashto m num after fabrication .
num num packaging .
securely fasten posts of the same type and length in bundles of num pounds or less in a manner that is easily handled by a fork lift and that prevents slipping during handling and shipping .
the engineer will reject posts whose finish is excessively damaged due to slipping rubbing or other reasons .
num section num sign substrates num aluminum .
num panel signs .
conform to astm b num alloy numtnum .
fabricate signs from numinch wide extrusions and if specified compatible numinch wide extrusions .
when a numinch extrusion is specified use it as the bottom panel of the sign .
typical cross sections and minimum weights per foot are specified in the plans .
use compatible side extrusions on all sign edges .
prepare surfaces of extrusions composing the sign face to receive retroreflective background material according to the extrusion and retroreflective material manufacturers recommendations .
provide all remaining surfaces of extrusions and side extrusions with a soft matte finish .
num sheeting signs .
conform to astm b num alloy numtnum or numhnum .
fabricate signs of the size and shape specified .
provide a thickness of num mils inch if any single edge dimension of the sign exceeds num feet .
if no single edge dimension exceeds num feet provide a thickness of num mils .
prepare the side of the sheet to be used as the sign face to receive retroreflective background material according to the sheeting and retroreflective material manufacturers recommendations .
num section num roadway lighting materials num general .
this section defines minimum acceptable design and operational standards for roadway lighting materials utilized on projects .
all materials must be approved prior to being utilized on a project .
num concrete .
conform to subsection num and num .
use class a concrete .
num steel reinforcement .
steel reinforcement shall have minimum yield strength of num psi .
num ground rods .
provide only composite shaft ground rods consisting of a pure copper exterior that has been inseparably molten welded to a steel core .
use rods with a minimum diameter of num inch and a minimum length of num feet .
equip the rods with copper or bronze clamps that are the correct size for the rod being used .
num conduit .
ensure the conduit is the size specified on the plans and detail sheets .
num rigid steel and fittings .
use rigid steel conduit meeting the requirements of ansi cnum .
use rigid steel conduit fittings that are zinc coated and meet the requirements of ansi cnum .
num schedule num and fittings .
use schedule num polyvinyl chloride meeting the requirements of nema tcnum ul num and ul num .
use schedule num polyvinyl chloride fittings having the same chemical and physical properties as the conduit with which it is to be used and meeting the requirements of ul numb .
use joints that are made in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
each conduit and fitting shall bear the underwriters laboratories inc. label .
num testpipe plugs .
provide a testpipe plugs that are galvanized steel or stainless steel mechanical type .
provide the testpipe plug with a rubber grommet that expands inside the conduit to seal the conduit .
num ducted cable .
a cable .
use stranded annealed copper cable conforming to astm b num and astm b num rated for num volts .
use material that conforms to either the applicable requirements of icea standard snum with thermoplastic insulation of grsrubber base conforming to appendix ka of icea and listed by ul as type usenum for direct burial or the application requirements of icea standard snum with thermosetting insulation of cross link polyethylene conforming to the requirement of column a of icea and listed by ul as type usenum .
use cable and conductors that are preinstalled in the duct .
b duct .
use polyethylene duct with a minimum tensile strength of num psi for secondary cable underground .
provide for num percent maximum fill .
conform to nema tcnum epeca .
num num warning tape .
provide tape that is num inch wide by num mils nominal thick has a minimum tensile strength of num pounds per num inch width and be color coded impregnated with alkali and acid stable leadfree organic pigments suitable for direct burial .
use tape that is ultraviolet colorfast and nondistorting with no elongation .
use tape that includes black letteringsymbols on a red background that conforms to the apwaulcc national color code .
provide tape that is continuously reads caution electric line buried below alternating with a no digging symbol .
num junction box .
provide a junction box that meets or exceeds ansiscte num tier num .
provide a junction box marked lighting .
attach covers with a minimum of two num stainless steel hex bolts and washers .
stackable boxes are permitted .
num wire for all multiple circuit roadway lighting wires use singleconductor awg copper wire of sizes specified in the contract .
use no .
num awg copper wire as leads from pole bases or junction boxes to ballast terminals .
use grounding conductor from the grounding system to the grounding terminal in luminaire .
use stranded wire except for ground wires connected directly to ground rods or between bushings .
ensure that all insulation for no .
num or larger wire is type usenum ul rated .
ensure that all insulation for no .
num or smaller wire is type thhnnum or thwnnum .
use copper grounding conductors sized as specified by the nec or as specified in the contract .
install copper service entrance conductors on the service poles sized and insulated as specified by the nec .
num fused cable connector kit .
use a fused connector kit that completely encloses and protects the fuse against damage from water and weather .
use a spring loaded contact between the fuse and fuseholder .
ensure that the springs are not a part of the current carrying circuit .
ensure that line and load side terminals of the fused connector kit positively connect to the conductors .
insulate and waterproof the terminals according to the manufacturers recommendation .
ensure that the fused connector kit can be repeatedly disconnected without damage to the watertight seals and terminals or without a reduction in conductivity .
provide a fused connector kit designed to break away without damage .
construct the load side housing to retain the fuse when disconnected and permanently mark it load or load side .
use a fused connector kit sized for the wires being used .
removal of wire strands will not be allowed .
num fuses .
use high interrupting capacity type fuses with a rating of num amperes .
use num by numinch fuses that are rated for num volts .
use fuses that protect circuits having a fault current capacity of up to num amperes ac .
use fuses tested to carry num of their rated capacity and that open at num in one hour or less .
num splicing .
use butt splices that are copper and of the correct conductor range .
cover all butt splices with a numm mastic pad or approved equal and then taped with a numm brand num electrical tape or approved equal .
num markers for buried cable use num inch by num inch by four inch deep precast concrete markers with letters numbers and arrows cast in the concrete .
each marker shall extend approximately num inch above the finished grade .
impress the word lighting appropriate directional arrow and circuit identification number on each marking slab .
use letters that are neat clearly legible and approximately four inch high num and three inch wide .
ensure that the stroke is num inch wide and num inch deep .
do not pour markers in place or chisel letters in concrete .
no substitution of rural right of way markers will be allowed .
num lighting poles .
lighting pole design shall be in accordance with loading and allowable stress requirements of num aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
fifth edition with current interims .
submit drawings in detail demonstrating the compliance with the aashto specification .
provide materials and products that are manufactured in the united states of america .
num conventional poles .
provide conventional poles that consist of a tapered aluminum pole having a base affixed to the lower end an aluminum bracket arm if required and a transformer base .
furnish an opening near the top of the pole to provide for a cable entrance from the pole to the bracket arm to provide a smooth cable guide for wiring .
equip the top of the pole with a removable cap .
secure a onepiece anchor base to the lower end of the pole .
provide this base with four slotted holes to receive the anchor bolts and four tapped holes for securing the bolt covers .
also provide four removable bolt covers and hardware with each base .
use single member bracket arms for four and six foot mast arm assemblies .
use single or double member bracket arms for eight foot mast arm assemblies .
use double pipe assemblies for ten twelve and fifteen foot mast arm assemblies .
double pipe assemblies consist of upper and lower members securely joined by means of vertical struts .
provide the pole end of the bracket arm with a cast or plate footing or clamp for positioning the assembly on the pole .
ensure that the pole manufacturer provides permanent marking on the pole base or other suitable location giving the pole design number and other identification data so the poles may be compared with material brochures or drawings .
provide each pole with a numxnum handhole at a height of between num and numabove the pole base .
provide an aluminum handhole cover secured with stainless steel screws .
num transformer bases .
provide bases that conform to the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals fifth edition with current interims .
ensure that each base has the following outside dimensions num inch num inch high num inch by numinch square bottom and num inch by numinch square top .
ensure that bases have a trapezoidal door with the following minimum dimensions num inch num inch high num inch across the bottom and num inch across the top .
construct the door of a high density polyethylene material in a color that matches the base .
provide each base with four loose bearing plates anchor washers lock washers and nuts to fasten the base to the anchor bolts .
fasten each transformer base to the base flange of the pole with four loose galvanized bearing plates four lock washers and four galvanized steel connecting bolts and nuts .
use connecting bolts of the same diameter and strength as the anchor bolts .
submit mill test reports on the connecting bolts .
the manufacturer shall specify the bolt circle and physical dimensions of the base bottom to ensure a proper foundation fit .
provide each transformer base with a numinch num unc tapped hole or other suitable provisions for grounding purposes .
num high mast poles .
use loading that based on a basic wind speed of num mph with a design liferecurrence interval of num years and designed to fatigue category i .
provide steel pole members designed for vortex shedding to eliminate galloping .
provide structures that are designed for a gust factor of num .
provide no truck induced gust fatigue design for this structure .
use a fabricator that is certified under category i conventional num steel structures as set forth by the american institute of steel construction quality certification program .
provide welding that is in accordance with sections num through num of the american welding society aws dnum structural welding code .
use tackers and welders that are qualified in accordance with the code .
use tube longitudinal seam welds that are free of cracks and excessive undercuts performed with automatic processes and visually inspected .
inspect with magnetic particle the longitudinal welds suspected to contain defects .
inspect ultrasonically and radiographically the circumferential butt welded pole and arm splices .
provide calculations and drawings that are stamped by a licensed professional engineer .
provide poles on the contract that are of the same design and manufacturer. . use poles that are designed for num fixtures per pole .
use the combined effective projected area epa and weight of the fixtures and lowering device that are determined by the fixture manufacturer .
provide calculations that include the pole base plate and anchor bolt analysis .
provide pole calculations that are analyzed at the pole base along the pole at num ft intervals and at each slip joint splice .
at each of these locations the following information shall be calculated num .
poles diameter thickness section modulus moment of inertia and cross sectional area .
num .
the centroid weight projected area drag coefficient velocity pressure and wind force of each trapezoidal pole segment .
num .
the axial force shear force primary moment total moment axial stress bending stress allowable axial stress allowable bending stress and combined stress ratio csr at each elevation .
num .
the poles angular and linear deflection at each elevation .
provide a pole section that conforms to astm a num grade a with a minimum yield strength of num ksi or astm a num with a minimum yield strength of num ksi .
use tubes that are round or num sided with a four inch corner radius have a constant linear taper of .num inft and contain only one longitudinal seam weld .
circumferential welded tube butt splices and laminated tubes are not permitted .
provide pole sections that are telescopically slip fit assembled in the field to facilitate inspection of interior surface welds and the protective coating .
the minimum length of the telescopic slip splices shall be num times the inside diameter of the exposed end of the female section .
use longitudinal seam welds on both sections of the slip splice shall be complete penetration welds for a length equal to the minimum splice length plus num ft. longitudinal seam welds within num ft of the base plate welds shall be complete penetration welds .
provide base plates that conform to astm grade num or grade num .
the thickness of the base plates shall be equal to or greater than the nominal diameter of the connection bolt .
plates shall be integrally welded to the tubes with a telescopic welded joint or a full penetration butt weld with backup bar .
provide products that are hotdip galvanized to the requirements of either astm a num fabricated products or astm a num hardware items .
num num lowering device for high mast poles .
use a head frame assembly that is fabricated from galvanized structural steel or stainless steel .
the head frame assembly shall mount to the high mast pole tenon and shall be secured with stainless steel set screws .
the manufacturer of the lowering device shall coordinate with the pole manufacturer to ensure compatibility between the lowering device and pole .
provide a head frame assembly that is stop latched with three lifting cables used to raise and lower the luminaire ring .
for lifting cables use num diameter stainless steel num x num or num x num strand core type aircraft cables manufactured according to mil wnum .
support each lifting cable by two sheaves pulleys that are manufactured of cast steel forged steel or molybdenum disulfide reinforced nylon and supported by smooth stainless steel shafts .
machine the sheave groove num in larger that the nominal diameter of the cable .
use sheaves that incorporate oil impregnated sintered bronze bushings .
provide a head frame assembly cover shaped to shed water that is constructed of copper free spun aluminum or clear uv stabilized acrylic .
use an electrical power cord that is num conductor num awg or num conductor num awg type so extra flexible rated for num v. support power cord by a minimum of seven teflon or delrin rollers .
terminate cord with a num conductor twistlock connector on the free end and num v terminal block in the ring enclosure .
provide a single throw double pole breaker with a num amp frame for num v operation .
amperage rating shall be num a for towers with four or less luminaires num a for towers with six luminaries and num a for towers with eight to num luminaries .
num luminaire ring .
provide a luminaire ring that is constructed of num feet x num feet galvanized structural steel .
prewire the luminaire ring and include a weatherproof junction box and test receptacle for ground level testing of the luminaires .
if a special cable is required for ground level testing supply one cable with each portable power unit specified on the contract .
provide a ring that includes the appropriate number of installed num in steel luminaire mounting tenons .
provide a luminaire ring that has spring loaded iris arms or spring loaded rollers to keep the ring concentric around the pole during raising and lowering .
design the iris arms as shown on the specification sheets in the plans .
provide spring and spring mounting hardware that are stainless steel .
provide a latching mechanism that consists of three high strength marine grade aluminum latch housings and three stainless steel latch pins .
each latch will include a spring to compensate for pole deflection .
latching and unlatching shall be accomplished by alternately raising and lowering the luminaire ring .
latching may also be accomplished by rotation of the latch pin or travel of the pin through a mechanical circuit .
provide latch housing that are an enclosed design with the only opening at the bottom .
provide housing with a flared entrance bell to align the latch pin .
include a reflective indicator flat that indicates when the latching is complete .
num winch assembly .
provide a winch assembly that consists of a winch drum and gearbox mounted in the pole and an external power unit .
provide a winch that has a load rating of at least num lb with a gear ratio of not less than num .
include a failsafe brake system to prevent freewheeling of the winch drum .
provide a portable external power unit that consists of a drill motor torque limiter step down transformer for num v operation and a remote switch .
ensure the power and winch unit are fully compatible with the holophane ldnum portable lowering device .
num anchor bolts .
use anchor bolts that conform to the requirement of astm f num grade num for hooked smooth bars or grade num for headed .
anchor bolts shall be fully galvanized .
provide each anchor bolt with num galvanized hex nuts as well as one flat num and one lock washer .
provide nuts that equal or exceed the proof load of the bolts strength .
provide bolts that are hotdip galvanized to the requirements of either astm a num fabricated products or astm a num hardware items .
protect anchor bolt threads from damage during shipping .
provide mill test reports on anchor bolts .
num conventional .
provide lshaped anchor bolts with a minimum overall length of num inches a minimum diameter of one inch and with the horizontal leg at least num inches long .
the manufacturer shall specify the correct dimensions but in no case shall they be less than the dimensions specified above .
provide at least num inches of threads at the top of the vertical leg and galvanize the entire anchor bolt .
num high mast .
conform to section num .
num luminaires .
use luminaires that provide light levels conforming to aashtos roadway lighting design guide num edition with current interims .
use a total light loss factor of num for closed fixtures and num for open bottom fixtures .
num conventional .
provide luminaire that is arranged for ansi msii distribution or otherwise specified in the contract .
provide a num in slipfitter for mounting .
type a num watt highpressure sodium horizontal roadway luminaires type b num watt highpressure sodium horizontal roadway luminaires type c num watt highpressure sodium horizontal roadway luminaires type d num watt highpressure sodium horizontal roadway luminaires num high mast .
use highpressure sodium high mast luminaires of a wattage specified on contract .
provide luminaires that meet the following criteria average maintained .num footcandles minimum maintained .num footcandles uniformity ratio num on roadway surface provide a num isofootcandle trace covering all roadway surfaces .
provide the trace from taper to taper on each mainline and crossroad .
all criteria must be met with original locations of poles on the plan sheet .
use high mast luminaires that are of the same manufacturer on the same project .
use specified number of luminaires per pole .
adding luminiares to the pole shall not be allowed .
num lamps .
provide only highpressure sodium lamps with the following minimum initial light output type a num num lm type b num num lm type c num num lm type d num num lm highmast num lm num num ballasts .
provide a built in constant wattage transformer type ballast for specified voltage and wattage num starters .
provide an igniter that is designed to work with all brands and types of num hz hps ballast and directs the high voltage spike directly into the lamp without being directed to the lamp through the ballast windings .
design the igniter so that a cycling or extinguished lamp shall not adversely affect the igniter or the ballast .
provide an igniter that is totally epoxy encapsulated in a metal or plastic can .
ensure the igniter can be open circuit tested with power applied for num h at num c with constant monitoring of the case temperature .
provide an igniter that is paynesparkman ulinums or ulinums as is appropriate for ballast wattage or approved equal .
num lighting control cabinet .
provide aluminum control cabinet for circuit breakers duplex receptacle transformers contactors fuses and other control equipment .
provide a cabinet with all wiring and components approved by the manufacturer as an assembly .
provide documentation that the cabinet wiring and all components are an approved assembly to central office traffic operations .
num weatherproof enclosure .
provide aluminum weatherproof enclosure with nema numr rating and ul listed .
provide pad or pole mounting as specified in the contract .
fabricate enclosures from nummilnum inch or thicker natural finished aluminum .
equip the enclosure with two adjustable c mounting channels on both of the side walls and the back wall of the enclosure .
provide a cabinet that has sufficient size to gain easy access to each component .
provide a rear aluminum panel that is a minimum of num w x num high .
the integrity of the cabinet walls should not be compromised except for where the conduit enters preferably on the bottom or for a weatherproof vent .
the enclosure door frame shall be double flanged out on all four sides .
provide all exterior seams that are continuously welded and ground smooth .
provide welds that are neatly formed and free of cracks blowholes and other irregularities .
provide inside and outside edges of cabinet that are free of burrs .
provide a door restraint to prevent door movement in windy conditions .
provide the door with a gasket which forms a weather tight seal between the cabinet and door .
provide the door with a stainless steel continuous hinge .
all exterior hardware shall be stainless steel .
provide interior hardware that is stainless steel or cadmium plated type ii class i or equal .
provide a cabinet that is vented .
provide a cabinet door that is keyed with a factory installed standard no .
num corbin traffic control key .
provide a light fixture with switch and bulb .
use a fixture that.num is num volt and utilize a compact fluorescent or l.e.d .
bulb num watt min .
fixture shall be situated at or near the top of the cabinet and illuminate the contents of the cabinet .
provide a num vac gfi duplex receptacle in the enclosure with a separate num amp breaker .
num magnetic contactor .
provide only magnetic contactors that are electrically held num pole sized as specified in the contract and have a num volt coil .
protect each contactor coil by a num amp fuse .
equip contactors with control switches for both automatic and manual actuation .
provide photoelectric switches for automatic actuation .
ensure that each switch has minimum rating of num volts num amperes .
provide two pole double throw switches that manually actuate .
num num photoelectric control .
use photoelectric controls that are solid state cadmium sulfide type designed for use in num volts num hz circuits and rated for num watts resistive load .
use photoelectric controls with builtin surge protection and designed to provide an output circuit closure when photoelectric control components fail .
provide photoelectric controls and mounting bases that are twistlock type .
num control transformers .
use control transformers that are one kva single phase num volt primary num volt secondary dry type num hz with primary winding isolated from secondary winding .
use transformers that are capable of indoor or outdoor installation .
num secondary lightning arresters .
provide only secondary lightning arresters designed for use with the specified voltage and rated at num volts rms .
num wood poles .
provide a class num pole and conform to section num .
num meter socket .
provide a meter socket that has copperaluminum line and load lugs .
socket shall be ringless type with bypass .
provide a meter socket with a num inch bolt on hub .
num safety switch .
provide a safety switch disconnect that is numwire num volt numpole and numfuse in a nema numr enclosure .
provide an enclosure that has a num size bolt on hub .
provide a bolt pattern on the hub that aligns with predrilled holes on the enclosure .
provide a line cover shield .
provide a safety switch that is ul approved and shall be marked in accordance with the national electrical code article num .
num padlocks .
provide a num  inch wide laminated steel body with num inch case hardened steel shackle num pin tumbler master lock no .
numka .
provide locks that are keyed to series num .
provide each lock with two keys .
num warranties .
warranty equipment for a period of num year or provide the manufacturers standard warranty whichever is greater .
num documentation .
with each unit purchased under this section include one documentation package consisting of num .
a complete instruction manual .
num .
a complete step by step explanation of circuit theory and operation .
num .
a complete schematic .
num .
a complete parts layout .
parts identification may be silkscreened directly on circuit board .
num .
all point to point voltages and wave forms pertinent to proper servicing .
this information may be included on the schematic diagram .
num .
complete installation procedures for the unit .
num .
a complete parts list with full information as to availability of any custom or nonstandard parts .
num .
all applicable warranties and guarantees .
num section num signal system materials num general .
this section defines minimum acceptable design and operational standards for traffic control devices used within the commonwealth .
materials shall be approved before being installed .
once approval is given for a product substitutions will only be permitted with written permission from the engineer .
num concrete .
use class a concrete .
conform to sections num and num .
num steel reinforcement .
steel reinforcement shall have a minimum yield strength of num psi .
num ground rods .
provide materials conforming to section num .
num conduit .
provide materials conforming to section num .
num junction box .
provide materials conforming to section num .
provide a junction box marked signal .
attach covers with a minimum of two num stainless steel hex bolts and washers .
stackable boxes are permitted .
num traffic poles .
pole diameter and wall thickness shall be calculated in accordance with the american association of state highway and transportation officials aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals num edition and current interims .
for mast arm poles provide fatigue classification that is category ii with galloping and natural wind gusts table num and with num year design life from table num .
provide poles and arms that conform to num astm anum grade a or b with minimum yield strength of num ksi num astm anum grade num or num astm anum .
provide poles anchor bolts base plates and all other hardware that are hotdip galvanized per astm anum or anum .
provide base plates that conform to astm anum for grade num or astm num for grade num .
ensure base plates have a thickness or to the nominal diameter of the connection bolt .
provide a base plate for the vertical pole that fits inside a num in diameter concrete base .
the maximum anchor bolt circle shall not be more than num inches .
the maximum anchor bolt diameter shall not be more than num inches .
provide mill certifications as proof of compliance with the specifications .
provide poles that are anchorbased hotdipped galvanized inside and out .
provide poles that are designed to support the specified forces when they are applied across the diagonal of the bolt circle .
provide poles that are furnished complete with fully galvanized anchor bolts and hardware .
provide poles with one num num inch x num inch handhole and cover to allow access at the bottom of the pole .
provide a galvanized steel handhole cover that is secured with stainless steel screws or some type of device to keep the restraining strap from spinning .
num provide a copper stainless steel or brass grounding lug installed num degrees from the handhole opening and that is accessible from the handhole .
provide welding that is in accordance with sections num through num of the aws dnum structural welding code .
use tackers and welders that are qualified in accordance with the code .
provide a tube that contains only one longitudinal seam weld .
provide tube longitudinal seam welds that are free of cracks and excessive undercuts performed with automatic processes .
visually inspect all welds .
longitudinal welds suspected to contain defects shall be magneticparticle inspected by the manufacturer .
provide calculations and drawings that are stamped by a licensed professional engineer .
provide materials and products that are manufactured in the united states of america .
all tables referenced in num are found in the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaries and traffic signals num and current interim regulations .
include a shop drawing specifying the pole height arm lengths bolt circle diameter bolt diameter and detailed drawings showing the handhole cover assemblies with all contracts .
num steel strain poles .
provide two num inch blind half couplings installed num feet from top of pole .
provide steel strain poles with two num pole clamp assemblies suitable for attaching messenger cable .
each clamp assembly shall include a minimum of one num inch bolt that conforms to astm anum with a minimum tensile load of num lbs .
provide steel strain poles with a permanently affixed label num feet from the bottom of the base plate on the outside with the following information manufacturer height minimum stringing tension at yield order number and maximum deflection rate .
provide a detailed analysis of the pole .
the detailed analysis shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer .
the detailed analysis shall include but not be limited to the following calculations num .
group i ii iii iv load combinations as listed in table num .
num .
dimensions and weights for all attachments .
this includes areas used for wind ice this shall be the total exterior area of the attachments and fatigue loads drags coefficients projected areas velocity pressures and wind force for each segment .
num .
for group loads ii iii and iv which have wind loads provide calculations for each controlling worst case wind direction that controls any aspect of the design anchor bolts pole sizing etc .. loads shall be positioned to produce maximum effect .
wind load is applied in the same direction as the tension .
num .
anchor bolts shall be designed for the orientation that would provide the maximum stress on any individual bolt .
num .
all structural properties for poles anchor bolts and base plates .
this includes the poles diameter thickness section modulus moment of inertia and cross sectional area .
num .
calculations for each member shall include loads section properties member forces axial shear bending and torsion member deflections angular and num linear member stresses actual and allowable and the combined stress ratio csr .
num .
fatigue calculations should be shown for all fatigue related connections .
provide the corresponding detail stress category and example from table num .
num .
in fatigue calculations the effective throat thickness of a complete joint penetration groove weld shall be the thickness of the thinner part joined per aisc jnuma .
num mast arm poles .
provide mast arm poles that are of monotube design similar to the one depicted in the contract .
provide mast arms that have a maximum num degrees rise .
the diameter of the mast arm shall not be greater than num inches at the attachment to the pole .
for mast arm poles notify pole manufacturer of all extra holes necessary for attachment of signal equipment pedestrian signals pedestrian detectors supplemental signal heads signs cameras etc .. no vibration mitigation device should be considered on mast arm poles .
if specified provide two num inch blind half couplings installed num feet from top of pole .
provide mast arm poles with a permanently affixed label num feet from the bottom of the base plate on the outside with the following information num manufacturer num moment num order number provide a detailed analysis of the pole .
the detailed analysis shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer .
the detailed analysis shall include but not be limited to the following calculations num group i ii iii iv load combinations as listed in table num group load combinations in aashto .
num dimensions and weights for all attachments .
this includes areas used for wind ice this shall be the total exterior area of the attachments and fatigue loads drags coefficients projected areas velocity pressures and wind force for each segment .
num for group loads ii iii and iv which have wind loads provide calculations for each controlling worst case wind direction that controls any aspect of the design anchor bolts pole sizing etc .
if dual arm structures the wind load shall be analyzed for the perpendicular to each arm and a num degree angle between the two arms for group loads ii and iii .
num anchor bolts shall be designed for the orientation that would provide the maximum stress on any individual bolt .
num all structural properties for poles anchor bolts and base plates .
this includes the poles diameter thickness section modulus moment of inertia and cross sectional area .
num calculations for each member shall include loads section properties member forces axial shear bending and torsion member deflections angular and linear member stresses actual and allowable and the combined stress ratio csr .
num fatigue calculations should be shown for all fatigue related connections .
provide the corresponding detail stress category and example from table num .
num in fatigue calculations the effective throat thickness of a complete joint penetration groove weld shall be the thickness of the thinner part joined per aisc jnuma .
num num limit vertical deflection to num inches for galloping .
num the horizontal deflection limits for vertical supports in section num of the aashto specification should be shown and verified .
num anchor bolts .
in addition to subsection num provide steel strain poles with a minimum of four fully galvanized anchor bolts and a minimum of six fully galvanized anchor bolts for mast arm poles .
num wood poles .
provide materials conforming to section num .
num anchors .
use anchor rods that are a minimum unless otherwise specified of num feet in length and num inches diameter .
ensure a doubleeye design .
use anchors that are of the expandable type with a minimum area of num square inches .
num rock anchors .
provide expandable rock anchors that are num inches long with tripleye reg tm.type eye .
num pedestrian signal pedestal .
num pole .
provide num  inch o.d .
aluminum schedule num pipe to provide maximum of num feet overall mounting height .
provide a pole that meets or exceeds component products cpiap .
num breakaway base .
provide a breakaway base cast from num aluminum alloy .
provide base that has been tested and has accepted by the fhwa in accordance with trb nchrp report num .
provide a base that meets or exceeds component products cpibas num pedestal top mounting bracket oneway .
provide a slip fitter assembly num num way aluminum with necessary hardware .
provide a pole that meets or exceeds pelco products inc. senum num pedestal top mounting bracket twoway .
provide a numway num  inch ctc aluminum with necessary hardware .
provide a pole that meets or exceeds pelco products inc. senum .
num post top .
provide a natural aluminum post top that can be securely attached to the pole specified in section num .
num anchor bolts .
provide materials conforming to section num .
num meter socket .
provide a meter socket that is num amp with copper aluminum line and load lugs ringless .
provide a meter socket with a num inch bolt on hub .
provide the meter socket with a bypass .
num safety switch .
provide a safety switch disconnect that is num amp num volt numwire numpole and numfuse in a nema numr enclosure .
provide an enclosure that has a num size bolt on hub .
provide a bolt pattern on the hub that aligns with predrilled holes on the enclosure .
provide a line cover shield .
provide a safety switch that is ul approved and shall be marked in accordance with the national electrical code article num .
num num padlocks .
provide materials conforming to section num .
num messengerguytether cable and hardware .
num messengerguytether cable .
provide messengerguytether cable that consists of class a zinccoated highstrength steel of the specified strength and extra galvanized per astm anum .
provide a minimum of num diameter and num strands .
num strandvise .
provide a strandvise that has a automatic jaw type deadend for num galvanized steel messenger .
provide a strandvise that is reliable numl or approved equal .
num strandlink .
provide a strandlink that is a splice for num galvanized steel messenger .
provide a strandlink that is reliable num or approved equal .
num cable rings .
provide cable ring that are designed for installation on a num inchnum strand galvanized steel messenger cable .
provide cable rings that are fabricated from round edge high carbon steel wire and shall be galvanized after forming .
provide wire size that is .num inch x .num inch nominal .
provide cable ring size that are numinch nominal to accommodate a num inch maximum cable bundle size .
provide cable ring that are designed to be attached to the correct size messenger cable to keep cable ring from slipping .
provide a cable ring that designed so that it can be installed and removed without tools and without damage to the messenger cable .
num bull rings .
provide bull rings that are weldless num inch steel with a nominal i.d .
of num .
provide a bull ring for the working load limit as specified in contract .
provide either working load limit as stated below type a num lbs type b num lbs num wire and cable .
use wire and cable that is plainly marked in accordance with the provisions of the national electrical code .
num ground wire .
use copper grounding conductors that are numawg solid and bare unless otherwise specified .
num service wire .
use service entrance conductors that are num awg stranded copper type usenum .
use conductors that are colored coded according to the national electric code .
num signal cables .
provide signal cables that are num awg stranded copper with the number of conductors indicated and shall conform to imsa spec num .
num loop wire .
provide loop wire that is num awg stranded copper and conform s to imsa spec num .
num loop leadin cable .
provide loop leadin cable that is num awg stranded copper paired conductors electrically shielded and conforms to imsa spec num num .
num num radio cable .
provide rgnumu coaxial cable consisting of preassembled cable and with connectors .
provide connectors that are crimp type silver plated with gold center pin and teflontpx insulation .
provide a connector that is waterproof .
provide a connector that meets or exceeds rf industries rfn num nume .
a cable for connection to antenna .
provide a coaxial cable at a minimum of num feet that is rgnumu nmale to nmale connectors .
provide a coaxial cable that is num ohm with minimum num percent shielding and a maximum of num db loss at numftnum mhz .
b cable for connection from radio .
provide a coaxial cable at a minimum of num feet that is rgnum nmale to nmale connectors .
provide a coaxial cable that is num ohm with minimum num percent shielding and a maximum of num db loss at numftnum mhz .
num video cable .
provide video cable that is num awg num ohms and solid conductor .
num ethernet cable .
provide ethernet cable to be general cable genspeed num cat nume outside plant cable num wire pn num or approved equal .
the cable shall meet or exceed the following specifications performance ansitiaeia numb category nume milcnuma water penetration propagation delay num ns num mhz return loss num mhz num db frequency range num mhz physical characteristics nominal outside diameter num in insulation type polyolefin maximum pulling tension num lbs maximum dc resistance num ohmsnumm mutual capacitance numkhz num pfnumm operating temperature num c to num c num splicing .
provide materials conforming to section num .
num signals and beacons .
num fittings and mounting .
supply all traffic control signals beacons and lane control signals unless otherwise specified with necessary fittings .
including wire entrance fittings and swivel type balance adjuster pelco pal or approved equal for span wire mounting .
design wire entrance fitting to prevent entrance of water when using normal drip loops .
galvanize or cadmium plate span wire clamps and bolts .
ensure that the total loose play rotational tolerance between span wire clamp and wire entrance fitting with swivel adjuster assembled is not more than num degrees .
use mounting arms and brackets made of num inch standard metal ips pipe .
the department will allow cast or fabricated bottom brackets .
ensure that signals are adjustable and arrange them so that num each face may be rotated to and positively locked within not more than num degrees of any position in the horizontal plane .
use a separate locking ring mating with serrations cast or molded into the signal housing .
do not use serrations cast into the wire outlet body .
use a locking ring designed with a minimum of num pins or tabs to mate with corresponding holes or notches in the wire outlet body .
use locking rings that are machined to provide sharp well formed serrations that exactly match the serrations in the signal housing .
num housings .
manufacture the housings doors and visors from polycarbonate resin to withstand a num footpound impact without fractures or permanent deformation .
ensure that the color is homogeneous throughout .
use parts that are fitted with rubber or neoprene type gaskets to provide weather tight seals .
use housings of the same type and make and manufacturer .
ensure that housings are interchangeable .
reinforce tops and bottoms to which supporting attachments are fastened to prevent breakage from vibration and shock .
ensure that doors are suitably hinged and held securely to the housing by simple locking devices which do not require tools of any kind for opening .
use stainless steel hinge pins lens clips etc .
num signal heads .
each signal head contains one or more signal faces and is designated as oneway numway numway etc .
onesection signals are standard flashing beacons .
for oneway and twoway flashing beacons supply signal heads that are l.e.d .
ready as specified in the contract .
mount signals with num or more sections vertically with indications positioned according to the mutcd .
fit each section with a visor or hood .
provide combination or tunnel type visors that enclose at least num percent of the lens circumference for amber optical units .
supply standard visors that enclose at least num percent of the lens circumference for all red and green optical units .
supply visor lengths that are approximately the same as the optical units diameter and designed to minimize sun phantom .
attach hoods with screws .
do not use snap in hoods .
ensure that numinch signals display circular indications of not less than num inches in diameter .
ensure that signal sections are of the same make and manufacturer and are interchangeable to provide for optional combinations of optical unit sizes .
use tops and bottoms of signals that have circular openings for num inch ips rigid pipe and use replaceable tops and bottoms that are interchangeable .
close all unused openings with removable plugs and caps .
use signal heads that are assembled .
supply and attach visors brackets backplates hangers etc .
that are packaged and shipped within the same carton as the signal head for which they are being supplied .
do not attach hangers num pedestrian signals .
use pedestrian signals that consist of a onepiece die cast aluminum housing .
use a housing that has num numinch holes in top and bottom for post top or bracket mounting .
provide signal heads that are assembled .
supply unattached arms and all other necessary hardware that are packaged and shipped within the same carton as the signal head for which they are being supplied .
num optical units .
use an optical unit that is a complete led assembly with all necessary supporting parts .
ensure conformance with the standards of the institute of traffic engineers ite current edition for led traffic signals .
provide lenses that are integral to the unit with a smooth outer surface constructed of plastic or glass .
provide an optical assembly that diffuses the light output and provides uniform illumination across the entire surface of the circular lens and the required visible portions of the arrow and pedestrian lens .
individual leds shall not be visible to the observer of indications displayed by vehicular traffic signal modules .
if a polymeric lens is used a surface coating num or chemical surface treatment shall be used to provide front surface abrasion resistance .
in addition to the module identification requirements of the respective ite documents the following additional information shall be permanently identified on the back of each module date of manufacture monthyear color for vehicular modules type circular or arrow all modules shall be operationally compatible with traffic signal controllers cabinets and accessories manufactured to the california department of transportation caltrans traffic signal control equipment specifications latest edition .
the wires that connect the module to the terminal block shall be terminated with spade lugs .
provide documentation that the manufacturers quality management system is iso num certified .
provide modules that are intertek certified and bear the etl mark .
the manufacturer shall have a license agreement with intertek whereby an initial factory assessment and ongoing quality assurance testing every six months is performed .
provide certification and copy of license agreement .
the manufacturer shall supply the kytc with all quality assurance testing results after they are performed throughout the contract period .
the list of certified products can be found on the following website httpwww.intertek.comuploadedfilesintertekdivisionscommercial_and_electricalme diapdfselectronics_and_electricalled_directory_traffic_signal_modules_certified_ products.pdf contrary to section num provide a written warranty against defects in materials andor workmanship .
the warranty period will last num months and begin on the date the modules are received by the kytc .
modules that fail within the warranty period will be returned to the vendor and replacement modules shall be provided at no cost to the kytc .
construct and mount optical units to provide easy access for all maintenance and repairs including wiring within the signal housing .
wire and connect each optical unit to a suitable terminal block within the signal housing with minimum no .
num awg num f num volt colorcoded stranded fixture wire .
locate the terminal block in the second section from the top in multisection faces .
ensure that optical units are interchangeable regardless of manufacturer .
each signal face contains one or more complete optical units in suitable housings for control in one direction only and is designated as onesection numsection numsection etc .
a pedestrian .
provide a pedestrian signal module that is designed to display the walking person icon and hand icon as shown in the ite specification for pedestrian traffic control signal and a numerical countdown display .
use icons that are designed so that the entire areas comprising the icons appear illuminated .
use icons that overlay one another adjacent to two numsegment numerical digits comprised of two rows of leds .
provide a module that does not have any external attachments or options that would allow disabling the countdown function .
contrary to the ite specification all pedestrian signal modules shall have a message bearing surface of num inch x num inch and a minimum icon size of num inch x num inch and minimum digit size of num inch x num inch .
provide a module num that is capable of detecting any increase or decrease of the pedestrian timing and reprogramming itself should this be detected .
provide a module that is capable of recognizing preemption events and temporarily modifying the crossing cycle accordingly .
num backplates .
provide backplates that are louvered and constructed of num inch aluminum primed and painted flat black on both sides .
provide backplates that include a minimum of six num numxnum inch hillman neoprene self drilling steel washer screws .
a reflective backplates .
provide a num inch wide fluorescent yellow reflective tape that is installed around the outer perimeter of the face of the backplates to project a rectangular appearance at night .
provide louvers that are installed horizontally and as close to the signal face as possible .
reflective tape shall not be installed on louvers .
use reflective tape that complies with astm dnum type ix fluorescent yellow and be listed on the kytc preapproved materials list .
num painting .
paint all signals and beacons except black polycarbonate arms and braces brackets trunions wire entrance fittings sign housings etc .
black with num coats of high grade exterior gloss enamel .
paint the inside of all hoods and visors dull black to minimize glare reflections .
prepare degrease and prime all painted surfaces before painting to prevent chipping and peeling .
ensure that all miscellaneous hardware is corrosion resistant .
galvanize or plate the hardware after any drilling threading or welding .
num sign hangers .
provide a bracket that accommodates signs made from aluminum sheeting num inches thick with a horizontal dimension as shown below type a numxnum type b numxnum type c numxnum num span mounted hangers .
provide hangers to suspend signs from an overhead untethered steel span wire with a diameter between num and num in .
ensure construction permits free swing in two vertical planes at num degrees apart multileveling wind dumping .
allow for perpendicular sign alignment with the roadway centerline for spans that cross the roadway at any angle up to num degrees .
provide a bracket assembly that provides a single safety chain at least num inches in length .
provide a chain that has a minimum diameter of num inches and will link between one of the bolts attaching the sign to the bracket and the span wire to prevent a sign from falling in case the bracket assembly fails .
provide a chain that has a threaded connector link quick link of appropriate size for easy and secure connection of the chain to the span wire .
provide parts made from steel that are hotdip galvanized per astm anum or anum .
num mast arm hangers .
provide brackets that meet or exceed pelco ab num .
provide sign hangers that attach to the horizontal component of a mast arm pole and consist of a sign bracket and a cable assembly .
the bracket will have an aluminum formed tube with stainless steel fasteners and a natural nonanodic protective coating .
num bracket will mount to pole using a num in .
cable assembly .
provide hangers with tubes that conform to the following types type a num inch type b num inch type c num inch num signal head hangers .
num twoway span wire assembly .
provide twoway span wire assembly span wire clamp with ubolts iron  inch galvanized pal balance adjuster  inch eyebolt  inch slot zinc bright wire entrance assembly aluminum painted and numway upper lower span wire assembly painted .
provide span wire assembly numway aluminum w pal balance adjuster .
provide two way span wire that meets or exceeds pelco se num num num num .
num threeway span wire assembly .
provide three way span wire assembly with ubolts iron  inch galvanized pal balance adjuster  inch eyebolt  inch slot zinc bright wire entrance assembly aluminum painted and numway upper lower span wire assembly aluminum painted .
provide span wire assembly numway aluminum w pal balance adjuster .
provide two way span wire that meets or exceeds pelco se num num num num .
num fourway span wire assembly .
provide span wire assembly with u bolts iron  inch galvanized pal balance adjuster  inch eyebolt  inch slot zinc bright wire entrance assembly aluminum painted and numway upper lower span wire assembly aluminum painted .
provide span wire assembly numway aluminum w pal balance adjuster .
provide two way span wire that meets or exceeds pelco se num num num num .
num mast arm assembly .
provide mast arm mount signal bracket that consist of a clamp assembly for the types listed type a numsection head type b num section head type c num section head provide a bracket that includes an upper and lower arms and a vertical support tube .
provide a bracket that is adjustable about the support tube axis vertically about the mast arm and about the vertical plane .
provide upper and lower arms that are attached to the signal in a clamping manner to assure rigidity .
provide a bracket that is capable with the type listed above .
provide a bracket that is constructed such that all electrical wiring can be completely concealed in the bracket and shall accommodate a minimum of three num awgnum conductor cables .
provide a clamp assembly that is equipped with two cables .
provide cables that are adjustable to fit all mast arm shapes without special tools or equipment .
provide cables that are num inches long .
provide each bracket that are furnished complete with all necessary hardware bolts washers gaskets etc .
to attach the signal to the bracket and the bracket to the mast arm .
provide aluminum parts that are alodine or approved equal finish .
provide steel parts that are stainless steel or galvanized .
provide a bracket that meets or exceeds pelco abnum .
num pedestrian pushbutton detectors .
provide a water tight pedestrian detector consisting of a piezo driven solid state switch with no moving parts .
num the button shall have a led indication and shall beep when pressed .
switch body shall be die cast aluminum and painted with powder coated finish paint .
pedestrian detector shall be secured to and housed in a type fs threaded single gang with four stainless steel hardware .
include a neoprene gasket for sealing the switch body to the enclosure .
num pedestrian detector body .
provide a num holed pole mounted aluminum rectangular housing that is compatible pedestrian detector .
provide all necessary hardware to seal the enclosure .
provide a natural aluminum painted surface .
num accessible pedestrian detectors .
provide a system that meets the requirements of the num manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd or latest edition .
provide a system that consists of two components control unit pushbutton num control unit .
provide a control unit that num. is designed to fit inside a num in .
clam shell style pedestrian signal head .
ensure the unit can be powered by the num vac supplied to the walkdont walk signals num. capable of providing power to the pushbutton unit num. has terminal blocks for connection of all wires num. has pulsed num vdc to power the vibrator in the pushbutton unit num. can detect a walkdont walk conflict num. has an audio amplifier of num w rms into num ohms num. has an adjustable volume control up to num db for the locator tone and audible message .
the tone will automatically let to no more than num db above ambient noise and will adjust sound levels automatically in response to any ambient noise over num decibels .
num pushbutton .
provide a vandal resistant pushbutton unit that accepts num to num v acdc that is imposed by connection of the pushbutton to the traffic signal controller cabinet .
ensure the pushbutton frame is powder coated cast aluminum and the face plate is powder coated aluminum .
provide a num in aluminum pushbutton with a powder coated silver arrow indicator on top of a black background and make of hard anodized powder coated aluminum .
the arrow should adjust to point in any direction the pushbutton shall vibrate during the walk interval and shall have a sunlight visible led light that illuminates when the button is pushed and will remain lit unit the beginning of the walk interval .
provide a weatherproof speaker located in the pushbutton unit that will emit a locator tone with a duration of num seconds or less repeat at num s intervals and will automatically adjust to no more than num db louder that the ambient noise .
the speaker will also provide the verbal message walk sign followed by the appropriate street name and a brief tick to confirm the button push .
provide a pushbutton that comes equipped with the informational sign rnumb num x num in and rnume num x num in .
provide an informational sign that is two sided reversible for right and left applications .
provide a system with one complete set of software and any necessary hardware to program the system to emit the verbal message .
provide one password protected navigator configurator for remote programming that has a backlit lcd screen that can be adjusted for contrast .
num num traffic loop encapsulant .
provide a nonshrink nonstringing moisture cure onepart polyurethane traffic loop encapsulate suitable for use in both asphalt and concrete pavements .
ensure it provides a voidfree encapsulation for detector loop wires and adequate compressive yield strength and flexibility to withstand heavy vehicular traffic and normal pavement movement .
the engineer may reject the product if any physical property renders the material unsuitable .
ensure that the cured encapsulate has the following properties num traffic loop encapsulant requirements and price adjustment schedule test specificati num num pay num pay num pay num num hardness num num num num astm d num num num num num num num tensile strength astm d num num min .
num min .
num num num num elongation num astm d num num min .
num min .
num num num num density lbgal num num num num astm d num num num num num num num tackfree time astm c num num max .
num num num num num complete dry hours km num num max .
num num num num num chemical km num motor oil no effect deicing chemicals no effect gasoline slight ll hydraulic brake l id no effect num if allowed to remain in place the department will review materials performing in this range on a projectbyproject basis to determine if removal of the material is warranted .
num tested at a num inch per minute pull rate .
use onequart tubes of loop sealant that are suitable for use with a standard caulking gun .
provide each tube with a plastic nozzle to facilitate placing of the material in the pavement slot .
num nonshrink grout .
provide nonshrink grout that meets the requirements of astm c num and section num .
all nonshrink grout shall be on division of materials approved list .
num backer rod .
provide backer rod that has closed cell polyethylene foam .
provide a backer rod that is  diameter .
provide backer rod that has the minimum density of num lbscubic feet using the astm d num test method and tensile strength of num psi using the astm d num test method .
provide back rod that has the maximum water absorption of num gmcc using astm c num test method .
num testpipe plugs .
provide materials conforming to section num num traffic control equipment .
provide traffic control equipment that meets or exceeds the specifications for traffic signal control equipment specifications california department of transportation january num or latest edition and california transportation electrical equipment specifications tees march num num or latest edition .
num httpwww.dot.ca.govhqescoespecificationsstd_specsnum_stdspecsnum_stdspecs .
doc .
httpwww.dot.ca.govhqtraffopselecsysreportsteesnum.pdf all chapterssections referenced in num are found in the california transportation electrical equipment specifications tees march num num or latest edition .
num traffic signal cabinet .
conform to chapter num .
provide these types of cabinets as stated in the plans num chapter num section num for minimum dimensions num minimum dimensions of num inches height num inches width and num inches depth .
provide cabinets that are constructed of aluminum and shall be supplied unpainted .
provide cabinets that are supplied with flashers flash transfer relays edi num ecl conflict monitors or approved equal .
provide conflict monitors flasher and transfer relays that installed inside the cabinet .
provide a cabinet door that has a lock and keyed with a standard no .
num corbin traffic control key .
provide cabinets that have a fluorescent front and back light installed and with a drawer .
provide a drawer that is installed so that the drawer opens from the back of the cabinet .
provide a cabinet that is fitted with a pda num power distribution assembly .
provide circuit breakers that are used in the pdanum assembly that have screw type terminal connections .
do not provide stud type connection .
mount equipment according to chapter num appendix anum with the following exceptions on num the pda num shall be above the input file ij .
on num drawer shall be between the pda num and the input file .
on num drawer shall be between the pda num and the output file .
on num excess space shall be evenly distributed on the top and bottom of the cabinet .
provide cabinets with a surge protector that meets or exceeds the specifications of the edco shanum surge protector .
mount surge protector shanum base on side panel or rack frame near the utility terminations .
surge protector shall not interfere with the operation of any access panels .
terminals that have numvac present shall be shielded with an insulating cover to prevent inadvertent contact .
relay contacts shall be wired to num point barrier style terminal block .
one point of the terminal block shall also be connected to pin cnum of the controllers cnum connector .
the other point of the terminal strip shall be connected to controller logic ground .
one extra shanum surge protector shall be supplied with each cabinet and stored in document pouch .
provide cabinets with point to point soldered wiring for load switch sockets .
printed circuit wiring for output files shall not be permitted .
do not install side mounted terminal blocks and associated wiring for loop connections .
provide cabinet with red monitor cabling installed .
provide cabinet that has the red monitor jumpers set in the enable position .
num do not connect the pedestrian yellow loadswitch outputs to the conflict monitor card edge connector .
provide plug like connection for the outputs for the pedestrian yellows that can be reconnected .
provide switchesrelays that are mercury free and shall be solid state type .
provide an arc flash sticker on the outside of the front and back doors .
provide one set of documentation including complete schematics that is supplied with each cabinet .
provide a warranty that the product furnished will perform in accordance with the requirements of the specifications and be warranted against defects in materials andor workmanship for a period of num years .
this warranty is an exception to section num .
num nume controllers .
conform to chapter num .
provide controllers configured to operate using wapiti microsystems wnumiks vnum numhcnumfnum firmware .
provide controllers with zero insertion force zif socket for installation of wnumiks firmware on cpu board .
zif socket must be high profile type aries lever locking type or equal .
low profile butterfly locking type shall not be used .
provide the controller without software .
provide controllers with two blank otp eprom chips pin and speed compatible with the controller .
provide eprom chips in static protective packaging .
configure cpu board for num baud acia and onboard firmware .
provide aluminum blanking plate or front panel that does not have an opening for prom module .
provide socket mounting for all integrated circuits that connect to controller inputs and outputs .
provide integrated circuit sockets that are machined beryllium copper contacts with gold plating .
num loop detector .
provide detector that meets the basic functionality of the model num loop detector in accordance with chapter num section num .
provide rack mounted loop detectors that provide two channels of detection .
provide detectors that have a backlit liquid crystal display .
detectors shall display a graph of relative inductance change to assist in detector setup .
detectors shall have optoisolated solid state outputs .
num conflict monitor .
provide conflict monitor that provides the basic functionality of the model num conflict monitor in accordance with chapter num section num .
provide conflict monitor that supports ethernet data communications and event logging .
a program card .
provide a conflict monitor that meets or exceeds edi numeclip with program card .
b program key .
provide a conflict monitor that meets or exceeds edi numkclip with datakey and ethernet port .
provide a datakey that is interchangeable nonvolatile device and does all the programming jumpers diodes and dip switches .
provide two datakey memory devices with conflict monitor .
num pedestrian isolator .
conform to chapter num section num .
num flasher model num .
conform to chapter num section num .
num load switch model num .
conform to chapter num section num .
num num ac powered beaconschool flasher control .
provide a beacon control cabinet that is constructed from .num aluminum and supplied unpainted .
provide a cabinet size that has the minimum inside dimensions of num high by num wide by num deep .
provide a cabinet that has a num num flange on the back predrilled and slotted for both banding and lag screw mounting .
provide a door that has a lock and keyed with a standard no .
num corbin traffic control key .
provide seams that are continuously welded and doors shall have gaskets to provide a weatherproof structure .
provide cabinet shall be fitted with one num num and one num conduit hub in the bottom of the cabinet .
provide conduit hubs that are positioned in the middle of the cabinets bottom .
provide cabinet that are fitted with a .num removable aluminum back panel with a num ampere circuit breaker edco hspnumbtnumru surgeemi filter beau snumab or equal flasher socket and cinch series num terminal block with y connectors .
provide a back panel that is drilled and tapped for equipment mounting with num hardware .
provide wiring that is routed behind the back panel and shall be soldered .
provide wires that are protected with grommets when passing through the back panel .
provide cabinet that are wired with a jumper between terminals num and num for flashing operation .
provide cabinets that are supplied with flasher section num cabinet keys wiring instructions and all necessary hardware for mounting to wood poles .
provide an arc flash sticker on all doors .
provide terminal strip connections as shown below num flasher ckt num num flasher ckt num num flasher ac num flasher ac num filtered ac num ac breaker protected num ac breaker protected num ac in num nc num neut num neut in num ground in provide a warranty that the product furnished will perform in accordance with the requirements of the specifications and be warranted against defects in materials andor workmanship for a period of num years .
num time clocks .
use time clocks that meet the following specifications num .
microprocessor based num .
keyboard programmable num .
num program steps settable by day hour minute and relay output if more than one relay exists num .
manual relay onoff function num .
one to four relay outputs rated at num amps num vac resistive load num .
ac power num to num vac num hz num .
temperature num to num f num .
timekeeping and program shall be maintained for at least num hours without ac power num .
enclosure shall mount on a vertical surface num num .
automatic daylight savings time adjustment as default with a daylight savings time override option controlled from the keyboard .
num .
num pin circular plastic power and output connector amp num or approved equal num .
output connector pinout as follows pin no .
function pin no .
num line num num com function num neutral num num n.o .
num ground num num com num num com num num n.c num num n.c num num n.o .
num num com num num n.c. num num n.o .
num num n.o .
num no con .
num num n.c. supply each unit with a female mating harness with numfoot wires appropriate for the number of relays in the clock .
label each wire one foot from the plug with permanent nonfading wire labels indicating the function .
num solar powered school flasher .
provide solar powered school flasher system capable of operating two twelveinch num watt led traffic signal indications that conforms to section num and operate two hours per day five days a week at a num duty cycle alternating flash .
provide system designed for num kwhm solar insulation and batteries sized for one week of operation with no sun .
provide solar electric arrays of crystalline cells in series .
provide solar cell modules with an antireflective coating and low iron glass covering .
solar cells shall be encapsulated to protect them from the environment .
each module shall provide a weather tight junction box for connecting the array output cable to the module terminals .
the modules shall be designed to provide rated power output for a minimum of num years .
the modules shall utilize an anodized aluminum frame for mechanical support .
the solar electric modules shall be designed to securely attach to a wood pole .
all the necessary hardware for installing the modules to the mounts and for fastening the mount to the side of the pole shall be included .
security hardware shall be used for securing the modules to the mount .
one set of tools appropriate for use with the security hardware shall be included .
mount shall be powder coat painted or hot dipped galvanized steel and shall adjust from num to num degrees from horizontal .
batteries shall be low selfdischarging leak proof nonventing deep cycle agm num volt dc with a num amp hour minimum .
the operating discharge range shall be num to num degrees f. the operating charge range shall be num to num degrees f. the system shall utilize a solid state integrated control unit capable of managing battery charging and flashing power output control .
the charge control portion of the control unit shall be designed such that it draws its power only from the solar array when power is available so as to reduce the parasitic load on the system .
the unit shall use an ambient temperature sensor to adjust the charge termination point temperature compensated charging .
the charge circuit shall also employ a pulse width modulation algorithm for charging the batteries and be of a solid state series switch type configuration .
num the loadflasher control function shall incorporate a lowvoltage disconnect lvd circuit to disconnect power to the flasher control circuit when the battery voltage falls to num of full charge .
the flasher control circuitry shall be all solidstate and shall provide two flasher outputs .
when flashing the unit shall provide an output duty cycle of num per lamp and the lamps shall flash alternately at the rate of num flashes per minute .
on board short circuit protection shall the provided .
the controller shall provide automatic builtin night dimming capability .
time clock shall be designed for the system and be a dc powered low current device .
clocks shall conform to section num .
provide the system with a speed limit sign in accordance with the contract .
provide a system that utilizes a single enclosure for ease of installation .
provide an enclosure that is fabricated from aluminum with a minimum material thickness of num inches .
provide an enclosure that is capable of accepting banding tape style mounts .
provide a cabinet that has screened louvered vents on each side of each compartment .
provide louver screening that is aluminum for longevity .
provide an integral rain lip at the top of the main cabinet body to minimize entry of rain .
provide a door to the enclosure that is attached with a continuous stainless steel hinge that is riveted to the door and to the enclosure body .
provide hinges that are installed so that the rivets are not exposed when the door is closed .
provide an integral rigid doorstop that is included in the unit so that the door can be fixed in the open position .
provide a door that is cover the entire side of the cabinet and shall be constructed of a single piece of aluminum .
provide a door that has a neoprene gasket around the entire edge .
provide a door that is secured with a standard traffic signal controller cabinet corbin num lock .
provide a keyhole for the lock shall have a cover attached to the door with a single rivet .
provide an adjustable latch striker that is included on the side of the main cabinet body to allow the user to adjust the pressure between the door gasket and the body of the cabinet .
provide a battery compartment that has a minimum of onehalf inch num of insulating sheeting around the battery to minimize heat transfer between the battery and the enclosure wall .
num warranties .
conform to section num .
num documentation .
conform to section num .
num section num durable preformed pavement markings type i tape num general .
use preformed pavement marking material consisting of white or yellow films with retroreflective optics incorporated to provide immediate and continuing retroreflection .
use preformed pavement marking material capable of adhering to new dense and open graded asphalt surfaces during the paving operation or portland cement concrete by a precoated pressure sensitive adhesive .
the engineer may require a primer to precondition the pavement surface .
ensure that the markings conform to pavement contours by the action of traffic .
ensure that after application the markings are immediately ready for traffic .
ensure that these markings provide long term reflectivity as determined in the following performance requirements when applied according to the manufacturers instructions .
ensure that the preformed markings are suitable for use one year after the date of receipt when stored according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num requirements .
num composition .
use retroreflective preformed pavement markings consisting of a mixture of high quality polymeric materials pigments and retroreflective optics distributed throughout its base cross sectional area .
num reflectance .
ensure that the white and yellow markings have the following minimum reflectance values as measured according to the testing procedures of astme num .
measure the coefficient of retroreflected luminance and express the value as millicandelas per square meter per lux mcdmnumlxnum .
num skid resistance .
ensure that the surface of the retroreflective material provides an initial minimum skid resistance value of num bpn when tested according to astm e num .
num patchability .
ensure that the pavement marking material is capable of use for patching worn areas of the same type according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num material quality .
replace any material used as longitudinal or intersection markings that fails minimum reflectivity values or fails due to loss of adhesion or complete wear through .
minimum replacement zone is num feet of roadway minimum reflectance color entrance observation minimum reflectance angle angle white num num num minimum yellow num num num minimum num length or one intersection marking .
num approval .
the department will approve type i pavement marking tape based on conformance to km num and this section .
num certfication .
submit manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for each shipment of approved type i pavement marking tape for use on projects .
clearly stat the manufacturer product name and product code and color as listed in the departments list of approved materials .
identify the lot numbers expiration date and quantity delivered .
num acceptance .
the department will accept type i pavement marking tape based on verification of inclusion on the departments list of approved materials compliance of the manufacturers certification and visual inspection of the installation of the type i pavement marking tape .
num section num extruded thermoplastic pavement marking materials num general .
this section covers extruded thermoplastic pavement marking materials for permanent applications .
num drop on beads .
use beads that will ensure the pavement marking material will meet retroreflectivity requirements .
the department will evaluate the beads as part of the marking system through retroreflectivity readings .
num approval .
select materials that conform to the composition and physical characteristic requirements below when evaluated in accordance with aashto tnum or other test methods as cited .
the department will sample and evaluate for approval each lot of thermoplastic material delivered for use per contract prior to installation of the thermoplastic material .
do not allow the installation of thermoplastic material until it has been approved by the division of materials .
allow the department a minimum of num working days to evaluate and approve thermoplastic material from the date received by the division of materials .
num composition .
use a maleicmodified glycerol ester resin alkyd binder to formulate the thermoplastic material .
ensure the pigment premix beads and filler are uniformly dispersed in the resin .
use material that is free from all dirt and foreign material .
provide independent analysis data and certification for each formulation stating the total concentration of each heavy metal present the test method used for each determination and compliance to num cfr num for leachable heavy metals content .
numuse a binder that consists of a mixture of synthetic resins at least one being solid at room temperature and high boiling point plasticizers .
ensure that at least onethird of the binder composition is solid maleicmodified glycerol ester resin and is not less than num percent by weight of the entire material formulation .
do not use alkyd binder that contains petroleum based hydrocarbon resins .
numthe manufacturer may choose the amount of calcium carbonate and inert fillers providing all other requirements of this section are met .
num physical characteristics .
for thermoplastic material heated for num hours at numf under agitation conform to the following requirements .
a color .
as determined with a spectrophotometer using dnum illuminant with a num degree entrance angle and num degree observation angle geometry .
composition percentage by weight component white yellow binder num num min .
num min .
glass beads premixed num num num num titanium dioxide num min .
calcium carbonate inert fillers num num max .
num max .
heavy metals content comply with num cfr num comply with num cfr num num cielab color coordinates yellow white daytime color cielab spectrophotometer using illuminant dnum at num illumination and num viewing with a num observer l num a num b num maximum allowable variation nume l num a num b num maximum allowable variation nume nighttime color cielab spectrophotometer using illuminant a at num illumination and num viewing with a num observer l num a num b num maximum allowable variation nume l num a num b num maximum allowable variation nume b flowability .
ensure that the white thermoplastic material has a maximum residue of num percent and the yellow thermoplastic material has a maximum residue of num percent .
c set time .
use material that when applied at a temperature range of num num f and thickness of num to num mils sets to bear traffic in not more than num minutes when the air and road surface temperature is approximately num num f and not more than num minutes when the air and road surface temperature is approximately num num f .
d softening point .
ensure that the thermoplastic material has a softening point of num num f .
e bond strength .
ensure that the bond strength of the thermoplastic material to concrete exceeds num psi .
f cracking resistance at low temperature .
ensure that the thermoplastic material shows no cracks when observed from a distance exceeding one foot .
g impact resistance .
ensure the impact resistance of the thermoplastic material is a minimum of num joules .
h flash point .
use thermoplastic material that has a flash point not less than num f. num packaging .
package thermoplastic material in suitable num pound containers to which the material shall not adhere during shipment or storage .
include a label stating that the thermoplastic material is to be maintained with a temperature range of num numf during application .
provide the thermoplastic material in either block or granular form .
num shelf life .
ensure that the thermoplastic material conforms to this section for a period of one year .
replace any thermoplastic material not conforming to the above requirements .
num manufacturers testing .
perform testing in accordance with aashto tnum on a minimum of one composite sample per num pounds or portion thereof per lot of thermoplastic produced .
num certification .
submit manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for each lot of extruded thermoplastic delivered for use on projects .
clearly state the manufacture formulation identification product name color date of manufacturer lot number s expiration date total quantity of lot produced actual quantity of thermoplastic material represented sampling method utilized to obtain the samples and required manufacturers testing data for each composite sample tested to represent each lot produced .
num num acceptance .
the department will accept extruded thermoplastic based on compliance of the manufacturers certification and conformance of test results obtained by the department to the requirements of this section .
num section num flexible delineator posts num general .
furnish surface and ground mounted flexible delineator posts from the departments list of approved materials .
the department considers the flexible delineator posts to include the post reflective sheeting and mounting hardware .
num reflective sheeting .
conform to section num .
num approval .
the department will approve flexible delineator posts in accordance with km num and conformance to this section .
num packaging .
securely fasten posts of the same type and length in bundles of num pounds or less in a manner that is easily handled by a fork lift and that prevents slipping during handling and shipping .
the engineer will reject posts with excessively damaged finishes .
num certification .
submit manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for each shipment of approved flexible delineator posts delivered for use on projects .
clearly state the manufacturer product name product code and type surface mount or ground mount as listed in the departments list of approved materials .
identify the lot numbers and quantity of flexible delineator posts delivered .
num acceptance .
the department will accept flexible delineator posts based on verification of inclusion on the departments list of approved materials and compliance of the manufacturers certification .
num section num ky type i glass beads num glass beads .
use for application to reflective pavement markings .
conform to aashto m num moisture resistant specifications with the following additional requirements for gradation and percentage of rounds gradation sieve size no .
num num percent passing no .
num num no .
num no .
num num no .
num num rounds num minimum for num beads num sampling .
the department will obtain random samples of all shipments that are intended for use by state traffic forces at the point of delivery .
the department will evaluate the beads for acceptance prior to use .
num testing .
the department will test according to aashto m num and the following .
a chemical resistance test .
place three num to numounce samples of the beads in separate pyrexglass beakers or porcelain dishes .
cover one sample with distilled water one with a numn solution of sulfuric acid and one with a num percent solution of sodium sulfide .
examine the samples microscopically after one hour of immersion .
reject the beads if they darken or frost .
b moisture resistance test .
place approximately num pounds of glass beads in a clean cotton bag not treated with sizing material .
immerse the bag in water completely covering the beads for approximately num seconds .
remove the bag and wring free of excess water .
hang the bag in room air for num hours to dry .
transfer the beads slowly to a clean dry standard numinch stem and a numinch diameter exit glass funnel .
accept beads that flow freely through the funnel .
num approval .
the department will notify the vendor of acceptance when all testing is complete .
the department will evaluate beads used by the contractor as part of the installed pavement marking in accordance with km num km num or km num as applicable .
num section num raised pavement markers num description .
this section covers the requirements for snowplowable raised pavement markers replacement lens and temporary surface mounted raised pavement markers .
num general .
use raised pavement markers conforming to the following types .
provide a certification from the adhesive manufacturer stating the adhesive conforms to the requirements of the marker manufacturer and the minimum application temperature at which the adhesive can be successfully applied .
num type iv markers .
type iv markers are replacement lenses mono or bidirectional for use in type v marker castings .
num type v markers .
type v markers consist of an iron casting with a type iv marker mono or bidirectional attached .
num type iva markers .
type iva markers are surface mounted lenses for temporary use in work zones .
num approval .
the department will approve raised pavement markers based on conformance to km num and the requirements of this section .
num packaging .
suitably and substantially package all materials with the name and address of the manufacturer and vendor contract or purchase number kind of material trade name and net contents plainly marked on each package .
num certification .
submit a manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for each shipment of raised pavement markers delivered for use on projects .
clearly state the manufacturer product name product code type and color as listed in the departments list of approved materials .
identify the lot numbers of the raised pavement markers and adhesives expiration date of the adhesives and quantity of raised pavement markers delivered .
num acceptance .
the department will accept raised pavement markers based on verification of inclusion on the departments list of approved materials compliance of the manufacturers certification and verification the adhesives has not exceeded the expiration date .
num section num latex admixture num description .
this section covers styrenebutadiene latex admixtures for concrete bridge deck overlays .
num general .
use a certified independent laboratory to conduct testing and evaluation of styrenebutadiene latex admixtures as described in the prequalification test program in the u.s. department of transportation research report no .
fhwardnum annually .
submit the certified test results along with a numgallon sample of the latex admixture to the departments division of materials .
use a latex admixture that is produced in the united states .
use only latex admixtures that are free of chlorides .
num approval .
the department will approve latex admixtures based upon conformance of the required independent laboratory data and test results obtained by the department to the requirements of fhwardnum and this section ..
submit independent laboratory data conducted within one year of the date of product submittal for department approval .
obtain department approval for each latex admixture annually. . num packaging .
package and store the latex admixture in containers and storage facilities that protect the material from freezing and from temperatures above num f. when storing outside of buildings during moderate temperatures keep the material shaded and away from direct sunlight .
do not use any latex admixture exposed to freezing temperatures without approval from the division of materials .
num certification .
submit manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for each shipment of latex admixture delivered for use on projects .
clearly state the manufacturer product name and product code as listed in the departments list of approved materials .
identify the lot numbers weight percent solids ph surface tension expiration date and quantity for each lot of latex admixture delivered .
num acceptance .
the department will accept latex admixtures based on verification of inclusion on the departments list of approved materials and compliance of the manufacturers certification .
the department reserves the right to sample and test latex admixtures at the discretion of the engineer in accordance with the departments field sampling and testing manual .
do not accept latex admixture that has been exposed to freezing temperatures .
num section num pavement striping paint num description .
this section covers quickdrying waterborne acrylic pavement striping paint for permanent applications .
num general .
select waterborne acrylic paint that conforms to the composition requirements below .
provide independent analysis data and certification for each formulation stating the total concentration of each heavy metal present the test method used for each determination and compliance to num cfr num for leachable heavy metals content .
paint composition property and test method yellow white daytime color cielab spectrophotometer using illuminant dnum at num illumination and num viewing with a num observer l num a num b num maximum allowable variation nume l num a num b num maximum allowable variation nume nighttime color cielab spectrophotometer using illuminant a at num illumination and num viewing with a num observer l num a num b num maximum allowable variation nume l num a num b num maximum allowable variation nume heavy metals content comply with num cfr num comply with num cfr num tionum astm d num na num by wt .
of pigment min .
voc astm d num and d num numlbgal max .
numlbgal max .
contrast ratio at num mils wft .
num num num manufacturers testing .
perform testing for daytime and nighttime color contrast ratio titanium dioxide white paints and volatile organic content voc on each lot of waterborne acrylic paint to be delivered for use on projects .
num sampling .
the department will obtain samples of waterborne acrylic paint for compliance testing to the requirements of this section in accordance with the departments materials field sampling manual .
num certification .
submit manufacturers certification stating conformance to the requirements of this section for each shipment of waterborne acrylic paint delivered for use on projects .
clearly state the manufacturer product name product code lot numbers expiration date color sampling method test results of manufacturer required testing and quantity delivered .
num acceptance .
the department will accept waterborne acrylic paint based on compliance of the manufacturers certification and conformance of test results obtained by the department to the requirements of this section .
num acceptance procedures for nonspecification pavement striping paint .
when nonspecification paint is inadvertently num incorporated into the work the department will accept the material with a reduction in pay .
the percentage deduction is cumulative based on its compositional properties but will not exceed num percent .
the department will calculate the payment reduction on the unit bid price for the routes where the nonspecification paint was used .
do not accept waterborne acrylic paint with a daytime or nighttime color variation greater than nume or if the cumulative deduction exceeds num percent .
pavement striping paint reduction schedule non conforming property color nume to nume heavy metals tio num voc contrast reduction rate num num num num num num section num geotextile fabrics num description .
this section covers requirements for geotextile fabrics for slope protection and channel lining underdrains subgrade or embankment foundation stabilization and drainage blankets .
num geotextile fabric .
use either woven or nonwoven fabric consisting only of long chain polymeric filaments or yarns such as polypropylene polyethylene polyester polyamide or polyvinylidenechloride formed into a stable network such that the filaments or yarns retain their relative position to each other .
use fabric that is inert to commonly encountered chemicals and free of defects or flaws significantly affecting its physical or filtering properties .
use circularknit geotextile conforming to astm d num for perforated pipe socks .
ensure that the fabric except wrapping placed directly against perforated pipe is formed in widths of at least num feet .
when necessary sew sheets of fabric together to form required fabric widths .
sew the sheets of fabric together at the point of manufacture or other approved locations .
the geotextile manufacturer is responsible for establishing and maintaining a quality control program to ensure compliance with this section .
the manufacturer must participate in the national transportation product evaluation program ntep for geotextiles and geosynthetics .
a packaging .
during all periods of shipment and storage wrap the fabric in a heavy duty protective covering to protect the fabric from direct sunlight ultraviolet rays temperatures greater than num f mud dirt dust and debris .
b physical requirements .
conform to the following applicable table as specified for each use .
c acceptance .
obtain the departments approval for all material before incorporating it into the project .
type i fabric geotextiles for slope protection and channel lining property minimum valuenum test method grab strength lbs num astm d num elongation num astm d num sewn seam strengthnum lbs num astm d num puncture strength lbs num astm d num trapezoid tear lbs num astm d num apparent opening size u.s. std .
sieve sieve u.s. num astm d num permeability cms num astm d num ultraviolet degradation at num hours num strength retained for all classes astm d num flow rate gal.min.ftnum num astm d num num type ii fabric geotextiles for underdrains except pavement edge drains property minimum valuenum test method grab strength lbs num astm d num elongation na astm d num sewn seam strengthnum lbs num astm d num puncture strength lbs num astm d num trapezoid tear lbs num astm d num apparent opening size u.s. std .
sieve sieve u.s. num astm d num permeability cms num astm d num ultraviolet degradation at num hours num strength retained for all classes astm d num flow rate gal.min.ftnum num astm d num type iii fabric geotextiles for subgrade or embankment stabilization property minimum valuenum test method grab strength lbs num astm d num elongation na astm d num sewn seam strengthnum lbs num astm d num puncture strength lbs num astm d num trapezoid tear lbs num astm d num apparent opening size u.s. std .
sieve u.s. num astm d num permeability cms num astm d num ultraviolet degradation at num hours num strength retained for all classes astm d num flow rate gal.min.ftnum num astm d num num num minimum .
use value in weaker principal direction .
all numerical values represent minimum average roll value i.e .
test results from any sampled roll in a lot shall meet or exceed the minimum values in the table .
num values apply to both field and manufactured seams .
num acceptance procedures for nonspecification fabric .
ensure that all geotextile fabric conforms to the requirements of this section .
however when non specification geotextile fabric is inadvertently incorporated into the work before completion of testing the department may accept the material with a reduction in pay provided the failure is marginal and will not cause poor performance .
when the failure is excessive then remove the geotextile fabric and replace it unless the engineer determines that the geotextile fabric can remain in place .
the department will apply the largest payment reduction when the material fails to meet more than one specification requirement .
the department will calculate the payment reduction on the invoice cost of the material delivered at the project site .
the department will reject geotextile fabric that fails and has not been incorporated into the work .
type iv fabric geotextiles for embankment drainage blankets and pavement edge drains property minimum valuenum test method grab strength lbs num astm d num elongation na astm d num sewn seam strengthnum lbs num astm d num puncture strength lbs num astm d num trapezoid tear lbs num astm d num apparent opening size u.s. std .
sieve u.s. num astm d num permeability cms num astm d num ultraviolet degradation at num hours num strength retained for all classes astm d num flow rate gal.min.ftnum num astm d num type v high strength geotextile fabric property minimum valuenum test method grab strength lbs num astm d num elongation num astm d num sewn seam strengthnum lbs num astm d num puncture strength lbs num astm d num trapezoid tear lbs num astm d num apparent opening size u.s. std .
sieve u.s. num astm d num permittivity nums num astm d num ultraviolet degradation at num hours num strength retained for all classes astm d num num aos payment reduction num num or num num num num num num num or more glass beads passing fabric as applicable reduction rate num num num num grab strength payment reduction the department will use the lowest value of machine and cross for the reduction calculation of requirement num or more num num num or less reduction rate num num num elongation payment reduction type i fabric only of requirement num or more num num num or less reduction rate num num num sewn seam strength payment reduction of requirement num or more num num num or less reduction rate num num num flow rate payment reduction of requirement num or more num num num or less reduction rate num num num remove and replace the fabric unless the engineer determines the fabric can remain in place at a num reduction rate .
num fastener pins .
the engineer will accept fastener pins based on visual inspection on the project .
conform to the following a underdrain systems .
use pins that are formed of no .
num diameter or heavier steel wire and are at least one foot long with a numinch right angle bend on one end .
b slope protection channel lining subgrade and embankment foundation stabilization and wrapped aggregate drainage blankets .
provide fastener pins that are formed of num inch diameter or heavier steel pointed at one end with a head on the opposite end to retain a washer with a minimum diameter of num num inches .
num section num mineral admixtures for concrete num fly ash requirements .
for fly ash added to concrete mixtures as a separate ingredient conform to astm c num class f or class c except ensure that the loss on ignition does not exceed num percent .
concrete containing class c fly ash may reduce sulfate resistance .
susceptibility to sulfate attack relates to the resistance factor r. the value of r is defined as the ratio cao numfenumonum as determined from the fly ash oxide analysis .
a resistance factor r greater than num indicates a reduction in sulfate resistance .
do not use class c fly ash having an r ratio greater than num in concrete where sulfate attack is possible .
identify the locations on the project where concrete containing class c fly ash is to be used and obtain the engineers approval of its use before beginning concrete work .
num approval .
num fly ash .
select from the departments list of approved materials for fly ash sources .
to be placed on the list furnish samples and astm c num test data developed over the previous num months and conform to the requirements in km num .
num ground granulated blast furnace ggbf slag .
the departments division of materials maintains a list of approved ggbf slag sources by producer .
furnish samples and astm c num test data for the previous six months and meet the following requirements to obtain approval .
num submit the ggbf slag suppliers quality control program to the engineer for approval .
the ggbf slag delivered to the project shall have uniform properties complying with this specification .
laboratories performing tests on ggbf slag for conformance to astm c num shall participate in the laboratory evaluation program conducted by the cement and concrete reference laboratory of astm .
num submit certification with each shipment of ggbf slag to document its compliance with this specification and astm c num .
num submit actual astm c num test results for fineness air content slag activity index sulfide sulfur content and sulfate ion content with each shipment .
the department reserves the right to perform all sampling and testing on ggbf slag that it deems necessary or desirable .
num microsilica .
the departments division of materials maintains a list of approved microsilica admixtures by brand name and manufacturer .
furnish samples and aashto m num test data for the previous six months and meet the following requirements to obtain approval num submit the microsilica suppliers quality control program to the engineer for approval .
the microsilica delivered to the project shall have uniform properties complying with this specification .
laboratories performing tests on microsilica for conformance to aashto m num shall participate in the laboratory evaluation program conducted by the cement and concrete reference laboratory of astm .
num submit certification with each shipment of microsilica to document its compliance with this specification and aashto num .
num submit actual aashto m num tests results for the chemical and physical requirements with each shipment .
num num nonspecification fly ash .
when either class c or class f sampled fly ash fails to meet specification requirements for loss on ignition loi but the engineer determines that concrete produced using the fly ash meets requirements for entrained air and compressive strength the engineer will reduce the price by num percent of the contractors invoice cost of the fly ash for each num percent that the fly ash loi is above num percent .
this procedure is intended to provide for acceptance at a reduced contract price when material is discovered to not meet specification requirements after work is performed and is not intended as a means to utilize nonspecification material .
the engineer will accept fly ash on the basis of certification and being from an approved source and project samples passing the applicable requirements of astm c num andor astm c num .
some variability or small departures from the requirements do not adversely affect properties of the finished product enough for removal and replacement .
therefore the department will use the following pay tables when deviations occur .
when a sample fails more than one test the department will impose the largest reduction rate .
the department will calculate the payment reduction on the invoice cost of the fly ash delivered to the concrete plant or to the project site .
strength activity index payment reduction control with cement num or more num num num or less psi with lime class f num or more num num num or less reduction rate num num num remove and replace finished product unless the engineer determines that it can remain in place at a num reduction rate .
fineness payment reduction retained on no .
num sieve num num num num or more reduction rate num num num autoclave expansion payment reduction expansion num num num num or more reduction rate num num num water requirement payment reduction control num or less num num num or more reduction rate num num num chemical requirements payment reduction sionumalnumonumfenumonum class f num or more num num num or less sionumalnumonumfenumonum class c num or more num num num or less sonum num num num num or more moisture content num num num num or more available alkalies as nanumo num num num num or more reduction rate num num num num section num fabric wrapped backfill drain materials num description .
place fabric wrapped backfill drains at locations where depth to weep hole flowline is num feet or less .
num fabric wrapped backfill drain .
select from the departments list of approved materials .
provide class i fabric wrapped backfill drains when the depth to weep hole flowline is num feet or less .
provide class ii fabric wrapped backfill drains when the depth to weep hole flow line is between num feet and num feet .
num compressive strength .
ensure the drain is capable of withstanding the following compressive load on the wide side with a maximum deflection of num percent class i num pounds per square foot .
class ii num pounds per square foot .
num core .
use a rectangular core at least num inches wide with nominal thickness of at least num inch consisting of molded plastic or of a numdimensional structure of monofilaments bonded at their intersections or of numinch average diameter expanded polystyrene beads bound together with an adhesive compound sufficiently open to allow free movement of water entering through the geotextile fabric and manufactured specifically for drainage applications .
num wrapping .
wrap the core on all num sides with type ii geotextile fabric conforming to the requirements of section num type ii .
num packaging and care .
wrap the drain in a protective covering to protect the fabric from direct sunlight ultraviolet rays temperatures greater than num f mud dirt dust and debris during all periods of shipment and storage .
completely cover with backfill material within num calendar days after placement .
if completely backfilling the drain is not feasible cover exposed portions with approved material to protect the fabric from direct sunlight .
remove and replace any drain not backfilled or suitably covered within num days after placing at no expense to the department .
num acceptance .
furnish the manufacturers certification to the engineer stating the fabric wrapped backfill drains meets all requirements herein .
the engineer will accept the fabric wrapped backfill drains by certification and visual inspection .
num section num durable waterborne paint num description .
this section covers quickdrying durable waterborne acrylic pavement striping paint for permanent applications .
the paint shall be readymixed one component num waterborne acrylic striping paint suitable for application on such traffic bearing surfaces as portland cement concrete bituminous cement concrete asphalt tar and previously painted areas of these surfaces .
num general .
select durable waterborne acrylic paint that conforms to the composition requirements below .
provide independent analysis data and certification for each formulation stating the total concentration of each heavy metal present the test method used for each determination and compliance to num cfr num for leachable heavy metals content .
the nonvolatile portion of the vehicle shall be composed of a num acrylic polymer as determined by infrared spectral analysis .
the acrylic resin used shall be a num cross linking acrylic as evidenced by infrared peaks at wavelengths num num and num cmnum with intensities equal to those produced by an acrylic resin known to be num cross linking .
paint composition property and test method yellow white daytime color cielab spectrophotometer using illuminant dnum at num illumination and num viewing with a num observer l num a num b num maximum allowable variation nume l num a num b num maximum allowable variation nume nighttime color cielab spectrophotometer using illuminant a at num illumination and num viewing with a num observer l num a num b num maximum allowable variation nume l num a num b num maximum allowable variation nume heavy metals content comply with num cfr num comply with num cfr num titanium dioxide astm d num na num by weight of pigment min .
voc astm d num and d num num lbgal max .
num lbgal max .
contrast ratio at num mils wft num num num manufacturers testing .
perform testing for daytime and nighttime color contrast ratio titanium dioxide white paints and volatile organic content voc on each lot of durable waterborne acrylic paint to be delivered for use on projects .
num sampling .
the department will obtain samples of durable waterborne acrylic paint for compliance testing to the requirements of this section in accordance with the departments field sampling and testing manual .
num certification .
submit manufacturers certification stating conformance num to the requirements of this section for each shipment of durable waterborne acrylic paint deliverer for use on projects .
clearly state the manufacturer product name product code color sampling method test results of manufacturer required testing and quantity delivered .
num acceptance .
the department will accept durable waterborne acrylic paint based on compliance of the manufacturers certification and conformance of test results obtained by the department to the requirements of this section .
num acceptance procedures for nonspecification durable waterborne pavement striping paint .
when nonspecification paint is inadvertently incorporated into the work the department will accept the material with a reduction in pay .
the percentage deduction is cumulative based on its compositional properties but will not exceed num percent .
the department will calculate the payment reduction on the unit bid price for the routes where the nonspecification paint was used .
do not accept waterborne acrylic paint with a daytime or nighttime color variation greater than nume .
durable waterborne pavement striping paint reduction schedule non conforming property resin color nume to nume contrast tionum voc heavy metals content reduction rate num num num num num num appendix a tabulation of construction tolerances i tabulation of construction tolerances perform all work and furnish all materials in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades cross sections dimensions and material requirements including tolerances shown on the plans or indicated in the specifications .
the maximum limits of tolerances listed below do not necessarily represent total construction acceptability but are limits at which the department may consider construction tolerances acceptable .
it is intended that in general all work and materials be well within the tolerances given .
the department will not allow continued employment of equipment and methods which allow undue proportion of all work and materials approaching the tolerances limits .
section subject tolerance num d automatic printing scales printed weight compared to scale display .
the printed weight is within num pounds of scale display .
num a surface for channel lining class iv .
num inches from a true plane .
num num distance from centerline to ditch line in cuts and to shoulder line in fills .
one foot from dimension shown on plans .
num num total width of roadbed .
one foot at any location .
num num specified slope limits for slope surfaces between ditch lines or shoulder lines and original ground .
not to be inside specified slope limits more than num inches nor outside specified slope more than one foot both measured horizontally .
num num cut bench elevation .
one foot of bench elevation established on plans or by the engineer .
num num subgrade tolerance for road way and drainage excavation .
complete to within num foot of designated grade at time of final acceptance except when rock subgrade is specified the tolerance is num foot .
num moisture content of embank ment or subgrade material .
num of the optimum moisture content as deter mined by km num .
num subgrade prepared for base or surface courses .
num inch from specified crown section .
num surface of finished gravel and dga base .
num inch from specified cross section num inch in num feet at any location from the specified longitudinal grade .
ii num h asphalt binder control unit metering devices .
num when tested for accuracy .
num b scales for weigh box or hopper or for weighting asphalt material .
tolerance on over registration and under registration of not exceeding num of indicated weight when tested for accuracy .
the change in load required to noticeably alter the position of rest of the indicating elements of a nonautomatic indicating scale shall not be greater than num of the nominal scale capacity .
num batch tolerances for automatic batching or pro portioning hotmix asphalt plants .
material batch aggregate component mineral filler asphalt binder zero return aggregate zero return asphalt materials accumulated weight of batches .
num of total batch weights .
num of total batch weights .
num of total batch weights .
num of total batch weights .
num of total batch weights .
num of that total batch weight .
num bituminous plant mixed pavements jmf tolerances .
see specifications for indivi dual mixtures .
num a asphalt base initial treatment and resurfacing projects .
the rate of application shall not exceed designated rate by more than num .
num b asphalt base new construct ion payment on basis of weight or area .
total combined thickness of all layers within num inch of compacted plan thickness .
deficient in thickness by more than num inch of compacted plan thickness .
num transverse joints in all asphalt courses .
deviations do not exceed tolerances described in subsection num from a numfoot straight edge after joint is complete and rolled .
num surfaces of finished courses asphalt plantmixed pave ments .
finished surfaces of base course and binder course shall not deviate more than num inch from numfoot straight edge .
iii cross slope of all courses .
finished surface of final surface course shall not deviate more than num inch from numfoot straight edge .
do not deviate more num inch in num feet from required cross slope .
num rate for applying cover material for asphalt seal coat .
not to exceed designated rate by more than num .
num asphalt mixture for pavement wedge .
asphalt binder content shall be maintained within num .
num asphalt pavement milling and texturing surface tolerance .
finished surfaced after final cut does not deviate more than num inch from a numfoot straight edge and that the cross slope does not deviate more than num inch in num feet .
correct all irregularities exceeding these limits .
num fly ash incorporated in concrete mixes for jpc pavement .
num of specified weight .
num d jpc pavement transverse contraction joints .
not to deviate from true alignment more than num inch in one lane width .
num c jpc pavement installation of preformed neoprene joint seals .
not to be stretched more than num .
num jpc pavement and base surface tolerances .
pave ment abutted by subsequent or jpc shoulder edge slump with edge forms or tailing forms or fixed forms pavement not abutted by pavement or shoulders edge slump high spot num inches or more from pavement edge .
not to exceed num inch .
does not exceed num inch .
do not to exceed num inch from a numfoot straight edge .
num num permanent concrete median barriers .
top surface castinplace barriers fixed form .
top surface castinplace num inch when tested longitudinally by a numfoot straight edge .
no deviation more than num iv barriers slip form .
inch from the line established by the reference wire between any num reference wire supports .
num masonry drill bits for drilling holes of installation of steel dowels into existing concrete by use of grout .
diameter no less than num inch greater nor more than num inch greater than diameter of dowels .
num scales for weighing water aggregates cement and fly ash for concrete for structures .
within num of net load on scales .
num concrete for structures air entraining admixture net air content by volume .
volume of num num by volume .
num concrete for structures accur acy of individual ingredient materials for each batch .
num for aggregates .
num for water cement .
num for cement in batches of num cubic yards or greater .
num for total cementitious materials in batches of num cubic yards or greater .
num to num for cement in batches less than num cubic yards .
num to num for total cementitious materials in batches less than num cubic yards .
num for admixtures .
num b air content of mortar or grout .
volume of num num .
num e num measuring cement .
when the weight of entire shipment of cement in bags varies more than num from num pounds per bag .
weigh the cement in bulk on scales .
num e num water metering systems for mixing concrete for structures .
num of required amount of water per batch .
num c num truck mixing of concrete for structures quantity of mixing water .
measure and control to num .
num a variation of finished surface of bridge seats .
not to vary more than num inch above or below true level plane .
num all exposed finished concrete surfaces unless specified else where in the contract .
not to vary more than num inch in numfeet as measured from a straightedge .
v num all steel reinforcement except that placed in bridge decks .
num inch of position and specified spacing .
num inch of specified clearance from face of concrete .
num epoxy coated tie wires chairs etc .
film thickness of epoxy coating .
film thickness of vinyl type coating .
thickness of flexible plastic or vinyl coating for tie wires .
num mils .
num mils .
num mils .
num a bearing piles that will be exposed .
variance from vertical during driving .
variance from plan position after driving .
stringline stretched between exterior piles in the exposed portion of the pile bent or group .
num inch per foot from vertical or batter position specified in the plans .
num inches from plan position at the pile cutoff elevation .
num inches .
num b bearing piles that will be unexposed in the finished structure .
variance from vertical during driving .
variance from plan position after driving .
num inch per foot from vertical or batter position specified in the plans .
num inches from plan position at the pile cutoff elevation .
num d num calibration of hydraulic jacks for prestressing .
num .
num prestressed or precast con crete members dimensional tolerances of ibeams box beams with castinplace slab precast barrier unit deck units and piling .
refer to tables in subsection num .
num c concrete bridge deck overlays accuracy of latex and water meters used in measurement for mixing .
num .
num a num concrete bridge deck num. vi overlays air content of concrete .
num a num concrete bridge deck over lays slump of concrete .
num inch .
num concrete bridges .
lines of finished concrete except bridge slabs and precast piles .
num inch per num feet or vary from plan lines more than num of the distance between extremities of the unit considered .
num reinforced concrete bridge slabs placement of steel reinforcement .
num inch vertically and horizontally of the position shown .
num reinforced concrete bridge slabs slab surface variations .
num inch in num feet .
num reinforced concrete ridge slabs thickness of concrete cover over top mat of steel reinforcement .
see schedule for adjusted quality for depth of cover deficiency subsection num .
num field assembled structural plate pipes vertical elong ation .
num of specified elong ation .
num a asphalt paving for pipe and pipe arches aggregate and asphalt binder temperature .
num f. num b concrete paving for pipe and pipe arches uniform pave ment thickness .
num inch .
num b slope protection reinforced concrete slope wall .
no surface variation from a true plane of more than num inch per num feet .
num c slope protection cyclopean stone riprap finished slope .
no surface variation of more than num inches from a true plane .
num d slope protection crushed aggregate slop protection .
no surface variation of more than num num inches per num feet from a true plane .
num a slope protection channel lining classes ii and iii .
no surface variation of more than num inches from a true plane .
num b slope protection channel lining class iv .
no surface variation of more than num inches from a true plane .
vii num cored hole drainage connector diameter of hole shall be equal to the outside diameter of pipe .
num inch .
appendix b index abbreviations num abutments concrete bridges num accelerating admixtures num acceptance num num activity bar chart num adjusting small structures num adjusting rings manhole num admixtures for concrete num num accelerating num airentraining num approval num general num latex bridge overlays num requirements num waterreducing num waterreducing and accelerating num waterreducing and retarding num waterreducing high range num waterreducing high range and retarding num admixtures for jpc pavement base and shoulders num aggregate lightweight num aggregates coarse .
see coarse aggregates aggregates fine .
see fine aggregates agricultural limestone num air content concrete num air entraining admixtures num air pollution num altered quantities num alternate equipment num alternate methods num aluminum bridge railing num aluminum sign substrates num aluminum material requirements num num am best num anchor bars channel lining class ia num anchor bolts num material requirements num anchorages and bearings structural steel bridges num annealing structural steel bridges num apparel num apron walls concrete box culverts num arrow panels num as built plans definition num asbestos num asphalt coating culvert pipe num metal pipe num asphalt curing seal num asphalt equipment pavers num plant num rollers num transport equipment num asphalt field technician num asphalt mastic num asphalt materials num acceptance general num acceptance nonspecification materials num coating and paving for metal pipe pipe arches and arches num emulsified asphalt num field tolerances num liquid asphalt for cold patching mixtures num pg binders num pg binders modification num polymer asphalt emulsions num price adjustment num sampling num time limitation on approvals num asphalt materials for mulch num asphalt mixture num acceptance testing num asphalt seal coat num asphalt treated drainage blanket num coarse aggregates num compaction num composition num control and acceptance num f and t testing num fine aggregates num jmf num joints num leveling and wedging num num num lot num lot pay adjustment num num num mineral filler num mix design criteria num moisture content num opengraded friction course num num overlaying breaking and seating jpc pavement num pavement marking num pavement wedge num num payment num rap num num sampling num sand asphalt surface num scratch course num num seasonal and weather limitations num setup period num shoulder num specialty mixtures num spreading and finishing num stonematrix asphalt num surface preparation num surface tolerances num testing num thickness num num transporting num unsatisfactory work num verification testing num weight num asphalt mountable medians num asphalt pavement milling and texturing num overlay breaking and seating jpc pavement num ride quality num asphalt paving structural plate soil interaction structures num asphalt plant num automatic batching num batching plant num dryer drum mixing plant num laboratory num mix design technologist num mixing and holding num plant technologist num asphalt prime coat num asphalt release agent num asphalt seal coat num asphalt tack coat num asphalt wedge curbs num asphalttreated drainage blanket atdb num assembling structural steel bridges num atdb num authorized adjustments definition num embankmentinplace num roadway excavation num backfill drain fabric wrapped num backfilling concrete box culverts num concrete entrance pavements num concrete headwalls num concrete sidewalks num concrete steps num flowable fill num initial pipe backfill num material for pipe num precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections num underdrains except edge drains num bar chart num bar mats material requirements num barbed wire material requirements num barrels num barricades num barrier median concrete standard num barrier wall slip forming num temporary num barrier temporary concrete median .
see median barrier temporary concrete barriers permanent concrete median .
see median barriers permanent concrete base crushed stone num dense graded aggregate num pcc .
see jpc pavement tolerances num trafficbound base num base course definition num bases sign num batch plant concrete num beacons traffic control num bearing pads num bearing piles allowable variation num bearing values num buildups num caps num castinplace num design modifications num driving equipment num excavation num exposed allowable variations num extensions num general num limitations of use num methods of driving and placing num num ordering num pointing num precast and prestressed num preparation for driving num protection num splices num static load tests num steel num storage and handling num test piles num unexposed allowable variation num unused pile lengths num bearing values bearing piles num bearings and anchorages structural steel bridges num bedding pipe fine aggregate num precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections num bedding for culvert pipe num bent plates structural steel bridges num best management practice bmp definition num developing num inspection num maintaining num plan num seeding num bidding num bid proposal num num bid proposal form num capacity rating num computer num disqualification num guaranty num irregular bid num prequalification num process agent num quantities num withdrawal num binder durable pavement striping num price adjustment num blast cleaning num blasting num num general num plan num presplitting num bluetops num bmp definition num plan num bolt reuse of astm a num bolts num tension num bolt holes structural steel bridges num bolts connections structural steel bridges num steel num timber structures num bonding num boring and jacking of encasement pipe general num materials num borrow excavation general num seed and protect num brace wire material requirements num breaking and seating jpc pavement breaking test section num edge drains num equipment num general num placement of asphalt num seating num size requirements num brick num bridge definition num bridge barrier wall slip forming num bridge deck restoration and waterproofing with concrete overlays latex admixture num bridge decks reinforced concrete .
see reinforced concrete bridge slabs bridge end object marker num bridge painting .
see structural steel coatings bridge planking .
see wood products bridge railing cast aluminum num bridge restoration and waterproofing with concrete overlays blast cleaning num bridge end transitions num brooming num cleaning num damage to structures num epoxysand slurry num equipment num expansion dam treatment num field welding num full depth patching num general num hydrodemolition num joints cleaning num joints sealing num latex overlays existing bridges num latex overlays new structures num num material hauling num materials num mixing concrete num partialdepth patching num placing concrete num removal of concrete num restoration of reinforcement num scheduling num thickness deficiency price adjustment num unacceptable work num weather limitations num bridges concrete .
see concrete bridges removal num structural steel .
see structural steel bridges brush barriers num num buildups bearing piles num burlap cloth num burlap drag jpc pavement base and shoulders num burning num num fire plan num butyl rubber sealants precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections num cable markers num num calcium chloride num calendar day contract time num definition num prosecution of work num camber box culverts num falsework and forms num camera inspection underdrains num camera testing equipment requirements num caps for piles num cast aluminum bridge railing num casting prestressed and precast concrete products num castings for rightofway markers num castinplace cip retaining wall num catch basins .
see small drainage structures filling and capping .
see filling and capping abandonded underground structures cement general num num mills num cement factor concrete num cement stabilized roadbed .
see chemically stabilized roadbedgeneral cement treated drainage blanket num certification prestress concrete plants special requirements num prestressed and precast plants num quantities num certification of materials num certified welder num chain link fencing materials barbed wire num brace connections num fabric num fabric ties num general num hog rings and tension wire num post caps num posts rails gate frames and expansion sleeves num change in quantities num changeable message signs num channel change general num planting num channel lining class ia num class ii num class iii num class iv num num general num geotextile num gradation num materials num mattress units num channel preservation num character of work change in num chemically stabilized roadbed num compaction num curing num materials num mixing num temperature and weather lmitations num claims num num clean cross drains num cleaning steel bridges maintenance .
see maintenance cleaning and painting steel bridges clearing and grubbing clearing plans num general num clothing num coal num num coarse aggregate asphalt mixtures finer than no .
num seals num channel lining class ia num channel lining class ii num channel lining class iv num channel lining general num crushed stone base csb materials requirement num dense graded aggregate dga num free draining bedding and backfill num granular embankment num maintenance num nonspecification gradations num reinforced fill material general num rock drainage blanket num slope protection crushed aggregate num slope protection general num slope protection stone for gabions num structure granular backfill num surfacing num traffic bound base num underdrains num coarse aggregates num approval num asphalt mixtures and seals absorption num asphalt mixtures and seals crushed particles num asphalt mixtures and seals general num asphalt mixtures flat and elongated num asphalt mixtures polishresistant aggregate num concrete bridge deck num concrete general num concrete jpc num concrete lightweight aggregate num concrete precast num erodible or unstable material num general requirements num gradation num physical properties num sampling and testing num shale num soundness num cofferdams foundation seals num general num compaction asphalt pavement num chemically stabilized roadbed num num crushed stone base csb num dense grade aggregate dga num num embankment num option a num option b num subgrade num completion date num comprehensive final inspection num compressive strength concrete num department testing num concrete admixtures num num num air content by class num artificial heating num barrier temporary num num barriers permanent num cement factor by class num classes num num compressive strength by class num consolidation num construction joints num construction requirements num curbs and gutters num curing num curing blankets num curing wet num delivery num entrance pavements num equipment num falsework num fine aggregates num flowable fill num fly ash num forms num general num ground granulated blast furnace ggbf slag num grout num handling materials num identification stencil num jpc pavement num num jpc pavement base and shoulders num materials num measuring proportions num medians num microsilica num mineral admixtures num mix design num mix requirements num mixing num mortar num opening to traffic num placing num placing under water num prepour meeting num primary uses num producer responsibilities num proportioning requirements num records num removal of falsework num removal of forms num scales num seal num sealing and patching with epoxy resin num selfconsolidating num sidewalks num significant loads time required num slope wall num slump num slump by class num steps num surface finish floated num surface finish general num surface finish masonry coating num surface finish ordinary num temperature limitations num trip tickets num vibrating num weather limitations and protection num concrete admixtures .
see admixtures for concrete concrete box culverts apron walls num drainage num extensions to existing num footings num general num headwalls num placing concrete num placing fill num removing forms num surface finish num concrete bridges classes of concrete num falsework and forms num foundation num general num identification plate num inspection facilities num layout num materials num permissable finish variations num piers and abutments num placing anchor bolts num placing concrete in substructure num placing steel reinforcement in substructure num placing steel reinforcement in superstructure num placing superstructure num protection num setting expansion devices num superstrucure general requirements num concrete curing materials burlap cloth num curing blankets num general num liquid membrane forming compounds num price adjustment num waterproof paper num white burlap polyethylene sheet num white polyethylene film num concrete headwalls footings num general num placing concrete num placing fill num removing forms num surface finish num concrete members prestressed and precast .
see prestressed and precast concrete products concrete overlays .
see bridge restoration and waterproofing with concrete overlays concrete paving structural plate soil interaction structures num concrete pipe .
see culvert pipe concrete placement jpc pavement base and shoulders num concrete plant batching equipment num batching equipment jpc pavement base and shoulders num personnel num concrete producer quality control num concrete seal num conduit installation roadway lighting num traffic signal num cones num conglomerate sand num connections pin structural steel bridges num consolidation concrete num jpc pavement base and shoulders num construction maintenance and control of traffic num construction loads num contract num award num bond num default and termination num definition num emergency deferment num emergency termination num execution num failure to execute num termination num time num contraction joints nonstructural concrete num contractor cooperation num definition num insurance num liability num maintenance num num responsibility for work num staking num utility responsibilities num wage requirements num control of work num control points num control strips dga and csb base num controlling item definition num liqidated damages num working days num controlling operation definition num liqidated damages num working days num cooperation by contractor num cored hole drainage box connector general num materials num cores asphalt density num corrective seeding num corrective work num costplus see force account num coupling bands num covering signs num crash cushion num crash cushions temporary num cross drains cleaning num crown vetch num crsi num crushed aggregate slope protection num crushed sand num crushed stone base csb num general num gradation num tolerances num csb num culvert definition num culvert pipe asphalt coating num backfill material num backfill concrete num backfill metal num backfill thermoplastic num bedding num concrete material requirements num construction loads num cover minimum num cover temporary num end structures num extensions to existing pipe num extra protection num flowable fill num foundation num general num geotextile fabric use num identification and markings concrete num initial backfill general num installation concrete num installation metal num installation structural plate num installation thermoplastic num joints concrete num joints metal num joints thermoplastic num materials num metal coating num metal coupling bands num metal material requirements num price adjustment for deflection num num removing num removing and relaying num testing num thermoplastic material requirements num trenching num undercutting num culvert pipe equivalent .
see culvert pipe curb and gutter combination concrete construction requirements num curbs and gutters concrete curb and gutter combination num forms num general num header curb num integral curb num removal num valley gutter num curing cement treated drainage blanket num chemically stabilized roadbed num num concrete sidewalks num curing blankets num curing compound price adjustment num curing concrete blankets num concrete entrance pavements num concrete steps num general num jpc pavement num num jpc pavement base and shoulders num latex concrete overlays num membrane num prestressed and precast products num num prestressed members num reinforced concrete bridge slabs num wet curing num curing jpc pavement blankets num wet burlap num white membrane num curving with heat steel num cutting with flame steel num cyclopean stone riprap num damage existing roadway num repair num dbe num decks reinforced concrete bridge .
see reinforced concrete bridge slabs defective material num defective work num definitions num deflection testing num deicers calcium chloride solid type s num general num sodium chloride num delays num delineator post num delineators num delivery of concrete discharge time num general num jpc pavement base and shoulders num demobilization num dense graded aggregate dga general num gradation num materials requirement num tolerances num density cores num design retaining walls num design quantity num roadway excavation num detour num definition num dewatering num foundation seals num structures num dga .
see dense graded aggregate diamond grinding jpc pavement alignment tolerances num equipment num general num num joints preserving existing seals num num joints resealing existing num pavement marking num ride quality num test section num texture num diesel fuel price adjustment num differing site conditions num digital terrain model num direct tension indicators material rrequirements num structural steel bridges use num disadvantaged business enterprise num num disagreement num discharge time delivery of concrete num disposal waste material num num dispute num resolution num disqualification of bidder num ditches num ditches paved .
see paved ditches ditching num ditching and shouldering general num diversion definition num general num dowel bar sleeves num dowel bars num medians concrete num transverse expansion joints jpc pavement num drain pipe slotted num drainage concrete box culverts num pavement num reinforced concrete bridge slabs num retaining walls num structure num subgrade num wick drains num drainage blankets embankment num embankment materials requirement num num geotextile num pavement .
see pavement drainage blankets drainage structures adjusting num num drawings falsework num roadway lighting num driving bearing piles num dropoffs num durable pavement striping layout num price adjustment num num num tape type i num thermoplastic num weather and temperature limitations num dust control num edge drain outlet headwalls .
see small drainage structures edge drains .
see underdrains see pavement edge drains edge planing structural steel bridges num edge slump jpc pavement base and shoulders num edging concrete entrance pavements num concrete sidewalks num jpc pavement base and shoulders num elastomeric bearing pads num electronic surveying num embankment channel changes num compaction num embankmentinplace num foundations num general num materials num embankment drainage blankets coarse aggregate num fine aggregate num rock num sand num embankment foundation stabilization geotextile num embankmentinplace num emulsified asphalt general num price adjustment num num num end connector angles structural steel bridges num end structures .
see also concrete headwalls concrete box culverts num culvert pipe num precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections num structural plate soil interaction structures num end treatments material requirements num engineer authority num definition num enterprise zone num entrance pavements concrete backfilling num curing num edging num forming general num forming side form num forming slip form num general num joints num straightedging num entrance pipe .
see culvert pipe entrance pipe equivalent .
see culvert pipe epoxy coated steel reinforcement num epoxy bond coat num epoxy coating steel reinforcing num epoxy resin systems num epoxy seal coats num epoxysand slurry bridge restoration and waterproofing with concrete overlays num fine aggregate num equipment pipeline inspection camera edge drains num rental rates num spreaders jpc pavement base and shoulders num sufficient num erection plans structural plate soil interaction structures num erodible material coarse aggregates num erosion control brush barrier num crown vetch num erosion control blanket num general num seeding and protection permanent num seeding and protection temporary num sod num temporary mulch num topdressing num erosion control blanket general num material requirements num erosion control materials agricultural limestone num asphalt materials for mulch num erosion control blanket num fertilizer num general num mulch materials num netting and staples num seed num sod num temporary silt fence num topsoil num excavated materials use num excavation bearing piles num precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections num roadway and drainage num excessive overrun and underrun num execution of contract num expansion devices num expansion joints concrete structures num neoprene reinforced concrete bridge slabs num nonstructural concrete num reinforced concrete bridge slabs num explosives num extensions bearing piles num concrete box culverts num culvert pipe num extra length posts guardrail num extra protection culvert pipe concrete num extra work definition num general num payment for num fabric .
see geotextile fabric ties material requirements num fabric wrapped backfill drain num fabric wrapped drains retaining walls num fabricwrapped backfill drain num facing of bearing surfaces structural steel bridges num fall protection num falsework camber num concrete bridges num design num drawings num general num removal of num removal of structural steel bridges num structural steel bridges num fence gates num general num remove num replace num reset num setting posts num fence posts material requirements num fencing materials chain link .
see chain link fencing materials woven wire .
see woven wire fencing materials fertilizer num seedbed num top dressing num fiberglass membrane num field laboratory asphalt plant num num concrete num general num filling and capping abandoned underground structures diameters num inches or less inlets num filling and capping abandoned underground structures diameters num inches or less catch basins num general num manholes num materials num wells num filling and capping abandoned underground structures diameters over num inches inlets num manholes num filling and capping abandoned underground structures diameters over num inches catch basins num general num materials num wells num final dressing class a num class b num general num final estimate definition num general num final inspection num final payment num final release num final strikeoff jpc pavement base and shoulders num fine aggregates approval num asphalt mixtures combined aggregate num asphalt mixtures general num asphalt mixtures mineral filler num num asphalt mixtures polish resistant aggregate num asphalt mixtures sand num backfill num concrete num conglomerate sand num crushed sand num drainage num embankment drainage blanket num num epoxy sand slurry num epoxy seal coats num general num mineral filler num mortar sand num num natural sand num nonspecification gadations num pipe bedding num sampling and testing num underdrains num finish surface .
see surface finish finishing jpc pavement base and shoulders num reinforced concrete bridge slabs num structural steel bridges num finishing aid num finishing machines reinforced concrete bridge slabs num fire plan num fixed completion date num fixed joints reinforced concrete bridge slabs num flagger apparel num flame cutting structural steel bridges num flashing arrow board num flexible delineator post num floated surface finish concrete num floating jpc pavement base and shoulders num flowable fill pipe backfill num placing num proportioning and requirements num num pumping num flume inlets general num materials num fly ash num num material requirements num nonspecification num price adjustment num seasonal limitations num footing excavation num footings concrete box culverts num concrete headwalls num signs num force account num definition num forgings structural steel bridges num formal acceptance definition num issuing num formal partnering num forming concrete entrance pavements num concrete median barriers fixed form num concrete median barriers slip num concrete sidewalks num general num jpc pavement base and shoulders num nonstructural concrete num prestressed and precast concrete products num reinforced concrete bridge slabs num structures num forming slip bridge barrier wall num concrete entrance pavement num concrete sidewalks num nonstructural concrete num forms camber num concrete bridges num concrete curbs and gutters num concrete general num entrance pavements concrete num jpc pavement base and shoulders num median barriers permanent concrete num removal of num removal of box culverts num removal of headwalls num removal of jpc pavement base and shoulders num removal of prestressed members num sidewalks concrete num stayinplace metal num steps concrete num foundation concrete bridges num embankment num pipe num retaining walls num foundation preparation backfilling num cofferdams num drainage num footing excavation num general num foundation seals num foundation undercut num ftest num fuel price adjustment num full depth patching bridge restoration and waterproofing with concrete overlays num gabion aggregate num walls num wire num gates material requirements num geogrid reinforcement base courses num subgrade num geotextile construction num channel lining num drainage blankets num embankment foundation stabilization num field splices num laps num slope protection num subgrade num underdrains num geotextile fabric culvert pipe num fastener pins num general num price adjustment num ggbf slag num num glass beads type i num gradation channel linings num granular embankment num structure granular backfill num granular embankment gradation num grass num gravity wall num gray iron castings num ground granulated blast furnace slag ggbf general num material requirements num ground rods num grout proportioning and requirements num num grouting and epoxy bond coat drilling num epoxy bond coat num general num grouting num inserting bars num growing season num guardrail adjust num extra length posts num general num install num material requirements num placing rail num relocate num remove num salvaged num temporary num hammers pile driving num handrail install num material requirements num hardware for timber structures num hauling general num over railways num over structures num overloads num hdpe pipe num header curb concrete construction requirements num headwalls .
see endstructures headwalls concrete .
see concrete headwalls headwalls edge drain outlet .
see small drainage structures health num heat curving structural steel bridges num high range and retarding water reducing admixtures num high range waterreducing admixtures num high strength steel bolts nuts and washers num highway definition num historic preservation num holidays num hook bolts general num material requirements num hot poured elastic seals jpc pavement uses num hydrated lime num hydrodemolition num identification marking concrete pipe num marking maintenance cleaning and painting steel bridges num plates concrete bridges num plates structural steel bridges num num stencil concrete num indemnify and save harmless num informal partnering num inlets .
see small drainage structures filling and capping .
see filling and capping abandonded underground structures inspection general num inspector authority num definition num integral curb construction requirements num international roughness index asphalt pavement num intersection markings num iri asphalt pavement num jpc pavement num joint materials num fillers cork expansion num fillers general num fillers preformed asphalt expansion num fillers preformed sponge rubber num sealers general num sealers hotpoured elastic num sealers preformed compression num sealers preformed expansion num sealers rigid pipe num sealers silicone rubber num joint resealing diamond grinding jpc pavment num jpc pavement num joint sealant types jpc pavement base and shoulders num joint sealing jpc pavement base and shoulders num reinforced concrete bridge slabs num joint seals temporary jpc pavement num joints asphalt pavement num concrete entrance pavements num concrete sidewalks num concrete general num construction concrete num construction concrete bonding of structural num construction concrete non structural num construction concrete structural num jpc pavement base and shoulders num median barriers permanent concrete fixed form num median barriers permanent concrete precast num median barriers permanent concrete slip form num nonstructural contraction num nonstructural expansion num pipe num precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections num structural steel bridges num structures expansion num jpc pavement admixtures num breaking and seating num burlap drag num care storage and handling of materials num consolidation num curing blankets num curing general num delivery of concrete num diamond grinding num num edge slump num edging num final strikeoff num finishing aid num finishing general num floating num forming num forms num general num hand finishing num joint resealing num joint sealant types num joint sealant selfleveling silicone rubber num joint sealant silicone rubber num num joint sealing general num joint seals preformed neoprene num joint seals temporary num joints general num joints longitudinal num joints longitudinal expansion num num joints transverse construction num num joints transverse contraction num num joints transverse expansion num machine finishing num materials num mixing num opening to traffic num placing concrete num preparation of aggregate base course num producer responsibilities num proportioning num removing forms num ride quality num rumble strips num slip form finishing num slip form pavers num slump num station number stencil num surface correction num surface tolerance testing general num texturing num thickness deficiency payment adjustment num thickness tolerance num weather limitations num wet burlap curing num white membrane curing num jpc pavement num curing num delay of opening price adjustment num general num opening to traffic num placing num strength testing num jpc shoulders .
see jpc pavement junction boxes .
see small drainage structures kentucky seed law num kepsc num labor requirements num landscaping .
see planting landslides num lane closure long term num laps erosion control blanket num geotextile construction num latent defects num lateral drains num latex admixture num latex concrete overlays consolidating num curing num finishing num general num new structures special requirements num placing concrete num prewetting and groutbond coat num proportioning and requirements num num laying sections precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections num layout concrete bridges num durable pavement striping num planting num thermoplastic intersection markings num lead plates num legal responsibilities num leveling and wedging num liability contractor num insurance num personal num licenses num lighting standard installation num lighting roadway .
see roadway lighting lighting roadway materials .
see roadway lighting materials lightweight aggregate num lime num lime stabilized roadbed .
see chemically stabilized roadbed limestone agricultural num limits of operations num liquidated damages num num list of approved materials num load transfer assemblies num load transfer devices transverse expansion joints jpc pavement num loading concrete time required num longitudinal expansion joints jpc pavement num longitudinal joints jpc pavement num lumber .
see wood products luminaires num lump sum num mailbox turnouts num mailboxes num maintenance num maintenance cleaning and painting steel bridges general num identification marking num maintaining traffic num paint application num paint mixing num paint thinning num prosecution of the work num responsibility for damage num seasonal and weather limitations num surface preparation num unsatisfactory work num major item definition num overrun and underrun num malleable castings num manhole risers num manhole steps num manholes .
see also small drainage structures adjusting num num adjusting rings num filling and capping .
see filling and capping abandonded underground structures masonry coating finish concrete num masonry coating material num masonry materials concrete brick num general num hydrated lime num precast reinforced manhole sections num sewer and manhole leveling brick num units for catch basins and manholes num match marking structural steel bridges num materials certification num control of num defective num department furnished num list of approved num rights in and use of num storage num materials care storage and handling concrete general num general num pcc pavement base and shoulders num precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections num prestressed and precast concrete products num steel reinforcement num structural plate soil interaction structures num structural steel bridges num mattress unit wire num mattress units num measurement num design quantity num lump sum num station num volumes num measuring concrete proportions num median barrier temporary concrete construction requirements num general num materials num median barriers permanent concrete fixed form construction num forms num general num joints fixed form num joints precast num joints slip form num precast construction num slip form construction num median concrete barrier standard .
see barrier median concrete standard median mountable concrete .
see mountable median concrete mediation num members prestressed and precast concrete .
see prestressed and precast concrete products metal handrail num microsilica general num material requirements num mill inspection structural steel bridges num milling and texturing asphalt pavement num mineral admixtures general num ground granulated blast furnace ggbf slag num microsilica num mineral admixtures for concrete fly ash num general num ggbf num microsilica num mineral filler num num minor item definition num miscellaneous metals for structural steel bridges num miscellaneous metals material requirements num misfits structural steel bridges num mix designs concrete num mixers concrete batch num central num continuous num general num jpc pavement base and shoulders num truck num mixing concrete for prestressed and precast members num mixing concrete bridge overlays num general num jpc pavement base and shoulders num onsite batch num onsite continuous num readymixed num readymixed central plant num readymixed truck num site num mobilization num milling and texturing num monuments rightofway num mop coat num mortar proportioning and requirements num num mortar sand num num mountable median concrete num mowing num mulch seedbed num temporary num num mulch materials num nails timber structures num natural sand num nchrp num num neoprene expansion joints reinforced concrete bridge slabs num neoprene joint seals reinforced concrete bridge slabs num neoprene seals installation jpc pavement num jpc pavement uses num netting and staples for erosion control num nonconformance report definition num notice of award num definition num notice of changed condition num notice to begin work num num definition num nuts steel num object marker bridge end type num num offset blocks materials requirement num ogfc num open joints reinforced concrete bridge slabs num opengraded friction courses num opening to traffic concrete general num jpc pavement num num jpc pavement base and shoulders num optical units num ordinary surface finish concrete num outlets .
see small drainage structures overhaul num overlaps erosion control blanket num geotextile construction num overloads num overrun num paint pavement striping num paint striping permanent num paint bridge .
see bridge coatings painting structural steel bridges num painting steel bridges .
also see maintenance cleaning and painting steel bridges panel signs sign substrates num panel traffic signs beams and supports num bridge mounting num footings bases and pedestals num general num locating num mounting general num shop drawings num partial payments num partial removal of structures num partialdepth patching bridge restoration and waterproofing with concrete overlays num partnering process num patents num paved ditches general num materials num pavement drainage blankets num jpc .
see jpc pavement removal num structure definition num pavement drainage blankets asphalttreated atdb num cement treated num general num materials num pavement edge drains .
see also underdrains breaking and seating jpc pavement num pavement marker removal num pavement markers .
see raised pavement markers pavement marking .
see pavement striping pavement marking tapes for construction zones num pavement markings intersection thermoplastic num raised markers num removal num temporary num num pavement striping diamond grinding jpc pavement num durable num glass beads num paint num permanent num records num removal num num num tape type i num tapes for construction zones num temporary num thermoplastic num num type i tape num pavement structure subgrade num pavement wedge num pavement wedge texturing num paving structural plate soil interaction structures num paving asphalt structural plate soil interaction structures num paving concrete structural plate soil interaction structures num payment num partial payments num scope num stockpiles num pcc base .
see jpc pavement pcc pavement num proportioning and requirements num num pedestals sign num pedestrian pushbutton detectors num pedestrian signals num perforated pipe num performancegraded binders pg binders num period of establishment planting num permanent paint striping retroreflectivity requirements num permits num personnel concrete plant num pg binder price adjustment num ph num piers concrete bridges num pile hammers num pile points num piles bearing .
see bearing piles pin connections structural steel bridges num pin holes boring num pins structural steel bridges num pins and rollers num pipe .
see culvert pipe pipe and pipe arches num concrete pipe num corrugated metal general num plastic hdpe num plastic pvc num smooth metal num thermoplastic general num pipe underdrains .
see underdrains pipe culvert .
see culvert pipe pipe culvert equivalent .
see culvert pipe pipe entrance .
see culvert pipe pipe entrance equivalent .
see culvert pipe pipe storm sewer .
see culvert pipe pipe storm sewer equivalent .
see culvert pipe placing bearing piles num placing concrete box culverts num bridge overlays num concrete bridges substructure num general num headwalls num jpc pavement num num planing structural steel bridges num plans conformity num coordination num definition num general num plant inspection num plant material num planting general num inspection schedule num layout num material num period of establishment num replacement planting num seasonal and temperature limitations num plastic pipe .
see thermoplastic pipe plugging pipe .
see plugging abandoned underground structures plugging abandoned underground structures general num materials num pipe num water wells num pointing bearing piles num polish resistant aggregates asphalt mixture composition num coarse num fine num pollution air num water num porous aggregate underdrain .
see underdrains portland cement .
see cement post cast aluminum bridge railing num chain link fence num fence num flexible delineator num guardrail materials requirements num sign num precast concrete products .
see prestressed and precast concrete products precast manhole sections num precast median barrier num precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections backfilling num bedding num drainage num excavation num general num headwalls num joints asphalt mastic num joints butyl rubber sealants num joints rubber gaskets num laying sections num materials num precast unit construction num shop drawings num transportation and handling num precast three sided structures num backfill num design num footings num preconstruction conference num prefabricated vertical wick drains num preformed neoprene joint seals reinforced concrete bridge slabs num preformed neoprene seals installation jpc pavement num prepour meeting num prequalification bidding num preservation historic num preservative treatment wood num presplitting num prestressed and precast concrete products casting num curing num dimensional tolerances num erection num forming num general num materials num mixing and batching num removal of forms num surface finish num transportation storagehandling num prestressed concrete members curing num drawings num form removal num hot weather protection num prestressing num safety measures num prestressed concrete products .
see prestressed and precast concrete products prestressing concrete members num prestressing strands num price adjustment concrete overlay thickness deficiency num curing compound num durable pavement striping num num num emulsified asphalt num num num fly ash num fuel num general num geotextile fabric num jpc pavement num delay of opening num jpc pavement thickness num jpc shoulders thickness num liquid asphalt num nonsag silicone rubber sealant num nonspecification cement num pavement striping paint num num pg binder num pipe deflection num reinforced concrete bridge slab depth of cover num steel reinforcement num structural steel num prime coat num producer responsibilities concrete general num jpc pavement num profile grade definition num progress schedule num project definition num project completion definition num project completion notice num definition num proportioning and requirements concrete num jpc pavement num num jpc pavement base and shoulders num latex concrete overlays num prosecution of work num protection property num work num proving period durable pavement markings num permanent paint striping num planting num thermoplastic intersection markings num public convenience and safety num pumping flowable fill num pvc pipe num qa num definition num qat num qc num qcqa num qcp num definition num quality assurance num num definition num quality assurance team num quality control num concrete producer num quality control plan cleaning and painting bridges num num definition num general num quantities altered num railing cast aluminum for bridge num num railway num raised markers num raised pavement markers general num installing type iv num installing type v num rap num rdz num record plans num records concrete num pavement striping num reflectivity requirements .
see retroreflectivity requirements reinforced concrete bridge slabs curing num depositing consolidating and striking off num drainage num finishing with burlap drag num form installation num forming num forming design num general num inspection num joint sealing num joints expansion and fixed num joints open num joints steel num materials num placing steel reinforcement num price adjustment for depth of cover num surface courses num surface finish num swinging the spans num texturing num waterproofing membranes num weather limitations num working the surface num reinforcing bars standard sizes num release agent num removal of bridges num defective and unauthorized work num defective material num falsework general num falsework structural steel bridges num forms num num forms jpc pavement num partial removal of structures num pavement striping num num septic tanks num sidewalks curbs and similar items num structures and obstructions general num trees and stumps num removing and relaying culvert pipe num removing culvert pipe num rental equipment num replacement planting num resealing joints jpc pavement num reshaping and compacting subgrade num retaining walls castinplace cip num design num drainage num foundation num gabion num general num joints num materials num standard gravity wall num retroreflective materials delineators num field performance num general num packaging num sheeting num warranty num retroreflectivity requirements paint permanent num thermoplastic intersection markings num review shop drawings num ride quality asphalt pavement num diamond grinding jpc pavement num jpc pavement num rightofway definition num rightofway marker castings num rightofway num establishing num monuments num road definition num roadbed chemically stabilized num definition num general num rock roadbed num roadside definition num roadway definition num roadway and drainage excavation classification num design quantity num ditches num general num landslides num overhaul num presplitting num roadbed num rock roadbed num serrated slopes num slopes num tolerances num use of excavated materials num waste areas num num roadway lighting cable markers num num conduit installation num documentation num drawings num general num painting num testing num warranties num wiring num roadway lighting materials ballasts num concrete num control transformers num ducted cable num fused cable connector kit num general num ground rods num lamps num lighting standards num luminaires num magnetic contactors num markers for buried conduit num secondary lightning arresters num transformer bases num weatherproof enclosures num wiring num wood poles num rock drainage blanket gradation num rock roadbed num roll up signs num rollers structural steel bridges num rotationalcapacity test num rubber gaskets precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections num rumble strips asphalt pavement num jpc pavement base and shoulders num wedge texturing num safeloading abandoned underground structures general num materials num septic tanks num small drainage structures num underground containers num safety general num plan num public num worker num salt .
see sodium chloride sampling num sawed rumble strips num sawing joints jpc pavement base and shoulders num scales num num concrete num scheduling num scope of work num alterations of num scratch course num sealing and patching concrete with epoxy resin application of epoxy mortar for patching num epoxy seal coat num general num mixing epoxy mortar for patching num mixing epoxy resin num surface preparation num sealing joints reinforced concrete bridge slabs num seasonal limitations planting num seating breaking and seating jpc pavement num sedimentation basins num seed num seed and protect borrow excavation num corrective seeding num permanent num seed acceptance num temporary num seedbed num seeding plan num num selfconsolidating concrete num selfleveling silicone rubber sealant installation jpc pavement num selfleveling silicone rubber seals jpc pavement uses num septic tanks safeloading .
see safeloading abandoned underground structures treatment num serrated slopes num settlement platforms num shear connectors stud num sheeting signs sign substrates num shipping structural steel bridges num shop coat application structural steel bridges num shop drawings num num panel traffic signs num precast reinforced concrete box culvert sections num structural plate soil interaction structures num structural steel bridges num shop inspection structural steel bridges num shoulder definition num pavement wedge num shoulder rumble strips num shouldering num shoulders jpc .
see jpc pavement shrubs .
see planting sidewalks concrete backfilling num curing num edging num forming general num forming side form num forming slip form num general num joints num removal num straightedging num sign posts general num type i num type ii num sign substrates panel signs num sheeting signs num signal heads num signal system materials pedestrian signal pedestal num signals and beacons num steel strain poles num traffic poles num wire and cable num signals traffic control num significant projects num signs num construction zone num roll up num signs panel beams and supports num bridge mounting num footings bases and pedestals num install num locating num mounting general num shop drawings num silicone rubber sealant general num installation jpc pavement num nonsag num price adjustment nonsag num silicone rubber seals jpc pavement uses num silicone sealant rapidcure num num silt fence num silt fence temporary num silt traps num sinkholetreatment num site conditions differing num slabs reinforced concrete bridge .
see reinforced concrete bridge slabs slip form pavers jpc pavement base and shoulders num slip forming entrance pavements num equipment num finishing jpc pavement num median barriers permanent concrete num nonstructural concrete num pavers num sidewalks num slope protection crushed aggregate num cyclopean stone riprap num general num geotextile num materials num reinforced concrete slope wall num num slope stakes num num slopes num serrated num slotted drain pipe num general num materials num slump concrete num concrete general num jpc pavement base and shoulders num sma num small drainage structures adjusted num filling and capping .
see filling and capping abandonded underground structures general num materials num newly constructed general num newly constructed precast except manholes num reconstructed num safeloading .
see safeloading abandoned underground structures snowplowable pavement markers .
see raised pavement markers sod num num sodium chloride num soil interaction structures .
see structural plate soil interaction structures soundings foundation structural plate soil interaction structures num spans swinging reinforced concrete bridge slabs num special note coordination num definition num special provision coordination num definition num specifications conformity num definition num order of precedence num special note num special provision num standard specifications num supplemental specifications num spill prevention plan num splicing bearing piles num geotextile construction num steel reinforcement num wiring num num stabilization embankment foundation num subgrade num staking contractor num num department num general num standard drawings coordination num definition num standard specifications coordination num definition num static load tests bearing piles num station number stencil jpc pavement base and shoulders num stayinplace forms num steel bolts nuts and washers num steel bridges .
see structural steel bridges steel bridges maintenance cleaning and painting .
see maintenance cleaning and painting steel bridges steel joints reinforced concrete bridge slabs num steel plates tunnel lining materials num steel reinforcement num anchor bolts material requirements num bar mats num bars material requirements num bending num bridge slabs num epoxy coated num num general num hook bolts material requirements num load transfer assemblies num placing and fastening num prestressing strands num price adjustment num protection of material num splicing num steel wire num straightening num welded deformed steel wire fabric num welded steel wire fabric wwf num num steel wire num stencil station number jpc pavement base and shoulders num steps concrete backfilling num curing num general num stess relieving structural steel bridges num stiffeners fit of structural steel bridges num stockpiles cement num payment num storing num topsoil num stonematrix asphalt num storing materials general num stockpiled num storm sewer pipe .
see culvert pipe storm sewer pipe equivalent .
see culvert pipe straightedges jpc pavement base and shoulders num straightedging concrete entrance pavement num concrete sidewalks num straightening bent material structural steel bridges num straw mulch num streams construction activities affecting num striping durable preformed type i tape num num paint num permanent num thermoplastic num num structural plate pipe num structural plate soil interaction structures composition num end structures num erection plans num general num installation num materials num paving asphalt num paving concrete num shop drawings num soundings for foundation num transportation and handling num structural plates for pipe pipe arches and arches num aluminum alloy num corrugated steel num structural steel price adjustment num structural steel bridges abutting joints num annealing and stress relieving num num bearings and anchorages num bent plates num bolt holes num bolt tension num bolted connections num boring pin holes num cleaning and painting num direct tension indicators material requirements num direct tension indicators use num edge planing num end connection angles num facing of bearing surfaces num falsework erection methods and equipment num field assembling num field inspection num field storing and handling materials num finished members num fit of stiffeners num flame cutting num forgings num general num heat curving num inspection facilities num match marking num material traceability num mill and shop inspection and shipping num miscellaneous metals num misfits num notice of beginning work num painting field coat applications num painting field coat preparation num num painting identification plate num painting repair of coatings num painting shop coat application num num painting shop coat preparation num num pin clearances num pin connections num pins and rollers num removal of falsework num reuse of bolts num shop assembly num shop drawings num straightening bent material num threads for bolts and pins num web plates num welding procedures num welds num workmanship num structural steel coatings project acceptance num sampling and testing num structural steel coatings general num structural steels material requirements num structure excavation cofferdams num common num general num solid rock num unclassified num structure excavation and backfill channel preservation num classification num drainage num footing num structure granular backfill gradation num structures backfilling num definition num forming num hauling over num partial removal num removal num stud shear connectors num subcontracting num subcontractor definition num subgrade compaction num construction tolerances num definition num drainage num general num geotextile num protection and maintenance num reshaping and compacting num substructure concrete bridges classes of concrete num concrete bridges placing concrete num concrete bridges steel reinforcement num definition num subsurface drainage outlets .
see pavement edge drains suits num superpave mix design technologist num superpave plant technologist num superstructure concrete bridges general num concrete bridges placing num concrete bridges steel reinforcement num supplemental agreement definition num general num supplemental drawings definition num supplemental specifications coordination num definition num surface correction jpc pavement base and shoulders num surface course definition num surface courses reinforced concrete bridge slabs num surface finish concrete box culverts num concrete headwalls num floated surface num general num masonry coating num ordinary surface num prestressed and precast concrete products num reinforced concrete bridge slabs num surface tolerance testing jpc pavement base and shoulders num surveying electronic num general num suspension of work num tack coat num tackifier for mulch num tape temporary num tape type i striping material num price adjustment num num num proving period num taxes num tcp num temperature limitations bridge restoration and waterproofing with concrete overlays num cement treated drainage blanket num chemically stabilized roadbed num num concrete num num durable pavement striping num jpc pavement base and shoulders num maintenance cleaning and painting steel bridges num planting num prestressed and precast concrete products num thermoplastic intersection markings num temporary concrete barrier num temporary crash cushion num temporary ditch num temporary mulch num num temporary pavement markings num temporary silt fence num temporary striping num temporary traffic signals num num num tension bolts num termination contract num contractors responsibility num termination of contract num test piles bearing num test section breaking and seating jpc pavement num diamond grinding jpc pavement num testing num pipe num roadway lighting num texturing diamond grinding jpc pavement num jpc pavement base and shoulders num reinforced concrete bridge slabs num texturing pavement wedge num thermoplastic intersection markings equipment num general num layout num proving period num restrictions num retroreflectivity requirements num thermoplastic marking material num thermoplastic pavement striping price adjustment num num num thermoplastic pipe num thermoplastic striping application equipment num general num proving period num thickness jpc pavement base and shoulders num timber num timber guardrail posts num timber poles num timber structures hardware num time clock num time extension num time limits discharge of concrete num tma num num num tolerances num see also appendix a accuracy of reamed and drilled holes num asphalt materials num asphalt surface num bearing piles num dga and csb base num diamond grinding jpc pavement num edge distance of bolts num jpc pavement num jpc pavement thickness num prestressed and precast num roadway and drainage excavation num subgrade num topdressing num topdresssing num topsoil num num furnish and place num spreading stockpiled num num traffic control arrow panels num barrier walls num blasting num coordinator num crash cushions num detour num devices num diversion num dropoffs num general num lane closure long term num signalized intersection num significant projects num signs num supervisor num technician num temporary pavement marking num temporary traffic signals num traffic control plan num traffic control devices documentation num pedestrian pushbutton detectors num pedestrian signals num signal heads num signals and beacons num temporary traffic signals num time clock num tma num num traffic loop encapsulant num warranties num traffic control plans num traffic loop encapsulant num traffic signal conduit installation num traffic signs panel beams and supports num bridge mounting num footings bases and pedestals num general num locating num mounting general num shop drawings num transformers num transverse construction joints jpc pavement num transverse contraction joints jpc pavement num transverse expansion joints jpc pavement num transverse joints medians concrete num treatment of open sinkholes num trees .
see planting trees and stumps removal num tremies num num trenching culvert pipe num trip tickets concrete num truck mounted attenuator num num num ttest num tunnel lining materials num bolts and nuts num steel plates num tunnels num unauthorized work num under water concrete placing num undercutting foundation num pipe num underdrains .
see also pavement edge drains backfill num camera inspection num coarse aggregate num fine aggregate num general num geotextile num material requirement num materials num nonperforated num pavment edge drains num perforated num porous aggregate num underground containers abandoned safeloading .
see safeloading abandoned underground structures underground storage tanks num underground structures treatment num underrun num unstable material coarse aggregates num utilities contractors responsibilities num cooperation with num valley gutter concrete num value engineering num variable message signs num vertical wick drains num vibrating concrete num jpc pavement base and shoulders num vibrators jpc pavement base and shoulders num vibratrors concrete num vines .
see planting vinsol resin num wage requirements num washers steel num timber structures num waste areas num num num waste material disposal num num water num construction over num pollution num water blasting pavement markings num water jets num water pollution control general num inspection and maintenance num progress requirements num sedimentation basins num seeding and protection permanent num seeding and protection temporary num silt fence num silt traps num temporary ditch num temporary measures num temporary mulch num water wells plugging .
see plugging abandoned underground structures waterproofing materials asphalt primer num fiberglass waterproofing membrane num fiberreinforced waterproofing membrane num general num mop coat num waterproofing membranes reinforced concrete bridge slabs num waterreducing admixtures num waterreducing and accelerating admixtures num waterreducing and retarding admixtures num wearing course definition num weather limitations bridge restoration and waterproofing with concrete overlays num cement treated drainage blanket num chemically stabilized roadbed num num concrete num durable pavement striping num jpc pavement base and shoulders num maintenance cleaning and painting steel bridges num planting num prestressed concrete products num reinforced concrete bridge slabs num thermoplastic intersection markings num web plates structural steel bridges num weep holes box culverts num concrete slope walls num retaining walls num weighing num small quantities num weldable steel num welded deformed steel wire fabric num welded steel wire fabric wwf num num material requirements num welding certification num materials procedures and inspection num procedures for structural steel bridges num structual steel bridges num wells filling and capping .
see filling and capping abandonded underground structures wells water plugging .
see plugging abandoned underground structures wet curing concrete num white polyethylene film num wick drains num wiring roadway lighting num splicing num num witness post num wood products boards num bridge planking and rough local hardwoods num dimension lumber num general num inspection testing and acceptance num preservative treatment num structural lumber num timbers numinch by numinch and larger num work contractors responsibility num definition num failure to complete on time num force account num prosecution of num suspension of num through national forests and parks num worker safety num workers sufficient quality and quantity num num working days num num definition num working drawings num definition num woven wire fabric material requirements num woven wire fencing material barbed wire num brace wire num braces num fabric ties num gates num general num posts num woven wire fabric num written narrative num
