standard specifications state of california california state transportation agency department of transportation num published by department of transportation copies of this book may be obtained from state of california department of transportation publication distribution unit num royal oaks drive sacramento california num telephone num num fax num num publication unit web site httpcaltransopac.ca.govpublicat.htm copyright num california department of transportation .
all rights reserved .
table of contents i division i general provisions num num general num num bidding num num contract award and execution num num scope of work num num control of work num num control of materials num num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num prosecution and progress num num payment num division ii general construction num num general num num welding num num temporary traffic control num num water pollution control num num environmental stewardship num num existing facilities num num temporary facilities num division iii earthwork and landscape num num general num num dust palliatives num num earthwork num num landscape num num erosion control num num finishing roadway num division iv subbases and bases num num general num num stabilized soils num num aggregate subbases num num aggregate bases num num cement treated bases num num concrete bases num num treated permeable bases num num reclaimed pavement num num reserved num table of contents ii division v surfacings and pavements num num general num num bituminous seals num num reserved num num asphalt concrete num num concrete pavement num num existing concrete pavement num num groove and grind concrete num num reserved num division vi structures num num general num num ground anchors and soil nails num num earth retaining systems num num temporary structures num num piling num num prestressing concrete num num concrete structures num num reinforcement num num shotcrete num num waterproofing num num steel structures num num overhead sign structures standards and poles num num wood and plastic lumber structures num num sound walls num num structural steel coatings num num existing structures num division vii drainage facilities num num general num num reserved num num plastic pipe num num concrete pipe num num corrugated metal pipe num num structural plate culverts num num subsurface drains num num overside drains num table of contents iii num miscellaneous drainage facilities num num existing drainage facilities num division viii miscellaneous construction num num slope protection num num concrete curbs and sidewalks num num pumping equipment and controls num num miscellaneous metal num num wells num num local infrastructure num num incidental construction num num reserved num num fences num division ix traffic control devices num num miscellaneous traffic control devices num num signs and markers num num railings and barriers num num markings num num reserved num division x electrical work num num reserved num division xi materials num num aggregate num num concrete num num paint num num asphalt binders num num reserved num num asphaltic emulsions num num epoxy num num geosynthetics num num reserved num division xii building construction num num building construction num num division i general provisions num general num general section num includes specifications related to the interpretation of the contract .
the specifications are divided into num divisions .
division i includes general specifications applicable to every contract unless specified as applicable only under certain conditions .
division ii includes specifications for general construction applicable to every contract unless specified as applicable only under certain conditions .
divisions iii through x include construction specifications for specific bid items .
division xi includes specifications for common materials .
for a material specified in this division that material specified in any section must comply with the specifications in division xi .
division xii includes construction specifications for buildings .
the bid items set forth the construction specifications that apply .
the first num digits of a bid item code correspond to the specification section number with the same first num digits except for bid item code num that corresponds to section num and unless shown otherwise in the table titled bid items and applicable sections in the special provisions .
the specifications are written to the bidder before award and the contractor after .
before award interpret sentences written in the imperative mood as starting with the bidder must and interpret you as the bidder and your as the bidders .
after award interpret sentences written in the imperative mood as starting with the contractor must and interpret you as the contractor and your as the contractors .
after contract approval submit documents and direct questions to the engineer .
orders authorizations and requests to the contractor are by the engineer .
the following items from the department are in writing num .
approvals num .
authorizations num .
decisions num .
notifications num .
orders num .
responses the following items from the contractor must be in writing num .
assignments num .
notifications num .
proposals num .
reports num .
requests including rfis sequentially numbered num .
subcontracts num .
test results where a location is not specified with the words shown specified or described interpret num .
shown as shown on the plans .
num .
specified as specified in the specifications .
num .
described as described in the contract .
described means shown specified or both .
headings are included for the purposes of organization and referencing .
inclusion of a heading with no related content not used or reserved does not indicate that no specification exists for that subject applicable specifications may be covered in a general or referenced specification .
section num general num specifications in a section titled general apply to all subordinate sections within the section .
specifications in the general section of a division apply to all sections within the division .
sections are reserved in the standard specifications for correlation of special provisions and revised standard specifications with the standard specifications and for future expansion of the standard specifications .
the specifications are expressed in us customary units except where a referenced document uses the international system of units as the standard .
unless an object or activity is specified to be less than the total the quantity or amount is all of the object or activity .
all items in a list apply unless the items are specified as choices .
num style variations the department is gradually standardizing the style of the specifications .
the use of the new style does not change the meaning of a contract part not using this style .
the new style includes num .
use of num .
imperative mood num .
introductory modifiers num .
conditional clauses num .
industrystandard terms num .
elimination of num .
language variations num .
definitions for industrystandard terms num .
redundant specifications num .
needless crossreferences because of the transition some terms or clauses used in division i are different from those used in other divisions and in other contract parts .
interpret the equivalent term or clause shown in the following table as having the same meaning as the corresponding term or clause in division i terms equivalencies term or clause in division i equivalent term or phrase that may be in other divisions and in other contract parts conditions authorize approve except in a change order authorized material list prequalified products list department engineer where referring to anyone other than the resident engineer or the resident engineers authorized representatives department furnished material statefurnished material work description is change order work work description will be paid for as extra work with or without a reference to a section num reserved num references a reference within parentheses to a law or regulation is included in the contract for convenience only and is not a comprehensive listing of related laws and regulations .
lack of a reference does not indicate no related laws or regulations exist .
section num general num where the version of a referenced document is not specified use the most recent version in effect on the date of the notice to bidders .
a reference to a section includes specifications in sections titled general that apply to the section .
where a section number is referenced without a reference to a document the reference is to a section of the standard specifications as revised by any revised standard specification special provision or both .
any reference directly to a revised standard specification section is for convenience only .
lack of a direct reference to a revised standard specification section does not indicate a revised standard specification for the section does not exist .
a code not specified as a federal code is a california code .
an agency or a department not specified as a federal or local agency or department is a california agency or department .
num abbreviations unless context indicates otherwise interpret the meaning of an abbreviation used in the specifications and the bid item list as shown in the following tables section num general num abbreviations abbreviation meaning aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials ab aggregate base aci american concrete institute adl aerially deposited lead aisc american institute of steel construction aisi american iron and steel institute ama archaeological monitoring area ansi american national standards institute api american petroleum institute arema american railway engineering and maintenanceofway association as aggregate subbase asme american society of mechanical engineers asq american society for quality atpb asphalt treated permeable base ats active treatment system awg american wire gauge awpa american wood protection association awsa american welding society awwa american water works association awis automated work zone information system bbs battery backup system bnsf burlington northern santa fe calosha california division of occupational safety and health administration cbc california building code cdph california department of public health cidh castindrilledhole cih certified industrial hygienist cip cast in place cjp complete joint penetration cmu concrete masonry unit cpm critical path method cpl composite plastic lumber crcp continuously reinforced concrete pavement crm crumb rubber modifier ctb cement treated base ctpb cement treated permeable base cvn charpy vnotch cwi aws certified welding inspector dbe disadvantaged business enterprise dra dispute resolution advisor drb dispute resolution board dtsc department of toxic substances control dvbe disabled veteran business enterprise ectc erosion control technology council eiaecia electronic industries allianceelectronic components industry association elap environmental laboratory accreditation program esa environmentally sensitive area etl electrical testing laboratories fc extreme fiber compressive stress in concrete at service loads fc compressive strength of concrete fhwa federal highway administration fdr full depth reclamation gaap generally accepted accounting principles ggbfs ground granulated blast furnace slag slag cement section num general num gsp galvanized steel pipe hma hot mix asphalt hmao hot mix asphalt open graded hs high strength icc international code council icea insulated cable engineers association ite institute of transportation engineers ieee institute of electrical and electronics engineers jmf job mix formula jpcp jointed plain concrete pavement ksf kips per square foot ksi kips per square inch lcb lean concrete base lcs departments lane closure system leed leadership in energy and environmental design ltds long term design strength mc medium curing mets departments materials engineering and testing services mpi master painters institute mpqp material plant quality program published by the department mr movement rating msdsb material safety data sheet mt magnetic particle testing mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices nal numeric action level ndt nondestructive testing nel numeric effluent limitation neta international electrical testing association nec national electrical code nema national electrical manufacturers association nfpa national fire protection association nmas nominal maximum aggregate size npdes national pollutant discharge elimination system npt national pipe thread taper nrtl nationally recognized testing laboratory ntu nephelometric turbidity unit obc optimum binder content ogfc open graded friction course osd offices of structure design plac permit license agreement certification or any combination of these pc precast pcc portland cement concrete pcf pounds per cubic foot pcms portable changeable message sign pg performance grade pjp partial joint penetration poc pedestrian overcrossing pqr procedure qualification record ps prestressed psf pedestrian signal face pv programmed visibility qsd qualified swppp developer qsp qualified swppp practitioner rap reclaimed asphalt pavement rcsc research council on structural connections recp rolled erosion control product section num general num rfi request for information rhma rubberized hot mix asphalt rhmag rubberized hot mix asphalt gap graded rhmao rubberized hot mix asphalt open graded rhmaohb rubberized hot mix asphalt open graded high binder rpl recycled plastic lumber rsc rapid strength concrete rsp rock slope protection rss revised standard specifications rt radiographic testing rwqcb regional water quality control board smsa standard metropolitan statistical area sc slow curing scc selfconsolidating concrete scm supplementary cementitious material sds safety data sheet sspc the society for protective coatings swppp stormwater pollution prevention plan swrcb state water resources control board tees transportation electrical equipment specifications tia telecommunications industry association time impact analysis tro timerelated overhead tv target value uffa ultra fine fly ash ul underwriters laboratories inc usc united states code usle universal soil loss equation usm unidentified stock material ut ultrasonic testing vecp value engineering change proposal vfd variablefrequency drive vpm volts per mil wma warm mix asphalt wpc water pollution control wpcp water pollution control program wps welding procedure specification wqo water quality objective ainterpret a reference to aws as a reference to aws ansiaws or aashtoaws binterpret a reference to msds as a reference to sds under num cfr num section num general num bid item list abbreviations abbreviation meaning acre acre cf cubic foot cy cubic yard ea each f final pay item gal gallon hr hour lb pound lf linear foot ls lump sum lnmi lane mile mfbm thousand foot board measure sta station num feet sqft square foot sqyd square yard ton num pounds wday working day num definitions numa general interpret terms as defined in the contract documents .
numb glossary abandon render unserviceable in place .
acts of god acts of god as defined in pub cont code num. activity task event or other project element on a schedule that contributes to completing the project .
an activity has a description start date finish date duration and one or more logic ties .
adjust raise or lower a facility to match a new grade line .
aerially deposited lead lead primarily from vehicle emissions deposited within unpaved areas or formerly unpaved areas .
authorized laboratory independent testing laboratory num not employed or compensated by any subcontractor or subcontractors affiliate providing other services for the contract and num authorized by the department .
base layer of specified material of planned thickness placed immediately below the pavement or surfacing .
basement material material in an excavation or embankment under the lowest layer to be placed .
bid item work unit for which the bidder provides a price .
bid item list list of bid items units of measure and the associated quantities .
the verified bid item list is the bid item list with verified prices .
the contract proposal of low bidder at the departments website is the verified bid item list .
after contract award interpret a reference to the bid item list as a reference to the verified bid item list .
borrow fill acquired from an excavation source outside the described cut area .
num. local borrow material obtained by widening cuts or excavating from sources outside the planned or authorized cross section on the job site .
the location of the local borrow is described or designated by the engineer .
num. imported borrow borrow that is not local borrow .
section num general num bridge structure that num .
has a bridge number num .
carries a num utility num railroad or num vehicle pedestrian or other traffic over under or around obstructions or waterways buildingconstruction contract contract that has building construction on the cover of the notice to bidders and special provisions .
california test departmentdeveloped test for determining work quality .
for california tests go to the mets website .
certificate of compliance certificate stating the material complies with the contract .
certified industrial hygienist industrial hygienist certified in comprehensive practice by the american board of industrial hygiene .
change order work work described in a change order including extra work and work described in the contract as change order work .
closure closure of a traffic lane or lanes including shoulder ramp or connector lanes within a single traffic control system .
commercial quality quality meeting the best general practices .
commercial source established business operating as a material source for the general public .
contract written and executed contract between the department and the contractor .
contract acceptance directors written acceptance of a completed contract .
contract time number of original working days as adjusted by any time adjustment .
contractor person or business or its legal representative entering into a contract with the department for performance of the work .
controlling activity construction activity that will extend the scheduled completion date if delayed .
critical path longest continuous chain of activities for the project that has the least amount of total float of all chains .
in general a delay on the critical path extends the scheduled completion date .
critical path method networkbased planning technique using activity durations and relationships between activities to calculate a schedule for the entire project .
culvert structure other than a bridge that provides an opening under a roadway .
data date day after the date through which a schedule is current .
everything occurring earlier than the data date is asbuilt and everything on or after the data date is planned .
day num consecutive hours running from midnight to midnight calendar day .
num. business day day on the calendar except a saturday and a holiday .
num. working day time measure unit for work progress .
a working day is any numconsecutivehour period except num .
saturday and a holiday .
num .
day during which you can not perform work on the controlling activity for at least num percent of the scheduled work shift with at least num percent of the scheduled labor and equipment due to any of the following num .
adverse weatherrelated conditions .
num .
traffic maintenance under the contract .
num .
suspension of a controlling activity that you and the engineer agree benefits both parties .
num .
unanticipated event not caused by either party such as num .
act of god num .
act of a public enemy .
section num general num num .
epidemic .
num .
fire .
num .
flood .
num .
governordeclared state of emergency .
num .
landslide .
num .
quarantine restriction .
num .
issue involving a third party including num .
industry or areawide labor strike .
num .
material shortage .
num .
freight embargo .
num .
jurisdictional requirement of a law enforcement agency .
num .
workforce labor dispute of a utility or nonhighway facility owner resulting in a nonhighway facility rearrangement not described and not solely for the contractors convenience .
rearrangement of a nonhighway facility includes installation relocation alteration or removal of the facility .
num .
day during a concurrent delay .
num. original working days num .
working days to complete the work shown on the notice to bidders for a noncostplustime based bid num .
working days bid to complete the work for a costplustimebased bid where working days is specified without the modifier original in the context of the number of working days to complete the work interpret the number as the number of original working days as adjusted by any time adjustment .
deduction money permanently taken from a progress payment or the final payment .
deductions are cumulative and are not retentions under pub cont code num. delay event that extends the completion of an activity .
num. excusable delay delay caused by the department and not reasonably foreseeable when the work began such as num .
change in the work num .
department action that is not part of the contract num .
presence of an underground utility main not described in the contract or in a location substantially different from that specified num .
described facility rearrangement not rearranged as described by the utility owner by the date specified unless the rearrangement is solely for the contractors convenience num .
departments failure to obtain timely access to the rightofway num .
departments failure to review a submittal or provide notification in the time specified num. critical delay excusable delay that extends the scheduled completion date num. concurrent delay occurrence of at least num of the following events in the same period of time either partially or entirely num .
critical delay num .
delay to a controlling activity caused by you num .
nonworking day department department of transportation as defined in st hwy code num and authorized in st hwy code num its authorized representatives .
detour temporary route for traffic around a closed road part .
a passageway through a job site is not a detour .
director departments director .
disabled veteran business enterprise business certified as a dvbe by the department of general services office of small business and dvbe services .
disadvantaged business enterprise disadvantaged business enterprise as defined in num cfr num. dispose of remove from the job site .
section num general num divided highway highway with separated traveled ways for traffic generally in opposite directions .
engineer resident engineer responsible for the contracts administration resident engineers authorized representatives .
early completion time difference in time between an early scheduled completion date and the work completion date .
environmentally sensitive area area within or near construction limits where access is prohibited or limited to protect environmental resources .
estimated cost estimated cost of the project as shown on the notice to bidders .
extra work any work desired or performed but not included in the original contract .
federalaid contract contract that has a federalaid project number on the cover of the notice to bidders and special provisions .
final pay item bid item whose quantity shown on the bid item list is the quantity paid .
finished grade final surface of the completed facility .
if the work under the contract includes stage construction the relation between the finished grade and the work under the contract is shown .
fixed cost labor material or equipment cost directly incurred by the contractor as a result of performing or supplying a particular bid item that remains constant regardless of the items quantity .
float difference between the earliest and latest allowable start or finish times for an activity .
num .
departmentowned float time saved on the critical path by actions of the department .
it is the last activity shown on the schedule before the scheduled completion date .
force account work work ordered on a construction project without an existing agreement on its cost and performed with the understanding that the contractor will bill the owner according to the cost of labor materials and equipment plus a certain percentage for overhead and profit .
grading plane basement material surface on which the lowest layer of subbase base pavement surfacing or other specified layer is placed .
highway whole rightofway or area reserved for use in constructing the roadway and its appurtenances .
holiday holiday shown in the following table holidays holiday date observed every sunday every sunday new years day january numst birthday of martin luther king jr. numrd monday in january lincolns birthday february numth washingtons birthday numrd monday in february cesar chavez day march numst memorial day last monday in may independence day july numth labor day numst monday in september columbus day numnd monday in october veterans day november numth thanksgiving day numth thursday in november day after thanksgiving day day after thanksgiving day christmas day december numth if january numst february numth march numst july numth november numth or december numth falls on a sunday the monday following is a holiday .
if november numth falls on a saturday the preceding friday is a holiday .
section num general num hours of darkness hours of darkness as defined in veh code num. idle equipment equipment num .
on the job site at the start of a delay num .
idled because of the delay num .
not operated during the delay informalbid contract contract that has informal bid authorized by pub cont code num on the cover of the notice to bidders and special provisions .
job site area within the defined boundaries of a project .
labor surcharge and equipment rental rates department publication that lists labor surcharge and equipment rental rates .
landscaping practice of a landscaping contractor under num ca code of regs num. material any product or substance specified for use in the construction of a project .
material shortage num .
shortage of raw or produced material that is areawide and caused by an unusual market condition except if any of the following occurs num .
shortage relates to a produced nonstandard material num .
suppliers and the contractors priority for filling an order differs num .
event outside the united states for a material produced outside the united states num .
unavailability of water that delays a controlling activity material source facility audit selfaudit and a department audit evaluating a facilitys capability to consistently produce materials that comply with department standards .
median portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways including inside shoulders .
milestone event activity that has zero duration and is typically used to represent the start or end of a certain stage of the project .
mobilization preparatory work that must be performed or costs incurred before starting work on the various items on the job site pub cont code num. modify add to or subtract from an appurtenant part .
narrative report document submitted with each schedule that discusses topics related to project progress and scheduling .
near critical path chain of activities with total float exceeding that of the critical path but having not more than num working days of total float .
obliterate place an earth cover over or root plow pulverize or scarify .
pavement uppermost layer of material placed on a traveled way or shoulder .
plans standard plans revised standard plans and project plans .
num. standard plans drawings standard to department construction projects .
num. revised standard plans new or revised standard plans .
num. project plans drawings specific to the project including authorized shop drawings .
plant establishment period number of days shown on the notice to bidders for plant establishment .
quality characteristic characteristic of a material that is measured to determine conformance with a given requirement .
quality control plan contractors plan to ensure qc .
section num general num reconstruct remove and disassemble and construct again at an existing or new location .
relocate remove and install or place in a new location .
remove remove and dispose of .
reset remove and install or place laterally at the same station location .
roadbed roadway portion extending from the curb line to curb line or the shoulder line to shoulder line .
a divided highway has num roadbeds .
roadside area between the outside shoulder edge and the rightofway limits .
roadway portion of the highway within the outside lines of curbs sidewalks slopes ditches channels or waterways .
a roadway includes the structures and features necessary for safety protection of facilities and drainage .
salvage remove clean and haul to a specified location .
schedule num. baseline schedule initial schedule showing the original work plan starting on the date of contract approval .
this schedule shows no completed work to date and no negative float or negative lag to any activity .
num. revised schedule schedule that incorporates a proposed or past change to logic or activity durations .
num. updated schedule current schedule developed from the accepted baseline and any subsequent accepted updated or revised schedules through regular monthly review to incorporate actual past progress .
scheduled completion date planned work completion date shown on the current schedule .
shoulder roadway portion contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of a stopped vehicle emergency use and lateral support of base and surface courses .
small tool tool or piece of equipment not listed in labor surcharge and equipment rental rates that has a replacement value of num or less .
specifications standard specifications revised standard specifications and special provisions .
num. standard specifications specifications standard to department construction projects .
these specifications are in a book titled standard specifications .
num. revised standard specifications new or revised standard specifications .
these specifications are in a section titled revised standard specifications of a book titled notice to bidders and special provisions .
num. special provisions specifications specific to the project .
these specifications are in a section titled special provisions of a book titled notice to bidders and special provisions .
state state of california including its agencies departments or divisions whose conduct or action is related to the work .
structure design offices of structure design of the department of transportation .
subbase layer of material between a base and the basement material .
subgrade roadbed portion on which pavement surfacing base subbase or a layer of any other material is placed .
submittal num. action submittal written and graphic information and samples that require the departments response .
num. informational submittal written information that does not require the departments response .
section num general num substantial defects defects plainly seen as damaged displaced or missing parts or improper functioning of materials parts equipment or systems .
substructure bridge parts below the bridge seats pier tops and haunches for rigidframed bridges or spring lines for arched bridges includes abutment backwalls abutment parapets and wingwalls .
superstructure bridge parts except the substructure .
supplemental project information information relevant to the project specified as supplemental project information and made available to bidders .
surfacing uppermost layer of material placed on a traveled way or shoulders pavement .
time impact analysis analysis using a cpm schedule developed specifically to demonstrate the effect a proposed or past change or delay has on the current scheduled completion date .
timescaled network diagram graphic depiction of a cpm schedule comprised of activity bars with relationships for each activity represented by arrows .
the tail of each arrow connects to the activity bar for the predecessor and points to the successor .
total bid sum of the item totals as verified by the department original contract price .
total float amount of time that an activity or chain of activities can be delayed before extending the scheduled completion date .
traffic pedestrians bicyclists ridden or herded animals vehicles streetcars and other conveyances either singularly or together while using any highway for purposes of travel .
traffic lane portion of traveled way used for the movement of a single line of vehicles .
traveled way portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles exclusive of the shoulders berms sidewalks and parking lanes .
tunnel tunnel as defined in num ca code of regs num et seq .
unauthorized work work performed beyond the lines and grades described in the contract or established by the engineer or extra work performed without department authorization .
unsuitable material material encountered below the natural ground surface in embankment areas or below the grading plane in excavation areas that the engineer determines to be in any of the following conditions num .
of such unstable nature that it can not be compacted to the specified density using ordinary methods at optimum moisture content .
num .
too wet to be properly compacted and can not be dried before incorporating it into the work .
excessive moisture alone is not sufficient cause for determining that the material is unsuitable .
num .
inappropriate for the planned use .
withhold money temporarily or permanently taken from a progress payment .
work resources and activities required for contract acceptance including labor materials equipment and the created product .
work plan detailed formulation of a program of action .
work zone area of a highway with construction maintenance or utility work activities .
num districts the departments district composition and office addresses are as shown in the following table section num general num district composition and office addresses district counties street address mailing address num del norte dn humboldt hum lake lak mendocino men num union st eureka ca po box num eureka ca num num lassen las modoc mod plumas plu shasta sha siskiyou sis tehama teh trinity tri num riverside dr redding ca po box num redding ca num num butte but colusa col el dorado ed glenn gle nevada nev placer pla sacramento sac sierra sie sutter sut yolo yol yuba yub num b st marysville ca num b st marysville ca num num alameda ala contra costa cc marin mrn napa nap san francisco sf san mateo sm santa clara scl solano sol sonoma son num grand ave oakland ca po box num oakland ca num num monterey mon san benito sbt san luis obispo slo santa barbara sb santa cruz scr num higuera st san luis obispo ca num higuera st san luis obispo ca num num num fresno fre kern ker kings kin madera mad tulare tul num w. olive ave fresno ca po box num fresno ca num num los angeles la ventura ven num s. main st los angeles ca num s main st los angeles ca num num riverside riv san bernardino sbd num w numth st san bernardino ca num w numth st san bernardino ca num num num inyo iny mono mno num s main st bishop ca num s main st bishop ca num num alpine alp amador ama calaveras cal mariposa mpa merced mer san joaquin sj stanislaus sta tuolumne tuo num e charter way stockton ca po box num stockton ca num num imperial imp san diego sd num taylor st san diego ca num taylor st san diego ca num num orange ora num michelson dr ste num irvine ca num michelson dr ste num irvine ca num a project with work in district num num or num is a north region project .
for districts num num and num interpret each reference to the district office as the north region office .
the north regions office address is the district num address .
num freezethaw areas freezethaw areas are areas of the state where freezethaw cycles and heavy salting frequently occur .
a project is in a freezethaw area if the project is specified in the special provisions to be in a freezethaw area .
num pavement climate regions to help account for the effects of various climatic conditions on pavement performance the state has been divided into num climate regions .
the projects pavement climate region is shown on the project plans .
section num general num num websites addresses and telephone numbers section num general num websites addresses and telephone numbers reference or agency or department unit website address telephone no .
authorized material lists authorized material source lists httpwww.dot.ca.govhq escapproved_products_li st bidders exchange httpwww.dot.ca.govhq escoebidex msc num bidders exchange department of transportation num numth st sacramento ca num num num num ca unified certification programs list of certified dbes httpwww.dot.ca.govhq bepfind_certified.htm california mutcd httpwww.dot.ca.gov department httpwww.dot.ca.gov department of conservation office of mine reclamation httpwww.conservation.c a.govomr department of general services office of small business and dvbe services httpwww.dgs.ca.govdg sprogramsservicesbus services.aspx office of small business and dvbe services department of general services num numrd st west sacramento ca num num num num num num num num department of industrial relations httpwww.dir.ca.gov num golden gate ave san francisco ca num division of accounting office of external accounts payable httpwww.dot.ca.govhq ascoappaymentscontac t.htmconpetsnum major construction payment and information unit office of external accounts payable division of accounting department of transportation p.o .
box num sacramento ca num num num num division of construction httpwww.dot.ca.govhq construc geotechnical services httpwww.dot.ca.govhq escgeotech geotechnical services department of transportation num folsom blvd sacramento ca num num num num mets httpwww.dot.ca.govhq esctranslab materials engineering and testing services department of transportation num folsom blvd sacramento ca num num num num section num general num mpqp httpwww.dot.ca.govma nuals.htm office engineer msc num office engineer department of transportation num numth st sacramento ca num num num num offices of structure design documents unit msc numi documents unit offices of structure design department of transportation num numth st sacramento ca num num num num publication distribution unit publication unit department of transportation num royal oaks dr sacramento ca num south coast air quality management district www.aqmd.gov num miscellany make checks and bonds payable to the department of transportation .
num reserved num num bidding num general section num includes specifications related to bid eligibility and the bidding process .
the electronic bid specifications in section num apply if electronic bidding contract is shown on the cover of the notice to bidders and special provisions .
num bid ineligibility a firm that has provided architectural or engineering services to the department for this contract before bid submittal for this contract is prohibited from any of the following num .
submitting a bid num .
subcontracting for a part of the work num .
supplying materials num contractor registration no contractor or subcontractor may be listed on a bid proposal for a public works project submitted on or after march num num unless registered with the department of industrial relations pursuant to labor code section num with limited exceptions from this requirement for bid purposes only under labor code section numa .
num reserved num bid documents numa general the bid book includes bid forms and certifications .
for an electronic bid the bid book includes forms not available through the electronic bidding service .
the notice to bidders and special provisions includes the notice to bidders revised standard specifications and special provisions .
the bid book including bid book forms not available through the electronic bidding service notice to bidders and special provisions project plans and any addenda to these documents may be accessed at the bidders exchange website .
the standard specifications and standard plans may be viewed at the bidders exchange website and may be purchased at the publication distribution unit .
numb supplemental project information the department makes supplemental information available as specified in the special provisions .
logs of test borings are supplemental project information .
if an information handout or cross sections are available you may view them at the contract plans and special provisions link at the bidders exchange website if rock cores are available you may view them by sending a request to coreroomdot.ca.gov .
if other supplemental project information is available for inspection you may view it by phoning in a request .
make your request at least num days before viewing .
include in your request num .
districtcountyroute num .
contract number num .
viewing date num .
contact information including telephone number for rock cores also include the bridge number in your request .
if bridge asbuilt drawings are available section num bidding num num .
for a project in district num through num or num you may request them from the office of structure maintenance and investigations fax num num num .
for a project in district num num num num or num you may request them from the office of structure maintenance and investigations fax num num and they are available at the office of structure maintenance and investigations los angeles ca telephone num num asbuilt drawings may not show existing dimensions and conditions .
where new construction dimensions are dependent on existing bridge dimensions verify the field dimensions and adjust the dimensions of the work to fit the existing conditions .
numcnumd reserved num job site and document examination examine the job site and bid documents .
notify the department of apparent errors and patent ambiguities in the plans specifications and bid item list .
failure to do so may result in rejection of a bid or rescission of an award .
bid submission is your acknowledgment that you have examined the job site and bid documents and are satisfied with num .
general and local conditions to be encountered num .
character quality and scope of work to be performed num .
quantities of materials to be furnished num .
character quality and quantity of surface and subsurface materials or obstacles num .
requirements of the contract num reserved num bid item list submit a bid based on the bid item quantities the department shows on the bid item list .
num subcontractor list on the subcontractor list form list each subcontractor to perform work in an amount in excess of num of num percent of the total bid or num whichever is greater pub cont code num et seq .. for each subcontractor listed the subcontractor list form must show num. business name and the location of its place of business .
num .
california contractor license number for a nonfederalaid contract .
num .
public works contractor registration number .
num .
portion of work it will perform .
show the portion of the work by num .
bid item numbers for the subcontracted work num .
percentage of the subcontracted work for each bid item listed num .
description of the subcontracted work if the percentage of the bid item listed is less than num percent num reserved num disadvantaged business enterprises numa general section num applies to a federalaid contract .
under num cfr numb the contractor sub recipient or subcontractor shall not discriminate on the basis of race color national origin or sex in the performance of this contract .
the contractor shall carry out applicable requirements of num cfr part num in the award and administration of dotassisted contracts .
failure by the contractor to carry out these requirements is a material breach of this contract which may result in the termination of this contract or such other remedy as the recipient deems appropriate which may include but is not limited to num withholding monthly progress payments section num bidding num num assessing sanctions num liquidated damages andor num disqualifying the contractor from future bidding as nonresponsible .
include this assurance in each subcontract you sign with a subcontractor .
numb disadvantaged business enterprise goal numbnum general section numb applies if a dbe goal is shown on the notice to bidders .
the department shows a goal for dbes to comply with the dbe program objectives provided in num cfr num .
make work available to dbes and select work parts consistent with the available dbes including subcontractors suppliers service providers and truckers .
meet the dbe goal shown on the notice to bidders or demonstrate that you made adequate good faith efforts to meet this goal .
you are responsible to verify at bid opening the dbe firm is certified as a dbe by the california unified certification program and possess the work codes applicable to the type of work the firm will perform on the contract .
determine that selected dbes perform a commercially useful function for the type of work the dbe will perform on the contract as provided in num cfr numcnum .
under num cfr numcnum the dbe must be responsible for the execution of a distinct element of work and must carry out its responsibility by actually performing managing and supervising the work .
all dbe participation will count toward the departments federally mandated statewide overall dbe goal .
credit for materials or supplies you purchase from dbes will be evaluated on a contractbycontract basis and counts toward the goal in the following manner num .
num percent if the materials or supplies are obtained from a dbe manufacturer .
num .
num percent if the materials or supplies are obtained from a dbe regular dealer .
num .
only fees commissions and charges for assistance in the procurement and delivery of materials or supplies if they are obtained from a dbe that is neither a manufacturer nor a regular dealer .
num cfr num defines manufacturer and regular dealer .
you receive credit toward the goal if you employ a dbe trucking company that is performing a commercially useful function .
the department uses the following factors in determining whether a dbe trucking company is performing a commercially useful function the dbe must be responsible for the management and supervision of the entire trucking operation for which it is responsible on a particular contract and there can not be a contrived arrangement for the purpose of meeting dbe goals .
the dbe must itself own and operate at least one fully licensed insured and operational truck used on the contract .
the dbe receives credit for the total value of the transportation services it provides on the contract using trucks it owns insures and operates using drivers it employs .
the dbe may lease trucks from another dbe firm including an owneroperator who is certified as a dbe .
the dbe who leases trucks from another dbe receives credit for the total value of the transportation services the lessee dbe provides on the contract .
the dbe may lease trucks without drivers from a nondbe truck leasing company .
if the dbe leases trucks from a nondbe truck leasing company and uses its own employees as drivers it is entitled to credit for the total value of these hauling services .
a lease must indicate that the dbe has exclusive use of and control over the truck .
this does not preclude the leased truck from working for others during the term of the lease with the consent of the dbe so long as the lease gives the dbe absolute priority for use of the leased truck .
leased trucks must display the name and identification number of the dbe .
num cfr numd section num bidding num numbnum dbe commitment submittal submit dbe information under section num .
submit a copy of the quote from each dbe shown on the dbe commitment form that describes the type and dollar amount of work shown on the form .
submit a dbe confirmation form for each dbe shown on the dbe commitment form to establish that it will be participating in the contract in the type and dollar amount of work shown on the form .
if a dbe is participating as a joint venture partner submit a copy of the joint venture agreement .
numbnum dbe good faith efforts submittal you can meet the dbe requirements by either documenting commitments to dbes to meet the contract goal or by documenting adequate good faith efforts to meet the contract goal .
an adequate good faith effort means that the bidder must show that it took all necessary and reasonable steps to achieve a dbe goal that by their scope intensity and appropriateness to the objective could reasonably be expected to meet the dbe goal .
if you have not met the dbe goal complete and submit the dbe good faith efforts documentation form under section num showing that you made adequate good faith efforts to meet the goal .
only good faith efforts directed toward obtaining participation by dbes are considered .
submit good faith efforts documentation within the specified time to protect your eligibility for award of the contract in the event the department finds that the dbe goal has not been met .
refer to num cfr num app a for guidance regarding evaluation of good faith efforts to meet the dbe goal .
the department considers dbe commitments of other bidders in determining whether the low bidder made good faith efforts to meet the dbe goal .
num reserved num disabled veteran business enterprises numa general section num applies to a nonfederalaid contract .
take necessary and reasonable steps to ensure that dvbes have the opportunity to participate in the contract .
comply with mil vet code num et seq .
numb projects num million or less section numb applies to a project with an estimated cost of num million or less .
make work available to dvbes and select work parts consistent with the available dvbe subcontractors and suppliers .
meet the goal shown on the notice to bidders .
complete and submit the certified dvbe summary form under section num .
list all dvbe participation on this form .
if a dvbe joint venture is used submit the joint venture agreement with the certified dvbe summary form .
list each numsttier dvbe subcontractor on the subcontractor list form regardless of its percentage of the total bid .
numc projects more than num million numcnum general section numc applies to a project with an estimated cost of more than num million .
the department encourages bidders to obtain dvbe participation to ensure the department achieves its statemandated overall dvbe goal .
section num bidding num if you obtain dvbe participation num .
complete and submit the certified dvbe summary form under section num .
list all dvbe participation on this form .
num .
list each numst tier dvbe subcontractor in the subcontractor list form regardless of percentage of the total bid .
if a dvbe joint venture is used submit the joint venture agreement with the certified dvbe summary form .
numcnum dvbe incentive the department grants a dvbe incentive to each bidder who achieves a dvbe participation of num percent or greater mil vet code num and code of regs num et seq .. to receive this incentive submit the certified dvbe summary form under section num .
bidders other than the apparent low bidder the numnd low bidder and the numrd low bidder may be required to submit the certified dvbe summary form if the bid ranking changes .
if the department requests a certified dvbe summary form from you submit the completed form within num business days of the request .
numcnum incentive evaluation the department applies the small business and nonsmall business preference during bid verification and proceeds with the evaluation specified below for the dvbe incentive .
the dvbe incentive is a reduction for bid comparison only in the total bid submitted by the lesser of the following amounts num .
percentage of the dvbe achievement rounded to num decimal places of the verified total bid of the low bidder num .
num percent of the verified total bid of the low bidder num .
num the department applies dvbe incentive and determines whether bid ranking changes .
a nonsmall business bidder can not displace a small business bidder .
however a small business bidder with a higher dvbe achievement can displace another small business bidder .
the department proceeds with awarding the contract to the new low bidder and posts the new verified bid results at the departments website .
num reserved num small business and nonsmall business subcontractor preferences numa general section num applies to a nonfederalaid contract .
the department applies small business preferences and nonsmall business preferences under govt code num et seq .
and num ca code of regs num et seq .
any contractor subcontractor supplier or service provider who qualifies as a small business is encouraged to apply for certification as a small business by submitting its application to the department of general services office of small business and dvbe services .
contract award is based on the total bid not the reduced bid .
numb small business preference the department allows a bidder certified as a small business by the department of general services office of small business and dvbe services a preference if num .
bidder submitted a completed request for small business preference or nonsmall business preference form with its bid num .
low bidder did not request the preference or is not certified as a small business section num bidding num the bidders signature on the request for small business preference or nonsmall business preference form certifies that the bidder is certified as a small business at the date and time of bid or has submitted a complete application to the department of general services .
the complete application and any required substantiating documentation must be received by the department of general services by num p.m. on the bid opening date .
the department of general services determines whether a bidder was certified on the bid opening date .
the department of transportation confirms the bidders status as a small business before applying the small business preference .
the small business preference is a reduction for bid comparison in the total bid submitted by the small business contractor by the lesser of the following amounts num .
num percent of the verified total bid of the low bidder num .
num if the department determines that a certified small business bidder is the low bidder after the application of the small business preference the department does not consider a request for nonsmall business preference .
numc nonsmall business subcontractor preference the department allows a bidder not certified as a small business by the department of general services office of small business and dvbe services a preference if num .
bidder submitted a completed request for small business preference or nonsmall business preference form with its bid num .
certified small business listing for the nonsmall business preference form shows that you are subcontracting at least num percent to certified small businesses each listed subcontractor and supplier must be certified as a small business at the date and time of bid or must have submitted a complete application to the department of general services .
the complete application and any required substantiating documentation must be received by the department of general services by num p.m. on the bid opening date .
the nonsmall business subcontractor preference is a reduction for bid comparison in the total bid submitted by the nonsmall business contractor requesting the preference by the lesser of the following amounts num .
num percent of the verified total bid of the low bidder num .
num num reserved num california companies section num applies to a nonfederalaid contract .
under pub cont code num the department gives preference to a california company as defined for bid comparison purposes over a nonresident contractor from any state that gives or requires a preference to be given to contractors from that state on its public entity construction contracts .
complete a california company preference form .
the california company reciprocal preference amount is equal to the preference amount applied by the state of the nonresident contractor with the lowest responsive bid unless the california company is eligible for a small business preference or a nonsmall business subcontractor preference in which case the preference amount is the greater of the two but not both .
if the low bidder is not a california company and a california companys bid with reciprocal preference is equal to or less than the lowest bid the department awards the contract to the california company on the basis of its total bid .
section num bidding num num reserved num opt out of payment adjustments for price index fluctuations you may opt out of the payment adjustments for price index fluctuations specified in section num .
to opt out submit a completed opt out of payment adjustments for price index fluctuations form under section num .
num reserved num bid document completion and submittal numa general complete the forms in the bid book .
use the forms provided by the department except as otherwise specified for a bidders bond .
do not fax forms except for the copies of forms with the public works contractor registration number submitted after the time of bid .
fax these copies to num num .
submit the forms and copies of the forms to the office engineer .
failure to submit the forms and information as specified may result in a nonresponsive bid .
if an agent other than the authorized corporate officer or a partnership member signs the bid file a power of attorney with the department either before opening bids or with the bid .
otherwise the bid may be nonresponsive .
numb electronic bids section numb applies to electronic bids .
complete and submit the electronic portion of the bid book under the electronic bidding guide at the bidders exchange website and submit the paper forms as specified for a paper bid .
your authorized digital signature is your confirmation of and agreement to all certifications and statements contained in the bid book .
on forms and certifications that you submit through the electronic bidding service you agree that each form and certification where a signature is required is deemed as having your signature .
numc paper bids section numc applies to paper bids .
submit your bid and any bid book forms after you submit your bid num .
under sealed cover num .
marked as a bid num .
identifying the contract number and the bid opening date numd bid form submittal schedules numdnum general the bid book includes forms specific to the contract .
the deadlines for the submittal of the forms vary depending on the requirements of each contract .
determine the requirements of the contract and submit the forms based on the applicable schedule specified in section numd .
bid forms and information on the form that are due after the time of bid may be submitted at the time of bid .
numdnum federalaid contracts numdnuma general section numdnum applies to a federalaid contract .
numdnumb contracts with a dbe goal section numdnumb applies if a dbe goal is shown on the notice to bidders section num bidding num submit the bid forms according to the schedule shown in the following table bid form submittal schedule for a federalaid contract with a dbe goal form submittal deadline bid to the department of transportation time of bid except for the public works contractor registration number copy of the bid to the department of transportation as submitted at the time of bid with the public works contractor registration number num days after bid opening subcontractor list time of bid except for the public works contractor registration number copy of the subcontractor list as submitted at the time of bid with the public works contractor registration number num days after bid opening small business status time of bid opt out of payment adjustments for price index fluctuationsa time of bid dbe commitment no later than num p.m. on the numth business day after bid opening dbe confirmation no later than num p.m. on the numth business day after bid opening dbe good faith efforts documentation no later than num p.m. on the numth business day after bid opening asubmit only if you choose the option .
numdnumc contracts without a dbe goal reserved numdnumdnumdnumh reserved numdnum nonfederalaid contracts numdnuma general section numdnum applies to nonfederalaid contracts .
numdnumb contracts with a dvbe goal section numdnumb applies if a dvbe goal is shown on the notice to bidders .
submit the bid forms according to the schedule shown in the following table section num bidding num bid form submittal schedule for a nonfederalaid contract with a dvbe goal form submittal deadline bid to the department of transportation time of bid except for the public works contractor registration number for a jointventure contract for a jointventure contract copy of the bid to the department of transportation as submitted at the time of bid with the public works contractor registration number num days after bid opening subcontractor list time of bid opt out of payment adjustments for price index fluctuationsa time of bid certified dvbe summary no later than num p.m. on the numth business day after bid opening california company preference time of bid request for small business preference or non small business preferencea time of bid certified small business listing for the non small business preferencea no later than num p.m. on the numnd business day after bid opening asubmit only if you choose the option or preference .
numdnumc contracts without a dvbe goal reserved numdnumdnumdnumh reserved numdnumdnum reserved num bidders security submit one of the following forms of bidders security equal to at least num percent of the bid num .
cash num .
cashiers check num .
certified check num .
signed bidders bond by an admitted surety insurer num .
for an electronic bid electronic bidders bond by an admitted surety insurer submitted using an electronic registry service approved by the department .
submit cash cashiers check certified check or bidders bond to the department at the bidders exchange before the bid opening time .
submit electronic bidders bond with the electronic bid .
if using a bidders bond you may use the form in the bid book .
if you do not use the form in the bid book use a form containing the same information .
num reserved num bid withdrawal for a paper bid num .
an authorized agent may withdraw a bid before the bid opening date and time by submitting a written bid withdrawal request at the location where the bid was submitted .
withdrawing a bid does not prevent you from submitting a new bid .
num .
after the bid opening time you can not withdraw a bid .
for an electronic bid num .
bids are not filed with the department until the date and time of bid opening .
num .
a bidder may withdraw or revise a bid after it has been submitted to the electronic bidding service if this is done before the bid opening date and time .
section num bidding num num reserved num bid opening the department publicly opens and reads bids at the time and place shown on the notice to bidders .
num reserved num departments decision on bid the departments decision on the bid amount is final .
the department may reject num .
all bids num .
a nonresponsive bid num bid relief the department may grant bid relief under pub cont code num et seq .
submit any request for bid relief to the office engineer .
the relief of bid request form is available at the departments website .
num reserved num submittal failure history the department considers a bidders past failure to submit documents required after bid opening in determining a bidders responsibility .
num bid rigging section num applies to a federalaid contract .
the us department of transportation dot provides a tollfree hotline to report bid rigging activities .
use the hotline to report bid rigging bidder collusion and other fraudulent activities .
the hotline number is num num .
the service is available num hours num days a week and is confidential and anonymous ..
the hotline is part of the dots effort to identify and investigate highway construction contract fraud and abuse and is operated under the direction of the dot inspector general .
num num contract award and execution num general section num includes specifications related to contract award and execution .
num consideration of bids numa general for a lumpsumbased bid the department compares bids based on the total price .
for a unitpricebased bid the department compares bids based on the sum of the item totals .
for a costplustimebased bid the department compares bids based on the sum of the item totals and the total bid for time .
numb tied bids the department breaks a tied bid with a coin toss except num .
if a small business bidder and a nonsmall business bidder request preferences and the reductions result in a tied bid the department awards the contract to the small business bidder .
num .
if a dvbe small business bidder and a nondvbe small business bidder request preferences and the reduction results in a tied bid the department awards the contract to the dvbe small business bidder .
num contractor registration no contractor or subcontractor may be awarded a contract for public work on a public works project awarded on or after april num num unless registered with the department of industrial relations pursuant to labor code section num .
num contract award submit any bid protest to the office engineer .
if the department awards the contract the award is made to the lowest responsible bidder within the number of days shown in the following table contract award period days after bid opening project estimated cost shown on the notice to bidders num num million num num million the department may extend the specified award period if the bidder agrees .
you may request to extend the award period by faxing a request to num num before num p.m. on the last day of the award period .
if you do not make this request after the specified award period num .
your bid becomes invalid num .
you are not eligible for the award of the contract num contract bonds pub cont code num and num the successful bidder must furnish num bonds num .
payment bond to secure the claim payments of laborers workers mechanics or materialmen providing goods labor or services under the contract .
this bond must be equal to at least num percent of the total bid .
num .
performance bond to guarantee the faithful performance of the contract .
this bond must be equal to at least num percent of the total bid .
the department provides bond forms to the successful bidder .
section num contract award and execution num num contractor license for a federalaid contract the contractor must be properly licensed as a contractor from contract award through contract acceptance pub cont code num .
for a nonfederalaid contract num .
contractor must be properly licensed as a contractor from bid opening through contract acceptance bus prof code num num .
joint venture bidders must obtain a joint venture license before contract award bus prof code num num insurance policies the successful bidder must submit num .
copy of its commercial general liability policy and its excess policy or binder until such time as a policy is available including the declarations page applicable endorsements riders and other modifications in effect at the time of contract execution .
standard iso form no .
cg num num or similar exclusions are allowed if not inconsistent with section num .
the allowance of additional exclusions is at the discretion of the department .
num .
certificate of insurance showing all other required coverages .
certificates of insurance as evidence of required insurance for the auto liability and any other required policy must set forth deductible amounts applicable to each policy and all exclusions that are added by endorsement to each policy .
the evidence of insurance must provide that no cancellation lapse or reduction of coverage will occur without num days prior written notice to the department .
num .
declaration under the penalty of perjury by a cpa certifying the accountant has applied gaap guidelines confirming the successful bidder has enough funds and resources to cover any self insured retentions if the selfinsured retention is over num .
if the successful bidder uses any form of selfinsurance for workers compensation in lieu of an insurance policy the bidder must submit a certificate of consent to selfinsure under labor code num .
num small business participation report the department has established an overall num percent small business participation goal .
the department is tracking small business participation on all contracts to determine whether the goal is achieved .
complete and sign the small business sb participation report form included in the contract documents whether or not no small business participation is reported .
num reserved num payee data record complete and deliver to the office engineer a payee data record form when requested by the department .
num reserved num form fhwanum for a federalaid contract form fhwanum is included with the contract form in the documents sent to the successful bidder for execution .
comply with its provisions .
interpret the training and promotion section as specified in section numa .
num reserved num contract execution the successful bidder must sign the contract form .
deliver to the office engineer num .
signed contract form including the attached form fhwanum num .
contract bonds num .
documents identified in section num num .
small business sb participation report form section num contract award and execution num the office engineer must receive these documents before the numth business day after the bidder receives the contract .
the bidders security may be forfeited for failure to execute the contract within the time specified pub cont code num num and num .
the following is a copy of the contract form section num contract award and execution num num bidders securities the department keeps the securities of the numst numnd and numrd low bidders until the contract has been executed .
the other bidders securities other than bidders bonds are returned upon determination of the numst numnd and numrd low bidders and their bidders bonds are of no further effect pub cont code num .
num num scope of work num general section num includes specifications related to the scope of work .
num intent the contract intent is to provide for work completion using the best general practices .
nothing in the specifications voids the contractors public safety responsibilities .
num work description construct the work described on the notice to bidders and as described in the contract .
num use of materials found on the job site you may use aggregate or other materials found in excavation that comply with the specifications .
the department pays for the material excavated at the excavation item contract price .
replace the quantity of material removed and used with an equal quantity of material .
the material must have been designated for use in the work .
except for material used as structure backfill the department does not pay for replacing the material .
the department pays for replacing excavated material used for structure backfill at the contract price for structure backfill .
do not excavate material from outside the excavations slope and grade lines without authorization .
num changes and extra work numa general the department may make changes within the scope of work and add extra work .
the engineer describes the changes and extra work the payment basis and any time adjustment in a change order .
a change order is approved when the department signs the change order .
until the department approves a change order continue to perform the work under the contract unless the engineer orders you to start the work described in the change order before its approval .
submit detailed cost data for a unit price adjustment for a bid item if num the engineer requests the data or num you request a unit price adjustment resulting from a change of more than num percent in the bid items quantity .
numb workcharacter changes the department adjusts the unit price for an item if num .
ordered plan or specification change materially changes the character of a work item from that on which the bid item price was based num .
unit cost of the changed item differs from the unit cost of that item under the original plans and specifications num .
no approved change order addresses the payment num differing site conditions num cfr num numa general reserved numb contractors notification promptly notify the engineer if you find either of the following conditions num .
physical conditions differing materially from either of the following num .
contract documents num .
job site examination num .
physical conditions of an unusual nature differing materially from those ordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the work provided for in the contract include details explaining the information you relied on and the material differences you discovered .
section num scope of work num if you fail to promptly notify the engineer you waive your claim of a differing site condition for the period between your discovery of the differing site condition and your notification to the engineer .
if you disturb the site after discovery and before the engineers investigation you waive the differingsite condition claim .
numc engineers investigation and decision upon your notification the engineer investigates job site conditions and num .
notifies you whether to resume affected work num .
decides whether the condition differs materially and is cause for an adjustment of time payment or both num value engineering numa general reserved numb value engineering change proposal you may submit a vecp to reduce any of the following num .
total cost of construction num .
construction activity duration num .
traffic congestion before preparing a vecp meet with the engineer to discuss num .
proposal concept num .
permit issues num .
impact on other projects num .
project impacts including traffic schedule and later stages num .
peer reviews num .
overall proposal merits num. review times required by the department and other agencies the vecp must not impair the projects essential functions or characteristics including num .
service life num .
operation economy num .
maintenance ease num .
desired appearance num .
design and safety the vecp must include num .
description of the contract specifications and drawing details for performing the work and the proposed changes .
num .
itemization of contract specifications and plan details that would be changed .
num .
detailed cost estimate for performing the work under the existing contract and under the proposed change .
determine the estimates under section num .
num .
deadline for the engineer to decide on the changes .
num .
bid items affected and resulting quantity changes .
the department is not required to consider a vecp .
if a vecp is similar to a change in the plans or specifications being considered by the department at the time the proposal is submitted or if the proposal is based on or similar to plans or specifications adopted by the department before contract award the department does not accept the vecp and may make these changes without vecp payments .
if the department does not approve a change order before the deadline stated in the vecp or other date you subsequently stated in writing the vecp is rejected .
the department does not adjust time or payment for a rejected vecp .
section num scope of work num the department decides whether to accept a vecp and the estimated net constructioncost savings from adopting the vecp or parts of it .
the department may require you to accept a share of the investigation cost as a condition of reviewing a vecp .
after written acceptance the department considers the vecp and deducts the agreed cost .
if the department accepts the vecp or parts of it the department issues a change order that num .
incorporates changes in the contract necessary to implement the vecp or the parts adopted num .
includes the departments acceptance conditions num .
states the estimated net constructioncost savings resulting from the vecp num .
obligates the department to pay you num percent of the estimated net savings in determining the estimated net constructioncost savings the department excludes your vecp preparation cost and the departments vecp investigation cost including parts paid by you .
if a vecp providing for a reduction in working days is accepted by the department num percent of the reduction is deducted from the contract time .
if a vecp providing for a reduction in traffic congestion or avoiding traffic congestion is accepted by the department the department pays num percent of the estimated net savings in construction costs attributable to the vecp .
submit detailed traffic handling comparisons between the existing contract and the proposed change including estimates of the traffic volumes and congestion .
the department may apply an accepted vecp for general use on other contracts .
if an accepted vecp is adopted for general use the department pays only the contractor who first submitted the vecp and only for the contracts awarded to that contractor before the submission of the accepted vecp .
if the department does not adopt a generaluse vecp an identical or similar submitted proposal is eligible for acceptance .
numc value analysis workshop section numc applies to a nonbuildingconstruction contract with a total bid of over num million .
you may request a value analysis workshop by submitting a request after contract approval .
the department offers a value analysis workshop to num .
identify valueenhancing opportunities num .
consider changes to the contract that will reduce the total cost of construction construction activity duration or traffic congestion without impairing the essential functions specified for a vecp in section numb if the request is authorized you and the engineer num .
schedule a value analysis workshop num .
select a facilitator and workshop site num .
agree to other workshop administrative details the workshop must be conducted under the methods described in the departments value analysis team guide .
for the guide go to the departments division of design website .
the facilitator must be a certified value specialist as recognized by the society of american value engineers .
the department reimburses you for num of the workshop cost .
the workshop cost is the sum of the workshopfacilitator cost and the workshopsite cost .
the engineer determines the workshop cost based on the facilitator and workshopsite invoice prices minus any available or offered discounts .
the department does not reimburse you for any other associated costs .
section num scope of work num num reserved num cleanup before final inspection leave the job site neat and presentable and dispose of num .
rubbish num .
excess materials num .
falsework num .
temporary structures num .
equipment the department does not require you to remove warning regulatory or guide signs before contract acceptance .
num num control of work num general section num includes specifications related to the contract parties relations and contract acceptance .
furnish the resources except departmentfurnished materials required to complete the work as described in the contract .
provide qc .
work is subject to the departments inspection sampling and testing .
the departments inspection sampling and testing do not relieve you of your responsibility to provide qc .
ensure the departments safe and unrestricted access to the work .
furnish facilities necessary for the departments inspection .
where the means and methods to complete the work are not described in the contract choose the means and methods to complete the work .
where the contract describes more than num construction method or more than num type of material or equipment the department does not assure that each construction method or type of material or equipment can be used successfully throughout all or any part of the project .
you are responsible to use the alternative or alternatives that will accomplish the work under the conditions encountered .
failure to comply with any contract part is a waiver of your right to an adjustment of time and payment related to that part .
use contract administration forms available at the departments website .
num contract components a component in one contract part applies as if appearing in each .
the parts are complementary and describe and provide for a complete work .
if a discrepancy exists num .
governing ranking of contract parts in descending order is num .
special provisions num .
project plans num .
revised standard specifications num .
standard specifications num .
revised standard plans num .
standard plans num .
supplemental project information num .
written numbers and notes on a drawing govern over graphics num .
detail drawing governs over a general drawing num .
specific specification governs over a general specification num .
specification in a section governs over a specification referenced by that section if a discrepancy is found or confusion arises submit an rfi .
num engineers authority the engineer makes the final decision on questions regarding the contract including num .
work quality and acceptability num .
manner of performance of the work num .
drawing and specification interpretation num .
contract fulfillment num .
time and progress rate num .
measurement and payment the engineer has the authority to enforce or fulfill an order that you fail to fulfill promptly .
failure to enforce a contract part does not waive enforcement of any contract provision .
section num control of work num the engineer may reject work that does not comply with the contract at any time including after a payment has been made .
num reserved num protests you may protest an engineers decision by submitting an rfi .
num reserved num partnering numa general the department strives to work cooperatively with all contractors partnering is our way of doing business .
the department encourages project partnering among the project team made up of significant contributors from the department and the contractor and their invited stakeholders .
for a contract with a total bid over num million professionally facilitated project partnering is encouraged .
for a contract with a total bid over num million and num or more working days professionally facilitated project partnering is required .
in implementing project partnering you and the engineer manage the contract by num .
using early and regular communication with involved parties num .
establishing and maintaining a relationship of shared trust equity and commitment num .
identifying quantifying and supporting the attainment of mutual goals num .
developing strategies for using risk management concepts num .
implementing timely communication and decision making num .
resolving potential problems at the lowest possible level to avoid negative impacts num .
holding periodic partnering meetings and workshops as appropriate to maintain partnering relationships and benefits throughout the life of the project num .
establishing periodic joint evaluations of the partnering process and attainment of mutual goals num .
evaluating potential vecps with stakeholders partnering does not void any contract part .
the departments field guide to partnering on caltrans construction projects is available to the project team as a reference .
this guide provides structure context and clarity to the partnering process requirements .
for the guide go to the departments division of construction website .
in implementing project partnering the project team must num .
create a partnering charter that includes num .
mutual goals including core project goals and may also include projectspecific goals and mutually supported individual goals including vecps num .
partnering maintenance and closeout plan num .
dispute resolution plan that includes a dispute resolution ladder and may also include use of facilitated disputeresolution sessions num .
team commitment statement and signatures num .
participate in monthly partneringevaluation surveys to measure progress on mutual goals and may also measure shortterm key issues as they arise .
num .
evaluate the partnering facilitator on the partnering facilitator evaluation forms .
the engineer provides the evaluation forms to the project team and collects the results .
the department makes evaluation results available upon your request .
facilitator evaluations must be completed at the end of num .
initial partnering workshop num .
project closeout partnering workshop num .
conduct a project closeout partnering workshop .
num .
document lessons learned before contract acceptance .
section num control of work num numb partnering facilitator workshops and monthly evaluation surveys the engineer sends you a written invitation to enter into a partnering relationship after contract approval .
respond within num days to accept the invitation and request the initial and additional partnering workshops .
after the engineer receives the request you and the engineer cooperatively num .
select a partnering facilitator that offers the service of a monthly partneringevaluation survey with a numpoint rating and agrees to follow the departments partnering facilitator standards and expectations available at the departments division of construction website num .
schedule the initial partnering workshop num .
determine the initial workshop site and duration num .
agree to other workshop administrative details additional partnering workshops and sessions are recommended quarterly and encouraged throughout the life of the project as determined necessary by you and the engineer .
numc training in partnering skills development for a contract with a total bid over num million and num or more working days training in partnering skills development is required .
you and the engineer cooperatively schedule the training session and select a professional trainer training site and num to num topics from the following list to be covered in the training num .
active listening num .
ethics num .
building teams num .
facilitation skills num .
change management num .
leadership num .
communication num .
partnering process and concepts num .
conflict resolution num .
project management num .
cultural diversity num .
project organization num .
dealing with difficult people num .
problem solving num .
decision making num .
running effective meetings num .
effective escalation ladders num .
time management num .
emotional intelligence num .
winwin negotiation num .
empathy before the initial partnering workshop the trainer conducts a numday training session in partnering skills development for the contractors and the engineers representatives .
this training session must be a separate session from the initial partnering workshop and must be conducted locally .
the training session must be consistent with the partnering principles under the departments field guide to partnering on caltrans construction projects .
send field supervisory personnel to the training session .
one of these must be your assigned representative specified in section num .
numd payment the department pays for num .
num of partnering workshops and sessions based on facilitator and workshop site costs num .
num of the monthly service cost for partneringevaluation surveys num .
cost of the trainer and training site for partnering skills development the engineer determines the costs based on invoice prices minus any available or offered discounts .
the department does not pay markups on these costs .
the department does not pay for your employees wages travel expenses or other costs associated with num attending the partnering workshops and sessions num completing monthly partneringevaluation surveys or num attending training in partnering skills development .
section num control of work num num reserved num assignment no thirdparty agreement relieves you or your surety of the responsibility to complete the work .
do not sell transfer or otherwise dispose of any contract part without prior written consent from the department .
if you assign the right to receive contract payments the department accepts the assignment upon the engineers receipt of a notice .
assigned payments remain subject to deductions and withholds described in the contract .
the department may use withheld payments for work completion whether payments are assigned or not .
num subcontracting numa general no subcontract releases you from the contract or relieves you of your responsibility for a subcontractors work .
before subcontracted work starts submit a subcontracting request form .
do not use a debarred contractor .
for a list of debarred contractors go to the department of industrial relations website .
if you violate pub cont code num et seq .
the department may exercise the remedies provided in pub cont code num .
the department may refer the violation to the contractors state license board as provided under pub cont code num .
except for a buildingconstruction nonfederalaid contract perform work equaling at least num percent of the value of the original total bid with your employees and with equipment you own or rent with or without operators .
each subcontract must comply with the contract .
the department encourages you to include a dispute resolution process in each subcontract .
each subcontractor must have an active and valid num .
state contractor license with a classification appropriate for the work to be performed bus prof code num et seq .
num .
public works contractor registration number with the department of industrial relations submit copies of subcontracts upon request .
upon request immediately remove and do not again use a subcontractor who fails to satisfactorily prosecute the work .
numb disadvantaged business enterprises numbnum general section numb applies to a federalaid contract .
use each dbe as listed on the dbe commitment form unless you receive authorization for a substitution .
ensure that all subcontracts and agreements with dbes to supply labor or materials are performed under num cfr num .
maintain records including num .
name and business address of each numsttier subcontractor num .
name and business address of each dbe subcontractor dbe vendor and dbe trucking company regardless of tier num .
date of payment and total amount paid to each business if you are a dbe contractor include the date of work performed by your own forces and the corresponding value of the work .
before the numth day of each month for the previous months work submit section num control of work num num .
monthly dbe trucking verification form num .
monthly dbe payment form if a dbe is decertified before completing its work the dbe must notify you in writing of the decertification date .
if a business becomes a certified dbe before completing its work the business must notify you in writing of the certification date .
submit the notifications .
upon work completion complete a disadvantaged business enterprises dbe certification status change form .
submit the form within num days of contract acceptance .
upon work completion complete a final report utilization of disadvantaged business enterprises dbe firsttier subcontractors form .
submit it within num days of contract acceptance .
the department withholds num until the form is submitted .
the department releases the withhold upon submission of the completed form .
numbnum disadvantaged business enterprises section numbnum applies if a dbe goal is shown on the notice to bidders .
dbes must perform work or supply materials as listed on the dbe commitment form .
do not terminate or substitute a listed dbe for convenience and perform the work with your own forces or those of an affiliate a nondbe firm or another dbe firm or obtain materials from other sources without authorization from the department .
the department authorizes a request to use other forces or sources of materials if it shows any of the following justifications num .
listed dbe fails or refuses to execute a written contract based on the plans and specifications for the project .
num .
you stipulated that a bond is a condition of executing the subcontract and the listed dbe fails to meet your bond requirements .
num .
work requires a contractor license and the listed dbe does not have a valid license under the contractors license law .
num .
listed dbe fails or refuses to perform the work or furnish the listed materials .
num .
listed dbes work is unsatisfactory and not in compliance with the contract .
num .
listed dbe is ineligible to work on the project because of suspension or debarment .
num .
listed dbe becomes bankrupt or insolvent .
num .
listed dbe voluntarily withdraws with written notice from the contract .
num .
listed dbe is ineligible to receive credit for the type of work required .
num .
listed dbe owner dies or becomes disabled resulting in the inability to perform the work on the contract .
num .
department determines other documented good cause under num cfr num .
notify the original dbe of your intent to use other forces or material sources and provide the reasons .
provide the dbe with num business days to respond to your notice and advise you and the department of the reasons why the use of other forces or sources of materials should not occur .
your request to use other forces or material sources must include num .
num or more of the reasons listed in the preceding paragraph num .
notices from you to the dbe regarding the request num .
notices from the dbe to you regarding the request if the department authorizes the termination or substitution of a listed dbe make good faith efforts to find another dbe .
the substitute dbe must num perform at least the same dollar amount of work as the original dbe under the contract to the extent needed to meet the dbe goal and num be certified as a dbe with the work code applicable to the type of work the dbe will perform on the contract at the time of your request for substitution .
submit your documentation of good faith efforts within num days of your request for authorization of the substitution .
the department may authorize a numday extension of this submittal period at your request .
refer to num cfr num app a for guidance regarding evaluation of good faith efforts to meet the dbe goal .
section num control of work num unless the department authorizes a request to terminate or substitute a listed dbe the department does not pay for work unless it is performed or supplied by the dbe listed on the dbe commitment form .
you may be subject to other sanctions under num cfr num .
numc disabled veteran business enterprises section numc applies to a nonfederalaid contract .
use each dvbe as shown on the certified dvbe summary form unless you receive authorization from the department for a substitution .
the substitute must be another dvbe unless dvbes are not available in which case you must substitute with a small business .
any authorization for a substitute is contingent upon the department of general services approval of the substitute .
the requirement that dvbes be certified by the bid opening date does not apply to dvbe substitutions after contract award .
the department authorizes substitutions for any of the reasons provided in num ca code of regs num .
include in your substitution request num .
copy of the written notice issued to the dvbe with proof of delivery num .
copy of the dvbes response to the notice num .
name and certification number of the listed dvbe and the proposed substitute requests for substitutions of a listed dvbe with a small business must include documentation of the unavailability of dvbes including num .
contact with the small businessdvbe advocate from the department and the department of veterans affairs num .
search results from the department of general services website of available dvbes num .
communication with a dvbe community organization nearest the job site if applicable num .
documented communication with the dvbe and small businesses describing the work to be performed the percentage of the total bid the corresponding dollar amount and the responses to the communication the department forwards your substitution request to the department of general services .
the department of general services issues a notice of approval or denial .
the department provides you this notice .
if you fail to use a listed dvbe without an authorized substitution request the department issues a penalty of up to num percent of the dollar amount of the work of the listed dvbe .
maintain records of subcontracts made with dvbes .
include in the records num .
name and business address of each business num .
total amount paid to each business for the purpose of determining compliance with pub cont code num et seq .
num .
upon work completion complete and submit final report utilization of disabled veteran business enterprises dvbe state funded projects only form .
num .
upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours permit access to its premises for the purposes of num .
interviewing employees .
num .
inspecting and copying books records accounts and other material that may be relevant to a matter under investigation .
numd nonsmall businesses section numd applies to a nonfederalaid contract .
use each subcontractor as shown on the certified small business listing for the nonsmall business preference form unless you receive authorization for a substitution .
section num control of work num the requirement that small businesses be certified by the bid opening date does not apply to small business substitutions after contract award .
maintain records of subcontracts made with small business subcontractors and records of materials purchased from certified small business suppliers .
include in the records num .
name and business address of each business num .
total amount paid to each business for the purpose of determining compliance with num ca code of regs num et seq .
num .
provide the department relevant information requested num .
upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours permit access to its premises for the purposes of num .
interviewing employees num .
inspecting and copying books records accounts and other material that may be relevant to a matter under investigation numenumi reserved num reserved num representative before starting work assign a representative to num .
receive the engineers orders num .
prosecute the engineers orders num .
supervise the workers num .
coordinate the subcontractors work the representative must be present at the job site while work is in progress .
submit the representatives name and telephone number so the representative can be easily contacted to perform emergency work while work is not in progress .
num character of workers if a worker appears to the engineer to be incompetent or acts disorderly or improperly discharge the worker immediately upon request .
do not employ that worker again on the work .
num reserved num coordination with other entities numa general other entities may perform work at or near the job site and material sources at any time .
coordinate activities to avoid delays .
each contractor or other entity performing work at or near the job or material site is responsible to the other for damage to work persons or property and for costs due to unnecessary delays .
numb permits licenses agreements and certifications numbnum general comply with placs .
the department makes plac changes under section num .
maintain a copy of each plac at the job site .
numbnum before award to make a change to a plac made available to you before award submit the proposed change .
the department sends the proposed change to the appropriate authority for consideration .
numbnum after award confirm with the engineer which afteraward placs are obtained by the department and which are obtained by the contractor .
section num control of work num to make a change to an afteraward plac obtained by the department submit the proposed change .
the department sends the proposed change to the appropriate authority for consideration .
obtain those placs to be issued to you and pay the fees and costs associated with obtaining them .
submit copies of contractorobtained afteraward placs .
numbnum contractorproperty owner agreement before procuring material from or disposing of material on nonhighway property num .
submit a written agreement from the property owner num .
for the use of the property num .
absolving the department from responsibility in connection with the property num .
obtain authorization to start before contract acceptance submit a document signed by the owner of the material source or disposal site stating that the contractor has complied with the contractorowner agreement .
numc railroad relations if the contract includes an agreement with a railroad company the department makes the provisions of the agreement available in the information handout in the document titled railroad relations and insurance requirements .
comply with the requirements in the document .
numd occupied improvements within the rightofway reserved nume water meter charges section nume applies if a bid item for water meter charges is shown on the bid item list .
the charges are specified in a special provision for section nume .
the local water authority will install the water meters .
the local water authority charges for num .
furnishing and installing each water meter num .
connecting to the local water authoritys main water line including any required hot tap or tee num .
furnishing and installing an extension pipe from the main water line to the water meter num .
sterilizing the extension pipe make arrangements and pay the charges for the installation of the water meters .
if the charge is changed at the time of installation the department adjusts the lump sum price based on the difference between the specified charges and the changed charges .
numf irrigation water service charges reserved numgnumj reserved num reserved num submittals numa general section num includes specifications for action and informational submittals .
any submittal not specified as an informational submittal is an action submittal .
submit action and informational submittals to the engineer .
each sheet of a submittal must include num .
contract number num .
districtcountyroutepost mile num .
structure name and number if any section num control of work num the department rejects a submittal if it has any error or omission .
if the last day for submitting a document falls on a saturday or holiday it may be submitted on the next business day with the same effect as if it had been submitted on the day specified .
convert foreign language documents to english and us customary units .
numb action submittals numbnum general maintain a sequential list of action submittals except for samples test samples and material sources .
with each individual submittal submit a copy of the updated list .
submit an action submittal before the start of the affected work to allow for review and corrections without work delays .
except for test samples obtain the departments authorization for action submittals before you perform work based on them .
except for shop drawings and test samples allow num days for review .
for a revised action submittal allow the same number of days for review as for the original submittal .
the time allowed for the review of an action submittal starts when the department receives the submittal .
do not change the scope of work on revised submittals .
the departments authorization of an action submittal does not void any contract part .
numbnum shop drawings submit shop drawings as specified and as otherwise required to control the work .
each drawing and calculation sheet must be in black ink and sequentially numbered .
each drawing sheet must num .
be num by num inches num .
be on a minimum of num lb paper num .
have text of a minimum nominal height of num inch each calculation sheet must num .
be num by num inches num .
have text of a minimum numpoint font text and graphics must be legible for photocopying and reduction .
calculations must demonstrate the design adequacy .
calculations specified as independently checked must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state and who did not seal and sign the drawings .
allow num days for the review .
if multiple sets are submitted simultaneously or an additional set is submitted before the review of a previously submitted set is complete designate the sequence that the sets are to be reviewed .
allow the review time specified plus num days for each additional set .
a set consists of num or fewer sheets .
if drawings require corrections the department num .
describes the deficiencies num .
stamps the drawings with the date that the review stopped num .
returns the drawings show the set revision number .
uniquely number each revised detail .
show the number in an inverted triangle near the revised portion of the detail .
in a legend describe and date the revision .
section num control of work num upon review completion the department returns num copy that shows the authorized date .
to make a change to an authorized drawing submit it as specified for a new submittal .
note the changes .
after the work shown on the drawings is complete submit electronic copies of asbuilt drawings .
include an index of the sheet numbers and titles on the numst sheet for each structure .
arrange the drawings in the drawingnumber order shown in the index .
numbnumbnum reserved numc informational submittals informational submittals include num .
assignments num .
certificates of compliance num .
manufacturers instructions not associated with drawing submittals num .
notifications num .
placs num .
subcontracts num .
qc test data qc test results and qc evaluation reports num reserved num construction surveys the department places stakes and marks under chapter num construction surveys of the departments surveys manual .
submit your request for departmentfurnished stakes num .
once the staking area is ready for stakes num .
on a request for construction staking form after your submittal the department starts staking within num business days .
preserve stakes and marks placed by the department .
if the stakes or marks are destroyed the department replaces them at the departments earliest convenience and deducts the cost .
num records numa general reserved numb record retention retain project records from bid preparation through num .
final payment num .
resolution of claims if any for at least num years after the later of these retain cost records including records of num .
bid preparation num .
overhead num .
payrolls num .
payments to subcontractors and suppliers num .
cost accounting maintain the records in an organized way in the original format electronic and hard copy conducive to professional review and audit .
numc record inspection copying and auditing make your records available for inspection copying and auditing by state representatives for the same time frame specified under section numb .
the records of subcontractors and suppliers must be made available for inspection copying and auditing by state representatives for the same period .
before section num control of work num contract acceptance the state representative notifies the contractor subcontractor or supplier num business days before inspection copying or auditing .
if an audit is to start more than num days after contract acceptance the state representative notifies the contractor subcontractor or supplier of the date when the audit is to start .
numd cost accounting records maintain cost accounting records for the project distinguishing between the following work cost categories num .
work performed based on bid item prices num .
change order work other than extra work .
distinguish this work by num .
bid item prices num .
force account num .
agreed price num .
extra work .
distinguish extra work by num .
bid item prices num .
force account num .
agreed price num .
specialist billing num .
work performed under potential claim records num .
overhead num .
work performed by subcontractors suppliers owneroperators and professional services cost accounting records must include num .
final cost code lists and definitions num .
itemization of the materials used and copies of the corresponding vendors invoices num .
direct cost of labor num .
equipment rental charges num .
workers certified payrolls num .
equipment num .
size num .
type num .
identification number num .
hours operated nume change order bills maintain separate records for change order work costs .
submit change order bills using the departments internet change order billing system .
the contractor submitting and the engineer authorizing a changeorder bill using the internet change order billing system is the same as each party signing the bill .
the department provides billing system num .
training within num days of your request num .
accounts and user identification to your assigned representatives after a representative has received training each representative must maintain a unique password .
num reserved num noncompliant and unauthorized work correct or remove and replace work that num does not comply with the contract num is unauthorized or num both .
the department does not pay for any of the following num .
corrective removal or replacement work num .
unauthorized work section num control of work num if ordered submit a work plan for the corrective removal or replacement work .
if you fail to comply promptly with an order under section num the department may correct remove or replace noncompliant or unauthorized work .
the department deducts the cost of this work .
num job site appearance keep the job site neat .
in areas visible to the public num .
if practicable dispose of debris removed during clearing and grubbing concurrently with its removal .
if stockpiling is necessary dispose of debris weekly .
num .
furnish trash bins for construction debris .
place the debris in trash bins daily .
num .
for falsework to be reused stack the forms neatly and concurrently with their removal .
num areas for use occupy the highway only for purposes necessary to perform the work .
if no stateowned area is designated for the contractors use you may arrange for temporary storage with the department .
defend indemnify and hold the state harmless to the same extent as under section num .
the department does not allow temporary residences within the highway .
num equipment legibly stencil or stamp at a clearly visible location on each piece of equipment except hand tools an identifying number and num .
on compacting equipment its make model number and empty gross weight that is either the manufacturers rated weight or the scale weight num .
on meters and on the loadreceiving element and indicators of each scale the make model serial number and manufacturers rated capacity submit a list describing each piece of equipment and its identifying number .
upon request submit the manufacturers information that designates portable vehicle scale capacities .
for proportioning materials use measuring devices material plant controllers and undersupports complying with section numb .
measuring devices must be tested and approved under california test num in the departments presence by any of the following num .
county sealer of weights and measures num .
scale service agency num .
official of the division of measurement standards the indicator overtravel must be at least num of the loading travel .
the indicators must be enclosed against moisture and dust .
group the measuring system dials such that the smallest increment for each indicator can be read from the location at which proportioning is controlled .
num reserved num property and facility preservation numa general preserve and protect num .
highway improvements and facilities num adjacent property num .
waterways num .
esas num .
lands administered by other agencies section num control of work num num .
roadside vegetation not to be removed num .
railroads and railroad equipment num .
nonhighway facilities including utilities num .
survey monuments num .
departments instrumentation num temporary work immediately report damage to the engineer .
if you cause damage you are responsible .
the department may make a temporary repair to restore service to a damaged facility .
install suitable safeguards to preserve and protect facilities from damage .
install temporary facilities such as sheet piling cribbing bulkheads shores or other supports necessary to support existing facilities or support material carrying the facilities .
numb landscape if you damage plants not to be removed num .
dispose of them unless the engineer authorizes you to reduce them to chips and spread the chips within the highway at locations designated by the engineer num .
replace them replace plants with plants of the same species .
replace trees with numinchbox trees .
replace shrubs with no .
numcontainer shrubs .
replace ground cover plants with plants from flats .
replace carpobrotus ground cover plants with plants from cuttings .
plant ground cover plants num foot on center .
if a plant establishment period is specified replace plants before the start of the plant establishment period otherwise replace plants at least num days before contract acceptance .
water each plant immediately after planting and saturate the backfill soil around and below the roots or the ball of earth around the roots of each plant .
water as necessary to maintain plants in a healthy condition until contract acceptance .
numc railroad property if working on or adjacent to railroad property do not interfere with railroad operations .
for an excavation on or affecting railroad property submit work plans showing the system to be used to protect the railroad facilities .
instead of the num days specified in section numb allow num days for the review of the plans .
if the contract does not include an agreement with a railroad company do not allow personnel or equipment on railroad property .
prevent material equipment and debris from falling onto railroad property .
numd nonhighway facilities the department may rearrange a nonhighway facility during the contract .
rearrangement of a nonhighway facility includes installation relocation alteration or removal of the facility .
the department may authorize facility owners and their agents to enter the highway to perform rearrangement work for their facilities or to make connections or repairs to their property .
coordinate activities to avoid delays .
notify the engineer at least num business days before you contact the regional notification center under govt code num et seq .
failure to contact the notification center prohibits excavation .
section num control of work num before starting work that could damage or interfere with underground infrastructure locate the infrastructure described in the contract including laterals and other appurtenances and determine the presence of other underground infrastructure inferred from visible facilities such as buildings meters and junction boxes .
notify the engineer if the infrastructure described in the contract can not be found .
if after giving the notice you find the infrastructure in a substantially different location from that described finding the infrastructure is change order work .
underground infrastructure described in the contract may be in different locations from those described and additional infrastructure may exist .
upon discovering an underground main or trunk line not described in the contract immediately notify the engineer and the infrastructure owner .
the engineer orders the locating and protecting of the infrastructure .
the locating and protecting is change order work .
if ordered repair infrastructure damage .
if the damage is not due to your negligence the repair is change order work .
if necessary underground infrastructure rearrangement is not described in the contract the engineer may order you to perform the work .
the rearrangement is change order work .
if you want infrastructure rearrangement different from that described in the contract num .
notify the engineer num .
make an arrangement with the infrastructure owner num .
obtain authorization for the rearrangement num .
pay the infrastructure owner any additional cost the department does not adjust time or payment for a rearrangement different from that described the contract .
immediately notify the engineer of a delay due to num .
presence of main line underground infrastructure not described in the contract or in a substantially different location num .
rearrangement different from that described in the contract nume survey monuments protect survey monuments on and off the highway .
upon discovery of a survey monument not identified and located by the department immediately num .
stop work near the monument num .
notify the engineer do not resume work near the monument until authorized .
num maintenance and protection numa general maintain and protect work until the department has granted relief from maintenance or accepted the contract .
do not remove any padlock used to secure a portion of the work until the engineer is present to replace it .
notify the engineer at least num business days before removing the lock .
prevent construction equipment that exceeds the maximum weight limits in veh code div num from operating on completed or existing treated base pavement or structures .
numb load limits numbnum general for areas within the project limits and subject to the contractor providing protective measures and repairing related damage construction equipment exceeding the size or weight limits in veh code div num may move over section num control of work num num .
public roads within the highway num .
treated base or pavement under construction or completed num .
culverts and pipes num .
structures not open to traffic that are designed for aashto hsnum live loading except culverts and pipes .
before crossing one of these structures submit the dimensions and maximum axle loadings of the equipment and unless a material hauling equipment lane on a bridge is shown on the drawings comply with the following specifications num .
the maximum loading on a bridge due to pneumatictired truck and trailer combinations must not exceed num .
num lb for single axles num .
num lb for tandem axles num .
num lb total gross load for single vehicles num .
num lb total gross load for truck and trailer or semitrailer combinations num .
the loading on a bridge due to num and numaxle pneumatictired earthmovers must not exceed that shown in the following table allowable construction loading on bridges for num and numaxle earthmovers bridge girder centertocenter spacing feet maximum axle loading pounds num num num num num num num num num num num num num and over num note minimum axle spacing for numaxle earthmovers axles num to num num feet for numaxle earthmovers axles num to num num feet axles num to num num feet num .
completed or existing base pavement and structures under the departments transportation permits manual whether open to the public or not loads imposed on existing new or partially completed structures must not exceed the loadcarrying capacity of the structure or any portion of the structure as determined by aashto lrfd with interims and california amendments design strength limit state ii .
the fc to be used in computing the load carrying capacity must be the smaller of the following num .
actual compressive strength at the time of loading num .
value of fc shown on the plans for that portion of the structure or num times the value of fc shown on the plans for portions of the structure where no fc is shown numbnum increased load carrying capacity you may submit a request to the department to redesign a structure to increase its loadcarrying capacity .
the department does not authorize a redesign for any of the following num .
load increase of more than num lb per single axle or pair of axles less than num feet apart num .
total gross vehicle weight more than num lb your request to the department must include num .
description of the structure or structures num .
detailed overload description num .
date the revised plans are required num .
signed statement agreeing to pay the costs including the engineering costs section num control of work num num .
signed statement agreeing to waive a time extension request for any delay if the department authorizes a redesign to strengthen the structure the engineer notifies you of the changes estimated cost and availability date of the revised plans .
if the cost and date are satisfactory to you the engineer prepares a change order for the changes .
numbnum material hauling equipment lane on bridges section numbnum applies to a bridge constructed with a material hauling equipment lane .
you may cross the bridge with pneumatictired material hauling equipment that exceeds the size and weight limits specified but that does not exceed the load limits shown on the materialhaulingequipment loading diagram on the plans .
for each bridge with a material hauling equipment lane num .
construct a minimum numfoot approach at each bridge end to a grade that provides a smooth transition to the bridge roadway grade .
maintain these approaches in a smooth and uniform condition during the operation of the equipment .
num .
operate equipment such that jolting and bouncing of the equipment while crossing the bridge is prevented .
num .
confine equipment to the material hauling lane using temporary barriers unless the plans show that the entire bridge may be used for hauling equipment and the permanent barriers are completed .
num .
allow at most num piece of equipment on the bridge at one time .
if ordered verify the weight of loaded material hauling equipment by weighing .
the department furnishes individual wheel or axle type scales .
the department weighs the equipment within the project limits and within the highway at a location accessible to the equipment .
you determine the exact weighing location .
install and maintain the scales .
installing and maintaining scales is change order work .
num maintenance and protection relief you may request relief from maintenance and protection responsibilities for a completed work part .
the work part must have been completed under the contract and to the engineers satisfaction .
work parts eligible for relief include num .
completed num mi section of roadway or a num mi section of one roadway of a divided highway or frontage road including num .
planned roadway protection work num .
lighting num .
required traffic control num .
access facilities num .
bridge or other major structure num .
complete unit of a traffic control signal system or a highway lighting system num .
nonhighway facility constructed for another agency if relieved by the department you are not required to perform further work on that part of work .
you are not responsible for damage to a relieved work part including damage caused by traffic or the elements except for that caused by your own activities or negligence .
num damage repair and restoration numa general before contract acceptance restore damaged work to the same state of completion as before the damage .
restoration of damaged work includes restoration of erected falsework and formwork .
the department does not adjust payment for repair or restoration that the engineer determines was caused by your failure to construct the work under the contract or protect the work .
numb damage caused by an act of god under pub cont code num the department pays for repair or restoration to damaged work in excess of num percent of the total bid if the damage was caused by an act of god .
section num control of work num submit a request for repair or restoration work payment before performing work other than emergency work .
the engineer determines the repair or restoration work cost under section num except markups are not allowed .
the department may change the contract for the areas requiring repair or restoration .
if the cost for the changes exceeds the repair or restoration cost based on the bid item list the engineer determines the payment adjustment under section num .
numc landscape damage numcnum general repair slopes or other existing facilities that were damaged after starting job site activities and before starting plant establishment .
as ordered replace plants that have been damaged from either or both of the following conditions num .
ambient air temperature falling below num degrees f during the plant establishment period num .
department or its supplier restricting or stopping water delivery during the plant establishment period this plant replacement work is change order work .
numcnum plant establishment period of num years or more section numcnum applies if a plant establishment period of num years or more is shown on the notice to bidders .
repair slopes or other existing facilities that were damaged before starting job site activities .
this work is change order work .
repair slopes or other existing facilities that were damaged by a change in the runoff pattern from that which existed on the date of the notice to bidders and was the result of work by others within the highway .
this work is change order work .
replace plants and repair slopes irrigation systems and other highway facilities damaged as a result of rain during the plant establishment period .
the department pays num the accumulated costs in excess of the greater of num percent of the plant establishment work or num the contractor pays the other num .
the engineer determines the repair cost under section num .
num reserved num requests for information submit an rfi upon recognition of any event or question of fact arising under the contract .
the engineer responds to the rfi within num business days .
proceed with the work unless otherwise ordered .
you may protest the engineers response by num .
submitting an initial potential claim record form within num business days after receiving the engineers response num .
complying with section num num potential claims and dispute resolution numa general minimize and mitigate the impacts of work or events for which you will make a potential claim .
for each potential claim assign an identification number determined by chronological sequencing and the numst date of the potential claim .
use the identification number for each potential claim on the num .
initial potential claim record form num .
supplemental potential claim record form num .
full and final potential claim record form section num control of work num failure to comply with this procedure is num .
waiver of the potential claim and a waiver of the right to a corresponding claim for the disputed work in the administrative claim procedure num .
bar to arbitration pub cont code num numb initial potential claim record submit an initial potential claim record form within num business days of the engineers response to the rfi or within num business days from the date when a dispute arises due to an act or failure to act by the engineer .
the initial potential claim record form establishes the claims nature and circumstances .
the nature and circumstances must remain consistent .
the engineer responds within num business days of receiving the form .
proceed with the work for which you will make a potential claim unless otherwise ordered .
within num days of a request provide access to the project records determined necessary by the engineer to evaluate the potential claim .
numc supplemental potential claim record within num days of submitting the initial potential claim record form submit a supplemental potential claim record form including num .
complete nature and circumstances causing the potential claim num .
contract specifications supporting the basis of a claim num .
estimated claim cost and an itemized breakdown of the individual costs stating how the estimate was determined num .
tia the engineer evaluates the supplemental potential claim record form and responds within num days of receiving the submittal .
to pursue a potential claim comply with sections numd and nume .
if the estimated cost or effect on the scheduled completion date changes update the supplemental potential claim record form information as soon as the change is recognized and submit this information .
numd full and final potential claim record notify the engineer within num days of the completion date of the potentially claimed work .
the engineer authorizes this completion date or notifies you of a revised date .
within num days of the completion of the potentially claimed work submit a full and final potential claim record form including num .
detailed factual account of the events causing the potential claim including num .
pertinent dates num .
locations num .
work items affected by the potential claim num .
contract documents supporting the potential claim and a statement of the reasons these parts support entitlement num .
itemized cost breakdown if a payment adjustment is requested .
segregate costs into the following categories num .
labor including num .
individuals num .
classifications num .
regular and overtime hours worked num .
dates worked num .
materials including num .
invoices num .
purchase orders num .
location of materials either stored or incorporated into the work num .
dates materials were transported to the job site or incorporated into the work num .
equipment including num .
detailed descriptions including make model and serial number section num control of work num num .
hours of use num .
dates of use num .
equipment rates at the rental rate listed in labor surcharge and equipment rental rates in effect when the affected work related to the claim was performed num .
detailed account of the time impact if a time adjustment is requested num .
dates for the requested time .
num .
reasons for a time adjustment .
num .
contract documentation supporting the requested time adjustment .
num .
tia .
the tia must demonstrate entitlement to a time adjustment .
num .
identification and copies of your documents and copies of communications supporting the potential claim including certified payrolls bills canceled checks job cost reports payment records and rental agreements num .
relevant information references and arguments that support the potential claim the department does not consider a full and final potential claim record form that does not have the same nature circumstances and basis of claim as those specified on the initial potential claim record form and supplemental potential claim record form .
the engineer evaluates the information presented in the full and final potential claim record form and responds within num days of its receipt unless the full and final potential claim record form is submitted after contract acceptance in which case a response may not be provided .
the engineers receipt of the full and final potential claim record form must be evidenced by postal return receipt or the engineers written receipt if delivered by hand .
nume alternative dispute resolution numenum general numenuma general section nume applies to a contract with num or more original working days .
the parties in section nume means you and the department .
dispute meeting in section nume refers to both the traditional and informal dispute meeting processes .
the alternative dispute resolution process must be used for the timely resolution of disputes that arise out of the work .
you must comply with section nume to pursue a claim file for arbitration or file for litigation .
the alternative dispute resolution process is not a substitute for submitting an rfi or a potential claim record .
do not use the alternative dispute resolution process for disputes between you and subcontractors or suppliers that have no grounds for a legal action against the department .
if you fail to comply with section num for a potential claim on behalf of a subcontractor or supplier you release the department of the subcontractors potential claim .
do not use the alternative dispute resolution process for quantification of disputes for overheadtype expenses or costs .
for disputes for overheadtype expenses or costs comply with section numd .
you the department and the dra or drb must complete and comply with the dispute resolution advisor agreement form or dispute resolution board agreement form .
for these forms go to the departments division of construction website .
no dra or drbrelated meetings are allowed until you the department and the dra or drb execute the agreement .
however you the department and the dra or drb may agree to sign and execute the agreement at the numst meeting .
numenumb establishment of procedures upon selecting the dra or drb the parties must meet with the dra or drb to establish and agree to procedures for num .
submitting documents section num control of work num num .
conducting hearings num .
providing recommendations num .
associated tasks the established procedures must comply with the contract and the dispute resolution advisor agreement form or dispute resolution board agreement form .
the procedures need not comply with laws of evidence .
numenumc dispute meetings you must follow the traditional dispute meeting process to pursue a potential claim .
either you or the department may refer a dispute to the dra or drb .
to request a dispute meeting submit a copy of the referral and supporting documentation to the dra or drb .
the documentation must describe the dispute in individual discrete segments such that resolved and unresolved discrete segments are differentiated .
include an estimate of the cost of the affected work and impacts to the work completion date .
a copy of all documents submitted to the dra or drb must be simultaneously submitted to the other party .
the department provides the dra or drb with the contract documents and provides conference facilities for meetings at no cost to you .
neither you nor the department may meet with or discuss contract issues with the dra or drb members unless the other party is present .
only the engineer the departments area construction engineer or the departments structure representative and your superintendent or project manager may present information at a dispute meeting .
if the dispute involves a subcontractor the subcontractors superintendent or project manager must be present at the dispute meeting and may present information .
only persons who are directly involved with the contract and who have direct knowledge of the dispute may participate in the dispute meeting .
no participation of either partys attorney is allowed .
however you and the department may agree to a request from the dra or drb for participation of a person not associated with the contract to provide technical services if the services are necessary to help the dra or drb make a recommendation .
if the dra or drb needs outside technical services you and the department must agree to the services before they are acquired .
if you the department and the dra or drb agree the technical services may be provided by technical staff who works for you or the department .
during a dispute meeting each party presents its position makes rebuttals provides relevant documents and responds to dra or drb questions and requests .
the following is not allowed num .
testimony under oath num .
crossexamination num .
reporting of the procedures by a shorthand reporter or by electronic means if either party fails to attend a dispute meeting all documents submitted by the nonattending party is considered as the nonattending partys entire argument .
numenumd informal dispute meetings you and the department may resolve small and uncomplicated disputes using an informal process .
you and the department may use this process only if you the department and the dra or drb agree its use is appropriate for resolving the dispute .
the informal dispute meeting process is independent from the traditional process .
the department does not grant time extensions for the traditional dispute process if the informal dispute process is used .
you and the department must each provide the dra or drb a numpage brief description of the dispute with supporting documentation and any additional information requested by the dra or drb .
section num control of work num in an informal dispute meeting each party presents its position and receives the dras or drbs recommendation orally on the same day the dispute is heard .
you and the department may ask for clarification of the dras or drbs recommendation within num business days of the dispute meeting .
the dra or drb will not be bound by its informal recommendation if a dispute is later heard in a traditional dispute meeting .
if the dispute is not resolved using the informal dispute meeting process comply with the traditional dispute meeting specifications .
numenume recommendations recommendations resulting from the alternative dispute resolution process are nonbinding .
if you and the department resolve the dispute with the aid of the dras or drbs recommendation implement the resolution .
numenumf completion of alternative dispute resolution all alternative dispute resolution activities must be completed before contract acceptance .
accelerated timeframes may be used if you the department and the dra or drb agree .
if a dispute becomes an unresolved claim after contract acceptance comply with section numdnum .
neither you nor the department may call the dra or drb members who served on the contract as a witness in arbitration or other proceedings that may arise from the contract .
you and the department must jointly indemnify and hold harmless the dra or drb members from and against all claims damages losses and expenses including attorneys fees arising out of and resulting from the findings and recommendations of the dra or drb .
numenumg payment pay the dra or each drb member num per day for the dras or drbs participation at each onsite meeting except if the dra or a drb member serves on more than one department dra or drb the num must be divided evenly among the contracts .
onsite meetings include num .
initial project meeting num .
scheduled progress meetings for a project with a drb num .
dispute meetings this payment includes full compensation for onsite time travel expenses transportation lodging travel time and incidentals for each day or portion thereof the dra or drb member is at a dra or drb meeting .
before a dra or drb member spends any time reviewing plans and specifications evaluating positions preparing recommendations or performs any other offsite dra or drbrelated tasks you and the department must agree to pay for the tasks .
pay the dra or drb member num per hour for these tasks .
this payment includes full compensation for incidentals such as expenses for telephone fax and computer services .
the department reimburses you for num of the invoiced costs to the dra or drb and num of the costs of any technical services agreed to .
submit a change order bill and associated invoices with the original supporting documents in the form of a canceled check or bank statement to receive reimbursement .
do not add markups to the change order bill .
the department does not pay for any dra or drbrelated work performed after contract acceptance .
the department does not pay your cost of preparing for and attending a dispute resolution meeting .
section num control of work num numenum dispute resolution advisor numenuma general section numenum applies to a contract with a total bid from num million to num million .
the dra is a singlemember board you and the department establish .
numenumb dra selection within num days of contract approval you and the department must select the dra using the following procedure num .
you and the department each nominates num dra member candidates .
each candidate must be num on the departments dispute resolution advisor candidates list at the departments division of construction website or num must num .
be knowledgeable in the type of construction and contract documents anticipated by the contract num .
have completed training by the dispute resolution board foundation num .
have served on at least num dispute resolution boards on a department contract as a member or at least num dispute resolution boards on a department contract as the chairman num .
have no prior direct involvement on this contract num .
have no financial interest in the contract or with the parties subcontractors suppliers consultants or associated legal or business services within num months before award and during the contract except for payments for department dra or drb services or payments for retirement or pensions from either party not tied to dependent on or affected by the net worth of the party num .
you and the department must request a disclosure statement from each nominated dra candidate and must furnish the num statements to the other party .
each statement must include num .
resume of the candidates experience num .
declaration statement that describes past present anticipated and planned professional or personal relationships with each of the following num .
parties involved in the contract num .
parties principals num .
parties counsel num .
associated subcontractors and suppliers num .
you and the department must select num of the num candidates to be the dra .
if you and the department can not agree on num candidate you and the department each must select num of the num nominated by the other and the dra is decided between the num candidates by a coin toss .
numenumc dra replacement the services of the dra may end at any time with a notice of at least num days if either of the following occurs num .
the dra resigns .
num .
either you or the department replaces the dra for failing to comply with the required employment or financial disclosure conditions of the dra as described in the contract and the dispute resolution advisor agreement form .
a dra replacement is selected the same way as the original dra .
the selection of a replacement dra must start upon determination of the need for a replacement and must be completed within num days .
the dispute resolution advisor agreement form must be amended to reflect the change of the dra .
numenumd dra traditional dispute meeting if you choose to pursue a potential claim refer the dispute to the dra within num business days after receiving the engineers response to your supplemental potential claim record form .
the dispute meeting must be scheduled no later than num days after the dra receives the referral unless you and the department otherwise agree .
at least num days before the scheduled dispute meeting each party must provide the dra documentation that supports its position and any additional information requested by the dra .
section num control of work num if the dra requests additional information within num business days after the dispute meeting the party receiving the request must provide this information within num business days of receiving the request .
the dra provides a written recommendation within num days of the dispute meeting unless you and the department agree to allow more time .
within num business days of receiving the dras recommendation either you or the department may request clarification of any part of the recommendation .
only one request for clarification from each party is allowed per dispute .
within num days after receiving the dras recommendation each party must furnish a written response to the dra indicating acceptance or rejection of the recommendation .
if a party rejects the recommendation and has new information that supports its position the party may request reconsideration .
the reconsideration request must be made within num days after receiving the dras recommendation .
only one reconsideration request from each party is allowed per dispute .
if both you and the department accept the dras recommendation but can not agree on the time or payment adjustment within num days of accepting the recommendation either party may request that the dra recommend an adjustment .
numenum dispute resolution board numenuma general section numenum applies to a contract with a total bid of over num million .
the drb is a nummember board that you and the department establish .
numenumb drb member selection within num days of contract approval you and the department must select drb members and establish the drb using the following procedure num .
you and the department each nominates a drb member candidate who is on the departments approved list .
for the list of approved member candidates go to the departments division of construction website .
if you or the department nominates someone who is not on that list the candidate must num .
be knowledgeable in the type of construction and contract documents anticipated by the contract num .
have completed training by the dispute resolution board foundation num .
have no prior direct involvement on this contract num .
have no financial interest in the contract or with the parties subcontractors suppliers consultants or associated legal or business services within num months before award and during the contract except for payments for department dra or drb services or payments for retirement or pensions from either party not tied to dependent on or affected by the net worth of the party num .
you and the department must request a disclosure statement from each nominated drb member candidate and must each furnish it to the other party .
the statement must include num .
resume of the candidates experience num .
declaration statement that describes past present anticipated and planned professional or personal relationships with each of the following num .
parties involved in the contract num .
parties principals num .
parties counsel num .
associated subcontractors and suppliers num .
you and the department are allowed num .
onetime objection to the others candidate without stating a reason num .
objection to any of the others subsequent candidates based on a specific breach of the candidates responsibilities or qualifications under items num and num above num .
if you or the department objects to the others candidate the party whose candidate was objected to must nominate another drb candidate within num days .
num .
the numst candidate from a party that receives no objection becomes that partys drb member .
num .
you and the department each provide written notification to your selected drb member .
section num control of work num num .
within num days of their notifications the selected drb members recommend to you and the department the numrd drb member candidate and provide that candidates disclosure statement .
num .
within num days of the recommendation you and the department must each notify the first num drb members whether you approve or disapprove of the recommended numrd drb member candidate .
num .
if the num drb members can not agree on the numrd drb candidate they will submit a list of candidates to you and the department for final selection and approval .
num .
if the num drb members do not recommend a numrd drb candidate within num days of notification of their selections or if you and the department do not agree on the numrd drb member candidate within num days of the recommendation or if you and the department do not agree on any of the candidates on the list provided by the first num selected drb members you and the department each must select num candidates from the current list of arbitrators certified by the public works contract arbitration committee established by pub cont code num et seq .
who will be willing to serve as a drb member .
the first num selected drb members must select the numrd member in a blind draw of these num candidates .
num .
the num drb members then decide which of the three will act as the drb chairman .
if you and the department do not agree with the selected chairman the numrd member will act as the drb chairman .
numenumc drb member replacement the service of a drb member may end at any time with a notice of at least num days if any of the following occurs num .
a member resigns num .
the department replaces its selected member num .
you replace your selected member num .
the departments and your selected members replace the numrd member num .
either you or the department replace any member for failing to comply with the required employment or financial disclosure conditions of drb membership as described in the contract and in the dispute resolution board agreement form .
replacing any drb member must be accomplished by written notification to the drb and the other party with substantiation for replacing the member .
a replacement drb member is selected the same way as the original drb member .
selecting a replacement must start upon determination of the need for a replacement and must be completed within num days .
the dispute resolution board agreement form must be amended to reflect the change to the drb .
numenumd drb progress meetings you and the department must periodically meet with the drb and visit the job site so the drb members can keep abreast of construction activities and develop familiarity with the work in progress .
the progress meetings must occur at the start of the project and at least once every num months after that .
both parties must attend each progress meeting .
you and the department may agree to waive scheduled progress meetings when the only work remaining is plant establishment .
numenume drb traditional dispute meeting if you choose to pursue a potential claim refer the dispute to the drb within num days after receiving the engineers response to your supplemental potential claim record form unless a facilitated dispute resolution is included in the signed original partnering charter in which case make the referral within num days after receiving the response .
the dispute meeting must be held no sooner than num days and no later than num days after the drb receives the referral unless you and the department otherwise agree .
at least num days before the scheduled dispute meeting each party must furnish the drb documentation that supports its position and any additional information requested by the drb .
if the drb requests additional information within num days after the dispute meeting the party receiving the request must furnish this information within num days of receiving the request .
section num control of work num the drb provides a written recommendation report within num days of the dispute meeting unless you and the department agree to allow more time .
within num days of receiving the drbs recommendation report either you or the department may request clarification of any part of the report .
only one request for clarification from each party is allowed per dispute .
within num days after receiving the drbs recommendation each party must furnish a written response to the drb indicating acceptance or rejection of the recommendation .
if a party rejects the recommendation and has new information that supports its position the party may request reconsideration .
the reconsideration request must be made within num days after receiving the drbs recommendation .
only one request for reconsideration from each party is allowed per dispute .
if both you and the department accept the drbs recommendation but can not agree on the time or payment adjustment within num days of accepting the recommendation either party may request that the drb recommend an adjustment .
numf reserved num reserved num final inspection and contract acceptance when you complete the work request the engineers final inspection .
if the engineer determines that the work is complete the engineer recommends contract acceptance .
immediately after contract acceptance you are relieved from num .
maintenance and protection duties num .
responsibility for injury to persons or property or damage to the work occurring after contract acceptance except as specified in section num num guarantee guarantee that work remains free from substantial defects for num year after contract acceptance except for work parts for which you were relieved of maintenance and protection .
guarantee each of these relieved work parts for num year after the relief date .
the guarantee excludes damage or displacement caused by an event outside your control including num .
normal wear and tear num .
improper operation num .
insufficient maintenance num .
abuse num .
unauthorized change num .
act of god during the guarantee period repair or replace each work part having a substantial defect .
the department does not pay for corrective work .
during corrective work activities provide the same insurance specified before contract acceptance .
the contract bonds must be in force until the later of num the expiration of the guarantee period or num the completion of the corrective work .
if a warranty specification conflicts with section num comply with the warranty specification .
during the guarantee period the engineer monitors the completed work .
if the engineer finds work having a substantial defect the engineer lists the defective work parts and furnishes you the list .
within num days of receipt of the list submit for authorization a detailed plan for correcting the work .
include a schedule that includes num .
start and completion dates num .
list of labor equipment materials and any special services you plan to use section num control of work num num .
work related to the corrective work including traffic control and temporary and permanent pavement markings the engineer notifies you when the plan is authorized .
start the corrective work and related work within num days of notice .
if the engineer determines corrective work is urgently required to prevent injury or property damage num .
the engineer furnishes you an order to start emergency repair work and a list of parts requiring corrective work num .
mobilize within num hours and start work num .
submit a corrective work plan within num business days of starting the emergency repair work if you fail to perform the work as specified the department may perform the work and bill you .
num reserved num num control of materials num general num general section num includes specifications related to the control of materials .
store materials and samples in a way that preserves the quality and facilitates prompt inspection .
material incorporated into the work must be new .
before the preconstruction conference submit material source information on a notice of materials to be used form .
num departmentfurnished materials request departmentfurnished materials except sign panels at least num days before their scheduled installation .
request sign panels at least num days before their scheduled installation .
if the department furnishes the material num .
at the job site unload and store the material num .
at a location other than the job site deliver the material to the job site and store it the engineer orders the return and disposal of surplus departmentfurnished material .
this returning and disposing of material is change order work .
you are responsible for the cost of replacing lost or damaged departmentfurnished material .
the department deducts replacement costs .
departmentfurnished material not used in the work remains the property of the department .
num local materials local material must be rock sand gravel earth or mineral material other than local borrow or selected material obtained or produced from a source in the work vicinity specifically for use on the project .
local borrow must not be a material from an established commercial source .
upon your request the department tests material from an untested local source .
if satisfactory material from that source is used in the work the department does not charge you for the tests otherwise the department deducts the test costs .
num buy america numa general reserved numb crumb rubber pub res code numd furnish crumb rubber with a certificate of compliance .
crumb rubber must be num .
produced in the united states num .
derived from waste tires taken from vehicles owned and operated in the united states numc steel and iron materials steel and iron materials must be melted and manufactured in the united states except num .
foreign pig iron and processed pelletized and reduced iron ore may be used in the domestic production of the steel and iron materials num .
if the total combined cost of the materials does not exceed the greater of num percent of the total bid or num materials produced outside the united states may be used if authorized furnish steel and iron materials to be incorporated into the work with certificates of compliance and certified mill test reports .
mill test reports must indicate where the steel and iron were melted and manufactured .
section num control of materials num all melting and manufacturing processes for these materials including an application of a coating must occur in the united states .
coating includes all processes that protect or enhance the value of the material to which the coating is applied .
num specific brand or trade name and substitution a reference to a specific brand or trade name establishes a quality standard and is not intended to limit competition .
you may use a product that is equal to or better than the specified brand or trade name if authorized .
submit a substitution request with a time period that num .
follows contract award num .
allows num days for review num .
causes no delay include substantiating data with the substitution request that proves that substitution num .
causes no delay num .
is of equal or better quality and suitability num quality assurance num general numa general section num includes provisions related to quality .
quality assurance includes all activities used to num provide an overall level of quality for the project and num determine compliance with the contract documents .
quality control includes sampling testing and inspections performed under your qc program to num control material quality and num ensure the specified quality characteristics for the project are met .
department acceptance includes sampling testing and inspections performed by the department to verify compliance with the contract .
the departments independent assurance program is described in the departments independent assurance manual procedures for accreditation of laboratories and qualification of testers .
for the manual go to the mets website .
for a material specified to comply with a state specification number the material may comply with a later version of the specification .
obtain state specifications from mets .
for a material specified to comply with a requirement for a quality characteristic shown in the following table the quality characteristic is tested under the corresponding california test california tests quality characteristic california test relative compaction num or num sand equivalent num resistance rvalue num gradation sieve analysis num durability index num numb authorized facility audit lists section numb applies where a facility is specified to be on an authorized facility audit list .
an audit authorized by the department not more than num years before completion of the fabrication process is acceptable if the department determines the audit was for the same type of work to be performed .
for procedures to be included on an authorized facility audit list go to the mets website .
section num control of materials num numc authorized material lists section numc applies where a material is specified to be on an authorized material list .
the material must be on an authorized material list before it is incorporated into the work .
for procedures to be included on an authorized material list go to the mets website .
numd authorized material source lists section numd applies where a material is specified to be on an authorized material source list .
the material source must be on an authorized material source list before the item from the source is incorporated into the work .
for procedures to be included on an authorized material source list go to the mets website .
nume material source inspection and testing section nume applies if a material is to be inspected or tested at the source .
submit an inspection request form num .
at least num business days before the requested inspection date for a material source within california .
num .
at least num business days before the requested inspection date for a material source outside california but within the united states .
num .
num days before the planned production start for a material source outside the united states .
notify the engineer at least num days before the actual start .
for the inspection request form and the procedure for its submittal go to the mets website .
notify the engineer of each submittal .
for each item shown in the following table the department deducts the corresponding amount shown section num control of materials num source inspection expense deductions item distancea deduction steel pipe piling prestressing system tier num and tier num precast concrete members epoxycoated reinforcement structural steel for sign structures miscellaneous metal num num num num extinguishable message signs variable message signs changeable message signs service equipment enclosures telephone demarcation cabinets closed circuit television cabinets weighinmotion cabinets highway advisory radio cabinets num num poles for electrical systems num num for num poles and num for every multiple of num poles thereafter structural steel num the greater of num .
num num .
numlb num the greater of num .
num num .
numlb structural steel paint num the greater of num .
num num .
numsq ft num the greater of num .
num num .
numsq ft check samples num num high mast poles num num num num ptfe bearings num lots num num num num ptfe bearings num lots num num num num adistance is airline miles from both sacramento and los angeles to the inspection source .
numf test samples section numf applies where a test sample is specified or if a test sample is requested .
notify the engineer num days before taking a sample .
submit material to be tested with a sample identification card .
for the card go to the mets website .
restore work immediately after sampling .
if requested obtain the departments authorization for the material before incorporating the material represented by the test sample into the work .
numgnumk reserved num quality control numa general material production and testing equipment must measure accurately and precisely .
section num control of materials num numb quality control program develop implement and maintain a qc program .
prepare and maintain qc records including num .
names and qualifications of num .
samplers num .
testers num .
inspectors num .
testing laboratories identification and certifications num .
testing equipment calibrations and certifications num .
inspection reports num .
sampling and testing records organized by date and type of material num .
test results with comparison of quality characteristic requirements num .
test results in relation to action and any suspension limits num .
records of corrective actions and suspensions within num hours notify the engineer of any noncompliance identified by your qc program .
allow the department access to all qc records .
submit qc test data and qc test results within num business days of test completion .
numc quality control manager section numc applies to work requiring a qc manager .
the qc manager must be responsible directly to you for the quality of the work including materials and workmanship performed by you and your subcontractors .
assign the qc manager before the start of the affected work .
the qc manager must be the sole individual responsible for num .
receiving reviewing and approving all correspondence submittals and reports before they are submitted to the department num .
signing the qc plan num .
implementing the qc plan num .
maintaining the qc records the qc manager must be your employee or must be hired by a subcontractor providing only qc services .
the qc manager must not be employed or compensated by a subcontractor or by other persons or entities hired by subcontractors who will provide other services or materials for the project .
notify the engineer of the name and contact information of the qc manager .
numd quality control plans submit num copies of each authorized qc plan .
make num copy available at each location where work is performed .
num department acceptance numa general the department may use multiple acceptance methods for a material .
specifications in sections titled department acceptance do not include all requirements on which the department makes its acceptance .
the department may inspect sample and test materials for compliance with the contract at any time .
allow the department to record including photograph and video to ensure a material is produced to comply with the contract .
you may examine the records and reports of tests the department performs .
section num control of materials num schedule work to allow time for the departments inspection sampling and testing .
the department deducts testing costs for work that does not comply with the contract .
the department may retest material previously tested and authorized for use .
if the department notifies you of a retest furnish resources for retesting .
numb job site inspection and testing section numb applies if a material is to be inspected or tested at the job site .
the material must be authorized for use before it is incorporated into the work .
numc certificates of compliance section numc applies num where a certificate of compliance is specified and num if any material is produced outside the united states .
submit a certificate of compliance num .
before the material is incorporated into the work num .
for each lot of the material .
identify the lot on the certificate num .
signed by the producer of the material and stating that the material complies with the contract num num legal relations and responsibility to the public num general section num includes specifications related to your num .
compliance with laws num .
responsibilities for public safety and convenience num .
responsibilities for indemnification insurance and liability num laws numa general comply with laws regulations orders and decrees applicable to the project .
indemnify and defend the state against any claim or liability arising from the violation of a law regulation order or decree by you or your employees .
immediately report to the engineer a discrepancy or inconsistency between the contract and a law regulation order or decree .
if the department incurs any fines or penalties because of your failure to comply with a law regulation order or decree the department deducts the amount of the fine or penalty .
immediately notify the engineer if a regulatory agency requests access to the job site or to records .
submit a list of documents provided to the agency and issued enforcement actions .
numb us fair labor standards act comply with num usc num et seq .
numc emissions reduction submit to the department the following certification before performing the work i am aware of the emissions reduction regulations being mandated by the california air resources board .
i will comply with such regulations before commencing the performance of the work and maintain compliance throughout the duration of this contract .
contract signing constitutes submittal of this certification .
numdnumh reserved numi government code numinum general reserved numinum nondiscrimination under num ca code regs num and num num .
during the performance of this contract contractor and its subcontractors shall not unlawfully discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race religion color national origin ancestry physical handicap medical condition marital status age over num or sex .
contractors and subcontractors shall insure that the evaluation and treatment of their employees and applicants for employment are free of such discrimination .
contractors and subcontractors shall comply with the provisions of the fair employment and housing act gov .
code section num et seq .
and the applicable regulations promulgated thereunder cal .
admin .
code tit .
num section num et seq ..
the applicable regulations of the fair employment and housing commission implementing government code section num set forth in chapter num of division num of title num of the california administrative code are incorporated into this contract by reference and made a part hereof as if set forth in full .
contractor and its subcontractors shall give written notice of their obligations under this clause to labor organizations with which they have a collective bargaining or other agreement .
num .
this contractor shall include the nondiscrimination and compliance provisions of this clause in all subcontracts to perform work under the contract .
standard california nondiscrimination construction contract specifications gov .
code section num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num these specifications are applicable to all state contractors and subcontractors having a construction contract or subcontract of num or more .
num .
as used in the specifications a .
administrator means administrator office of compliance programs california department of fair employment and housing or any person to whom the administrator delegates authority b .
minority includes i black all persons having primary origins in any of the black racial groups of africa but not of hispanic origin ii hispanic all persons of primary culture or origin in mexico puerto rico cuba central or south america or other spanish derived culture or origin regardless of race iii asian pacific islander all persons having primary origins in any of the original peoples of the far east southeast asia the indian subcontinent or the pacific islands and iv american indian alaskan native all persons having primary origins in any of the original peoples of north america and who maintain culture identification through tribal affiliation or community recognition .
num .
whenever the contractor or any subcontractor subcontracts a portion of the work it shall physically include in each subcontract of num or more the nondiscrimination clause in this contract directly or through incorporation by reference .
any subcontract for work involving a construction trade shall also include the standard california construction contract specifications either directly or through incorporation by reference .
num .
the contractor shall implement the specific nondiscrimination standards provided in paragraph numa through e of these specifications .
num .
neither the provisions of any collective bargaining agreement nor the failure by a union with whom the contractor has a collective bargaining agreement to refer either minorities or women shall excuse the contractors obligations under these specifications government code section num or the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto .
num .
in order for the nonworking training hours of apprentices and trainees to be counted such apprentices and trainees must be employed by the contractor during the training period and the contractor must have made a commitment to employ the apprentices and trainees at the completion of their training subject to the availability of employment opportunities .
trainees must be trained pursuant to training programs approved by the u.s. department of labor or the california department of industrial relations .
num .
the contractor shall take specific actions to implement its nondiscrimination program .
the evaluation of the contractors compliance with these specifications shall be based upon its effort to achieve maximum results from its actions .
the contractor must be able to demonstrate fully its efforts under steps a. through e. below a .
ensure and maintain a working environment free of harassment intimidation and coercion at all sites and at all facilities at which the contractors employees are assigned to work .
the contractor where possible will assign two or more women to each construction project .
the contractor shall specifically ensure that all foremen superintendents and other onsite supervisory personnel are aware of and carry out the contractors obligations to maintain such a working environment with specific attention to minority or female individuals working at such sites or in such facilities .
b .
provide written notification within seven days to the director of dfeh when the union or unions with which the contractor has a collective bargaining agreement has not referred to the contractor a minority person or woman sent by the contractor or when the contractor has other information that the union referral process has impeded the contractors efforts to meet its obligations .
c. disseminate the contractors equal employment opportunity policy by providing notice of the policy to unions and training recruitment and outreach programs and requesting their cooperation in assisting the contractor to meet its obligations and by posting the company policy on bulletin boards accessible to all employees at each location where construction work is performed .
d. ensure all personnel making management and employment decisions regarding hiring assignment layoff termination conditions of work training rates of pay or other employment decisions including all supervisory personnel superintendents general foremen onsite section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num foremen etc .
are aware of the contractors equal employment opportunity policy and obligations and discharge their responsibilities accordingly .
e. ensure that seniority practices job classifications work assignments and other personnel practices do not have a discriminatory effect by continually monitoring all personnel and employment related activities to ensure that the equal employment opportunity policy and the contractors obligations under these specifications are being carried out .
num .
contractors are encouraged to participate in voluntary associations which assist in fulfilling their equal employment opportunity obligations .
the efforts of a contractor association joint contractorunion contractorcommunity or other similar group of which the contractor is a member and participant may be asserted as fulfilling any one or more of its obligations under these specifications provided that the contractor actively participates in the group makes every effort to assure that the group has a positive impact on the employment of minorities and women in the industry ensures that the concrete benefits of the program are reflected in the contractors minority and female workforce participation and can provide access to documentation which demonstrates the effectiveness of actions taken on behalf of the contractor .
the obligation to comply however is the contractors .
num .
the contractor is required to provide equal employment opportunity for all minority groups both male and female and all women both minority and nonminority .
consequently the contractor may be in violation of the fair employment and housing act gov .
code section num et seq .
if a particular group is employed in a substantially disparate manner .
num .
establishment and implementation of a bona fide affirmative action plan pursuant to section num b of this chapter shall create a rebuttal presumption that a contractor is in compliance with the requirements of section num of the government code and its implementing regulations .
num .
the contractor shall not use the nondiscrimination standards to discriminate against any person because of race color religion sex national origin ancestry physical handicap medical condition marital status or age over num .
num .
the contractor shall not enter into any subcontract with any person or firm decertified from state contracts pursuant to government code section num .
num .
the contractor shall carry out such sanctions and penalties for violation of these specifications and the nondiscrimination clause including suspension termination and cancellation of existing subcontracts as may be imposed or ordered pursuant to government code section num and its implementing regulations by the awarding agency .
any contractor who fails to carry out such sanctions and penalties shall be in violation of these specifications and government code section num .
num .
the contractor shall designate a responsible official to monitor all employment related activity to ensure that the company equal employment opportunity policy is being carried out to submit reports relating to the provisions hereof as may be required by ocp and to keep records .
records shall at least include for each employee the name address telephone numbers construction trade union affiliation if any employee identification number when assigned social security number race sex status e.g .
mechanic apprentice trainee helper or laborer dates of changes in status hours worked per week in the indicated trade rate of pay and locations at which the work was performed .
records shall be maintained in any easily understandable and retrievable form however to the degree that existing records satisfy this requirement contractors shall not be required to maintain separate records .
numj reserved numk labor code numknum general work on the job site must comply with labor code num et seq .
and num ca code of regs num et seq .
work includes roadside production and processing of materials .
payroll records include time cards canceled checks cash receipts trust fund forms books documents schedules forms reports receipts or other information which reflect job assignments work schedules by days and hours and the disbursement of payment to workers num ca code of regs num .
numknum wages the department obtains the general prevailing rate of wages applicable to the work to be done .
the rate includes num .
basic hourly rate section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num .
employer payments for health and welfare pension vacation apprenticeship training fees travel time and subsistence pay as provided for in labor code num num .
similar purposes the general prevailing wage rates and any applicable changes to these wage rates are available num .
at the departments labor compliance office of the district in which the work is located num .
from the department of industrial relations website post the general prevailing wage rates at a prominent place at the job site labor code num .
the wage determinations refer to expiration dates .
the determinations with a single asterisk after the expiration date and in effect on the date of advertisement for bids are good for the life of the contract .
the determinations with double asterisks after the expiration date indicate the wage rate to be paid for work performed after this date has been determined .
if work is to extend past this date pay the new rate and incorporate it into the contract .
changes in general prevailing wage determinations apply to the contract when the director of industrial relations has issued them at least num days before advertisement .
labor code num and num ca code of regs num the department does not recognize any claim for additional payment because of a payment by the contractor of any wage rate in excess of the prevailing wage rate specified in the contract .
the contractor and any subcontractor must forfeit to the department not more than num per day or part of a day for each worker paid less than the prevailing wage rate and pay the worker the difference between the prevailing wage rate and the rate paid labor code num .
the labor commissioner determines the amount of this penalty and bases the amount on num .
whether the failure to pay the correct prevailing wage rate was a goodfaith mistake that the contractor or subcontractor promptly and voluntarily corrected upon notice num .
prior record of the contractor or subcontractor in meeting its prevailing wage obligations num .
contractor or subcontractors willful failure to pay the correct rate of prevailing wages if a worker employed by a subcontractor on a public works project is not paid the general prevailing per diem wages by the subcontractor the contractor is not liable for the penalties described in section num numknum unless the contractor had knowledge of the failure to pay the correct general prevailing per diem wages or unless the contractor fails to comply with the following requirements labor code num num .
the contract executed between the contractor and the subcontractor for the performance of work on the public works project must include a copy of the requirements in labor code num num num num num and num .
num .
the contractor must monitor the payment of the specified general prevailing rate of per diem wages by periodic review of the certified payroll records of the subcontractor .
num .
upon becoming aware of the subcontractors failure to pay the specified prevailing rate of wages to the subcontractors workers the contractor must diligently take corrective action to stop or rectify the failure including withholding sufficient funds due the subcontractor for work performed on the public works project .
num .
before making final payment to the subcontractor for work performed on the public works project the contractor must obtain an affidavit signed under penalty of perjury from the subcontractor that the subcontractor has paid the specified general prevailing rate of per diem wages to its employees on the public works project and any amounts due under labor code num .
under labor code num the department must notify the contractor on a public works project within num days of receipt by the department of a complaint of the failure of a subcontractor on that public works project to pay workers the general prevailing rate of per diem wages .
numknum certified payroll records labor code num keep accurate payroll records .
submit a copy of your certified payroll records weekly including those of subcontractors .
include num .
each employees section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num .
full name num .
address num .
social security number num .
work classification num .
straight time and overtime hours worked each day and week num .
actual wages paid for each day to each num .
journeyman num .
apprentice num .
worker num .
other employee you employ for the work num .
pay rate num .
itemized deductions made num .
check number issued num .
apprentices and the apprenticetojourneyman ratio each certified payroll record must include a statement of compliance form signed under penalty of perjury that declares num .
information contained in the payroll record is true correct and complete num .
employer has complied with the requirements of sections num num and num for any work performed by his or her employees on the public works project num .
wage rates paid are at least those required by the contract the department allows the use of a form with identical wording as the statement of compliance form provided by the department .
you may submit certified payroll records electronically to the mailbox address that corresponds to the district in which the work is located .
the districts electronic mailbox addresses are as shown in the following table electronic mailboxes district address num districtnum.payrollsdot.ca.gov num districtnum.payrollsdot.ca.gov num districtnum.payrollsdot.ca.gov num districtnum.payrollsdot.ca.gov num districtnum.payrollsdot.ca.gov num districtnum.payrollsdot.ca.gov num districtnum.payrollsdot.ca.gov num districtnum.payrollsdot.ca.gov num districtnum.payrollsdot.ca.gov num districtnum.payrollsdot.ca.gov num districtnum.payrollsdot.ca.gov num districtnum.payrollsdot.ca.gov before submitting the payroll records electronically you must complete and sign the contractors acknowledgement and submit it to the districts electronic mailbox address .
the department responds with an email containing a caltrans internet certificate to be used for the electronic submission of payroll records .
when you accept the certificate and reply to the email the department is ready to accept your electronic submissions .
each electronic submission must num .
include certified payroll records in a nonmodifiable pdf file .
no spreadsheets microsoft word documents or passwordprotected documents are accepted .
num .
include a signed statement of compliance form with each weekly record .
num .
be received by the department by close of business on the numth day of the month for the prior months work .
section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num .
be encrypted before submission .
num .
contain the following information in the subject line num .
contract number .
num .
week ending date as we mmddyy .
num .
contain num contract number and week ending date per submission .
for additional information on electronic submission of certified payroll records go to the departments labor compliance website .
make certified payroll records available for inspection at all reasonable hours at your main office on the following basis num .
upon the employees request or upon request of the employees authorized representative make available for inspection a certified copy of the employees payroll record .
num .
refer the publics requests for certified payroll records to the department .
upon the publics request the department makes available for inspection or furnishes copies of your certified payroll records .
do not give the public access to the records at your main office .
make all payroll records available for inspection and copying or furnish a copy upon request of a representative of the num .
department num .
division of labor standards enforcement of the department of industrial relations num .
division of apprenticeship standards of the department of industrial relations furnish the department the location of the records .
include the street address city and county .
furnish the department a notification of a location and address change within num business days of the change .
comply with a request for the records within num days after you receive a written request .
if you do not comply within this period the department withholds from progress payments a num penalty for each day or part of a day for each worker until you comply .
you are not assessed this penalty for a subcontractors failure to comply with labor code num .
the department withholds from progress payments for delinquent or inadequate records labor code num .
if you have not submitted an adequate record by the months numth day for the period ending on or before the numst of that month the department withholds up to num percent of the monthly progress estimate exclusive of mobilization .
the department does not withhold more than num or less than num .
numknum apprentices comply with the apprentice to journeyman ratio requirements labor code numg .
comply with the training contribution requirements labor code nummnum .
for answers to questions contact the division of apprenticeship standards before starting work .
the department deducts from progress payments civil penalties assessed by the chief of the division of apprenticeship standards for violating labor code num labor code num .
numknum working hours eight hours is a legal days work labor code num .
the time of service of any worker employed on public work is limited and restricted to num hours in num day and num hours in num calendar week except as provided by labor code num labor code num .
a contractors employee may work more than num hours per day and num hours per week if the contractor pays the employee num times the basic pay rate for the hours worked in excess of num hours per day and num hours per week labor code num .
for each worker employed in the work for each day the worker works more than num hours in num day and num hours in num calendar week without overtime pay the department deducts num as a penalty for violating labor code num labor code num .
section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num numknum occupational safety and health standards numknuma general comply with applicable occupational safety and health standards rules regulations and orders .
the occupational safety and health standards board is the only agency authorized in the state to adopt and enforce occupational safety and health standards labor code num et seq .. you are the controlling employer and must ensure hazardous conditions are corrected labor code num .
the engineer may notify calosha if you fail to establish or maintain a safe and healthful workplace .
submit copies of your injury and illness prevention program and permits required by calosha .
the program must address the use of personal and companyissued electronic devices during work .
do not allow the use of entertainment and personal communication devices in the work zone .
workers may use a communication device for business purposes in the work area at a location where their safety and the safety of other workers and the traveling public is not compromised .
numknumb excavation safety comply with labor code num while excavating .
for an excavation num feet or more in depth submit shop drawings for a protective system .
the drawings must show the design and details for providing worker protection from caving ground during excavation .
shop drawings of protective systems for which the construction safety orders require design by a registered professional engineer must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
the submittal must allow review time and include the contents shown in the following table except the review time is num days for an excavation on or affecting railroad property drawing review time and contents topic plan not requiring a signature plan requiring a signature review time num business days before excavating num days before excavating contents drawings calculations material information proprietary system information drawings calculations material information proprietary system information soil classification soil properties soil design calculations numknumc tunnel safety calosha classifies tunnels into one of the following classifications num .
nongassy num .
potentially gassy num .
gassy num .
extrahazardous if a tunnel location is described in the contract the classification is included in the information handout and you must num .
designate an onsite safety representative under num ca code of regs num num .
submit the name of your onsite safety representative at least num days before starting work at each tunnel num .
prominently post a notice at the job site of num .
tunnel classifications num .
any special orders rules special conditions or regulations related to tunnel work num .
ensure your workers are informed of these classifications section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num notify the engineer at least num days before a worker enters a tunnel not described in the contract .
the department obtains the classification of the tunnel .
the engineer may suspend the work because of a change directly resulting from the contractors planned activities that causes activities to fall under the tunnel safety orders of num ca code of regs num .
numknumd confined space safety comply with num ca code of regs num while working in a confined space .
numknume scaffolding reserved numknumfnumknumi reserved numknumj lead safety numknumji general reserved numknumjii lead compliance plan section numknumjii applies if a bid item for a lead compliance plan is shown on the bid item list .
regulations containing specific calosha requirements when working with lead include num ca code of regs num .
submit a plan num .
that documents your compliance program to prevent or minimize worker exposure to lead num .
including the items listed in num ca code of regs numenumb num .
sealed and signed by a cih allow num days for review .
obtain authorization for the plan before starting any activity that presents the potential for lead exposure .
before starting any activity that presents the potential for lead exposure to employees who have no prior training including state employees provide a safety training program to these employees that complies with num ca code of regs num and your lead compliance plan .
submit copies of air monitoring or job site inspection reports made by or under the direction of the cih under num ca code of regs num within num days after the date of monitoring or inspection .
supply personal protective equipment training and washing facilities required by your lead compliance plan for num state employees .
numknumjiii earth material containing lead reserved numknumjivviii reserved numknumknumknumt reserved numl public contract code numlnum general reserved numlnum antitrust claims in entering into a public works contract or a subcontract to supply goods services or materials pursuant to a public works contract the contractor or subcontractor offers and agrees to assign to the awarding body all rights title and interest in and to all causes of action it may have under section num of the clayton act num u.s.c .
sec .
num or under the cartwright act chapter num commencing with num of part num of division num of the business and professions code arising from purchases of goods services or materials pursuant to the public works contract or the subcontract .
this assignment shall be made and become effective at the time the awarding body tenders final payment to the contractor without further acknowledgment by the parties .
pub cont code num b section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num numm public resources code nummnum general reserved nummnum fire protection reserved nummnum surface mining and reclamation act imported borrow or aggregate material must come from a surface mine permitted under the surface mining and reclamation act of num pub res code num et seq .
or from a source not subject to this act .
for the list of permitted sites go to the department of conservation office of mine reclamation website .
if you import borrow or aggregate material from a surface mine not on this list submit proof that the source is not subject to this act .
nummnummnum reserved numn reserved numo vehicle code under veh code num the department determines areas within the project limits are open to public traffic .
for those areas comply with the requirements set forth in divisions num num num num and num of the veh code .
veh code num does not relieve you or any other person from the duty of exercising due care .
numpnumz reserved num public convenience compliance with section num does not relieve you of your responsibility for public safety .
construction activities must not inconvenience the public or abutting property owners .
schedule and conduct work to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to the public and abutting property owners .
avoid undue delay in construction activities to reduce the publics exposure to construction .
where possible route traffic on new or existing paved surfaces .
maintain convenient access to driveways houses and buildings .
when an abutting property owners access across the rightofway line is to be eliminated or replaced under the contract the existing access must not be closed until the replacement access facility is usable .
construct temporary approaches to a crossing and an intersecting highway .
provide a reasonably smooth and even surface for use by traffic at all time during the excavation of a roadway and construction of an embankment .
before other grading activities place fill at culverts and bridges to allow traffic to cross .
if ordered excavate a roadway cut in layers and construct an embankment in partial widths at a time alternating construction from one side to the other and routing traffic over the side opposite the one under construction .
install or construct culverts on only num the width of the traveled way at a time keep the traveled way portion being used by traffic open and unobstructed until the opposite side of the traveled way is ready for use by traffic .
upon completion of rough grading or placing any subsequent layer bring the surface of the roadbed to a smooth and even condition free of humps and depressions and satisfactory for the use of the public .
after subgrade preparation for a specified layer of material has been completed repair any damage to the roadbed or completed subgrade including damage caused by public use .
while subgrade and paving activities are underway allow the public to use the shoulders .
if halfwidth paving methods are used allow the public to use the side of the roadbed opposite the one under construction .
if enough width is available keep open a passageway wide enough to accommodate at least num lanes of traffic at locations where subgrade and paving activities are underway .
shape shoulders or reshape subgrade as necessary to accommodate traffic during subgrade preparation and paving activities .
section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num apply a dust palliative for the prevention or alleviation of dust nuisance .
install signs lights flares type k temporary railing barricades and other facilities to direct traffic .
provide flaggers whenever necessary to direct the movement of the public through or around the work .
flagging must comply with section num .
the department pays you for this work under section num .
you are required to pay for the cost of replacing or repairing all facilities installed under change order work for the convenience direction or warning of the public that are lost while in your custody or are damaged by your operations to such an extent as to require replacement or repair .
the engineer may order or consent to your request to open a completed section of surfacing pavement or structure roadway surface for public use .
you will not be compensated for any delay to your construction activities caused by the public .
this does not relieve you from any other contractual responsibility .
num public safety you are responsible to provide for public safety .
do not construct a temporary facility that interferes with the safe passage of traffic .
control dust resulting from the work inside and outside the rightofway .
move workers equipment and materials without endangering traffic .
whenever your activities create a condition hazardous to the public furnish erect and maintain those fences temporary railing barricades lights signs and other devices and take any other necessary protective measures to prevent damage or injury to the public .
any fences temporary railing barricades lights signs or other devices furnished erected and maintained by you are in addition to those for which payment is provided elsewhere in the specifications .
provide flaggers whenever necessary to ensure that the public is given safe guidance through the work zone .
flagging must comply with section num .
the department pays you for this work under section num num .
at locations where traffic is being routed through construction under oneway controls move your equipment in compliance with the oneway controls unless otherwise ordered .
use of signs lights flags or other protective devices must comply with the california mutcd and any directions of the engineer .
signs lights flags or other protective devices must not obscure the visibility of nor conflict in intent meaning and function of either existing signs lights and traffic control devices or any construction area signs .
keep existing traffic signals and highway lighting in operation .
other forces within the department will perform routine maintenance of these facilities during the work .
cover signs that direct traffic to a closed area .
except for work specified in section num maintaining and removing the covers on construction area signs is change order work .
install temporary illumination such that the illumination and the illumination equipment do not interfere with public safety .
the installation of general roadway illumination does not relieve you from furnishing and maintaining any protective devices .
equipment must enter and leave the highway via existing ramps and crossovers and must move in the direction of traffic .
all movements of workmen and construction equipment on or across lanes open to traffic must be performed in a manner that do not endanger the public .
your vehicles or other mobile equipment leaving an open traffic lane to enter the construction area must slow down gradually in advance of the location of the turnoff to give the traffic following an opportunity to slow down .
when leaving a work area and entering a roadway carrying traffic your vehicles and equipment must yield to traffic .
immediately remove hauling spillage from a roadway lane or shoulder open to traffic .
when hauling on roadways trim loads and remove material from shelf areas to minimize spillage .
section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num notify the engineer not less than num days and not more than num days before the anticipated start of an activity that will change the vertical or horizontal clearance available to traffic including shoulders .
if vertical clearance is temporarily reduced to num feet or less place low clearance warning signs in compliance with the california mutcd and any directions of the engineer .
signs must comply with the dimensions color and legend requirements of the california mutcd and section num except that the signs must have black letters and numbers on an orange retroreflective background .
wnump signs must be illuminated so that the signs are clearly visible .
pave or provide full width continuous and cleared wood walks for pedestrian openings through falsework .
protect pedestrians from falling objects and concretecuring water .
extend overhead protection for pedestrians at least num feet beyond the edge of the bridge deck .
illuminate all pedestrian openings through falsework .
temporary pedestrian facilities must comply with the california mutcd part num chapter numd pedestrian and worker safety .
do not store vehicles material or equipment in a way that num .
creates a hazard to the public num .
obstructs traffic control devices do not install or place temporary facilities used to perform the work which interfere with the free and safe passage of traffic .
temporary facilities that could be a hazard to public safety if improperly designed must comply with design requirements described in the contract for those facilities or if none are described with standard design criteria or codes appropriate for the facility involved .
submit shop drawings and design calculations for the temporary facilities and show the standard design criteria or codes used .
shop drawings and supplemental calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
if you appear to be neglectful or negligent in furnishing warning devices and taking protective measures the engineer may direct your attention to the existence of a hazard .
you must furnish and install the necessary warning devices .
if the engineer points out the inadequacy of warning devices and protective measures that action on the part of the engineer does not relieve you from your responsibility for public safety or abrogate your obligation to furnish and pay for these devices and measures .
install type k temporary railing or other authorized protective systems under any of the following conditions num .
excavations where the near edge of the excavation is within num feet from the edge of an open traffic lane num .
temporarily unprotected permanent obstacles when the work includes the installation of a fixed obstacle together with a protective system such as a sign structure together with protective railing and you elect to install the obstacle before installing the protective system or you for your convenience and as authorized remove a portion of an existing protective railing at an obstacle and do not replace such railing completely the same day num .
storage areas when material or equipment is stored within num feet of the edge of an open traffic lane and the storage is not otherwise prohibited by the contract num .
height differentials when construction operations create a height differential greater than num feet within num feet of the edge of traffic lane installation of type k temporary railing is not required if an excavation within num feet from the edge of an open traffic lane is protected by any of the following num .
steel plate or concrete covers of adequate thickness to prevent accidental entry by traffic or the public num .
side slope where the downhill slope is num horizontalvertical or less unless a naturally occurring condition num .
barrier or railing offset the approach end of type k temporary railing a minimum of num feet from the edge of an open traffic lane .
install the temporary railing on a skew toward the edge of the traffic lane of not more than num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num foot transversely to num feet longitudinally with respect to the edge of the traffic lane .
if the numfoot minimum offset can not be achieved the temporary railing must be installed on the num to num skew to obtain the maximum available offset between the approach end of the railing and the edge of the traffic lane and an array of temporary crash cushion modules must be installed at the approach end of the temporary railing .
secure type k temporary railing in place before starting work for which the temporary railing is required .
if a traffic lane is closed with channelizers for excavation work move the devices to the adjacent edge of the traveled way when not excavating .
space the devices as specified for the closure .
do not move or temporarily suspend anything over a traffic lane open to the public unless the public is protected .
num indemnification numa general you must defend indemnify and save harmless the state including its officers employees and agents excluding agents who are design professionals from any and all claims demands causes of action damages costs expenses actual attorneys fees losses or liabilities in law or in equity section num claims arising out of or in connection with your performance of this contract for num .
bodily injury including but not limited to bodily injury sickness or disease emotional injury or death to persons including but not limited to the public any employees or agents of you the state or any other contractor and num .
damage to property of anyone including loss of use thereof caused or alleged to be caused in whole or in part by any negligent or otherwise legally actionable act or omission of you or anyone directly or indirectly employed by you or anyone for whose acts you may be liable .
except as otherwise provided by law these requirements apply regardless of the existence or degree of fault of the state .
you are not obligated to indemnify the state for claims arising from conduct delineated in civ code num and for claims arising from any defective or substandard condition of the highway that existed at or before the start of work unless this condition has been changed by the work or the scope of the work requires you to maintain existing highway facilities and the claim arises from your failure to maintain .
your defense and indemnity obligation shall extend to claims arising after the work is completed and accepted if the claims are directly related to alleged acts or omissions by you that occurred during the course of the work .
any inspection of the work by the state is not a waiver of full compliance with these requirements .
your obligation to defend and indemnify is not excused because of your inability to evaluate liability or because you evaluate liability and determine that you are not liable .
you must respond within num days to the tender of any claim for defense and indemnity by the state unless this time has been extended by the state .
if you fail to accept or reject a tender of defense and indemnity within num days in addition to any other remedy authorized by law the department may withhold such funds the state reasonably considers necessary for its defense and indemnity until disposition has been made of the claim or until the contractor accepts or rejects the tender of defense whichever occurs first .
with respect to thirdparty claims against you you waive all rights of any type to express or implied indemnity against the state its officers employees or agents excluding agents who are design professionals .
nothing in the contract is intended to establish a standard of care owed to any member of the public or to extend to the public the status of a thirdparty beneficiary for any of these indemnification specifications .
numb responsibility to other entities you are responsible for any liability imposed by law and for injuries to or death of any person including workers and the public or damage to property .
indemnify and save harmless any county city or district and its officers and employees connected with the work within the limits of which county city or district the work is being performed all in the same manner and to the same extent specified for the protection of the state .
section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num insurance numa general nothing in the contract is intended to establish a standard of care owed to any member of the public or to extend to the public the status of a thirdparty beneficiary for any of these insurance specifications .
numb casualty insurance obtain and maintain insurance on all of your operations with companies acceptable to the state as follows num .
keep all insurance in full force and effect from the start of the work through contract acceptance .
num .
all insurance must be with an insurance company with a rating from a.m. best financial strength rating of a or better and a financial size category of vii or better .
num .
maintain completed operations coverage with a carrier acceptable to the state through the expiration of the patent deficiency in construction statute of repose set forth in civ pro code num .
numc workers compensation and employers liability insurance under labor code num secure the payment of workers compensation under labor code num .
submit to the department the following certification before performing the work labor code num i am aware of the provisions of section num of the labor code which require every employer to be insured against liability for workers compensation or to undertake selfinsurance in accordance with the provisions of that code and i will comply with such provisions before commencing the performance of the work of this contract .
contract signing constitutes your submittal of this certification .
provide employers liability insurance in amounts not less than num .
num for each accident for bodily injury by accident num .
num policy limit for bodily injury by disease num .
num for each employee for bodily injury by disease if there is an exposure of injury to your employees under the us longshoremens and harbor workers compensation act the jones act or under laws regulations or statutes applicable to maritime employees coverage must be included for such injuries or claims .
numd liability insurance numdnum general carry general liability and umbrella or excess liability insurance covering all operations by or on behalf of you providing insurance for bodily injury liability and property damage liability for the following limits and including coverage for num .
premises operations and mobile equipment num .
products and completed operations num .
broad form property damage including completed operations num .
explosion collapse and underground hazards num .
personal injury num .
contractual liability numdnum liability limitsadditional insureds the limits of liability must be at least the values shown in the following table section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num liability limits total bid for each occurrencea aggregate for productscompleted operation general aggregateb umbrella or excess liabilityc num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num acombined single limit for bodily injury and property damage .
bthis limit must apply separately to your work under this contract .
cthe umbrella or excess policy must contain a clause stating that it takes effect drops down in the event the primary limits are impaired or exhausted .
do not require a small business subcontractor to carry liability insurance that exceeds the limits shown in the preceding table .
for a small business subcontractor interpret total bid in the table as the dollar amount of subcontracted work .
as used in section numdnum a small business num .
for a nonfederalaid contract is defined in num ca code of regs num and is incorporated by this reference num .
for a federalaid contract is defined in num cfr num and is incorporated by this reference the state including its officers directors agents excluding agents who are design professionals and employees must be named as additional insureds under the general liability and umbrella liability policies with respect to liability arising out of or connected with work or operations performed by or on behalf of you under this contract .
coverage for such additional insureds does not extend to liability num .
arising from any defective or substandard condition of the roadway which existed at or before the time you started work unless such condition has been changed by the work or the scope of the work requires you to maintain existing roadway facilities and the claim arises from your failure to maintain num .
for claims occurring after the work is completed and accepted unless these claims are directly related to alleged acts or omissions of you that occurred during the course of the work or num .
to the extent prohibited by ins code num .
additional insured coverage must be provided by a policy provision or by an endorsement providing coverage at least as broad as additional insured form b endorsement form cg num as published by the insurance services office iso or other form designated by the department .
numdnum contractors insurance policy is primary the policy must stipulate that the insurance afforded the additional insureds applies as primary insurance .
any other insurance or selfinsurance maintained by the state is excess only and must not be called upon to contribute with this insurance .
nume automobile liability insurance carry automobile liability insurance including coverage for all owned hired and nonowned automobiles .
the primary limits of liability must be not less than num combined single limit for each accident for bodily injury and property damage .
the umbrella or excess liability coverage required under section num numdnum also applies to automobile liability .
numf policy forms endorsements and certificates provide your general liability insurance under commercial general liability policy form no .
cgnum as published by the insurance services office iso or under a policy form at least as broad as policy form no .
cgnum .
numg deductibles the state may expressly allow deductible clauses which it does not consider excessive overly broad or harmful to the interests of the state .
regardless of the allowance of exclusions or deductions by the section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num state you are responsible for any deductible amount and must warrant that the coverage provided to the state complies with section num .
numh enforcement the department may assure your compliance with your insurance obligations .
ten days before an insurance policy lapses or is canceled during the contract period you must submit to the department evidence of renewal or replacement of the policy .
if you fail to maintain any required insurance coverage the department may maintain this coverage and withhold or charge the expense to you or terminate your control of the work .
you are not relieved of your duties and responsibilities to indemnify defend and hold harmless the state its officers agents and employees by the departments acceptance of insurance policies and certificates .
the minimum insurance coverage amounts do not relieve you for liability in excess of such coverage nor do they preclude the state from taking other actions available to it including the withholding of funds under this contract .
numi selfinsurance selfinsurance programs and selfinsured retentions in insurance policies are subject to separate annual review and approval by the state .
if you use a selfinsurance program or selfinsured retention you must provide the state with the same protection from liability and defense of suits as would be afforded by firstdollar insurance .
execution of the contract is your acknowledgment that you will be bound by all laws as if you were an insurer as defined under ins code num and that the selfinsurance program or selfinsured retention shall operate as insurance as defined under ins code num .
num legal actions against the department numa general if legal action is brought against the department over compliance with a state or federal law rule or regulation applicable to highway work then num .
if the department in complying with a court order prohibits you from performing work the resulting delay is a suspension related to your performance unless the department terminates the contract .
num .
if a court order other than an order to show cause or the final judgment in the action prohibits the department from requiring you to perform work the department may delete the prohibited work or terminate the contract .
numb seal coat claims pay for claims for personal property damage caused by screening and bituminous binder .
seal coat claims are limited to num .
num percent of the total bid num .
damage occurring between the numst day of screening spreading and num days after the last day of screening spreading for each seal coat location within num days of the last screening spreading do the following num .
process and resolve all claims reported or submitted to you by the public as follows num .
within num business days of receipt of a claim submit to the department a copy of the claim a written analysis of the claim and a statement indicating whether or not you will pay the claim .
if you reject a claim provide the reasons for rejection in writing .
num .
if the claimant becomes dissatisfied with your handling of the claim immediately refer the claimant to the local district claims office for assistance in resolving the claim .
num .
submit to the department evidence of your paid claims .
all claims presented to the department any district claims office or the state board of control govt code num et seq .
are processed and resolved by the department as follows section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num .
the claims are processed as formal government claims subject to all laws and policies and are resolved as the department determines including referring the claim to you for handling .
num .
if the department or the state board of control approves settlement of a claim or is ordered to pay pursuant to a court order the claim is paid from funds withheld from you .
num .
within num business days of the departments determination that you are responsible for resolving the claim the department sends a copy of the claim to you for resolution or notifies you of the departments decision to resolve the claim .
the department withholds an amount not to exceed num percent of the total bid to resolve all claims .
the amount is held no longer than num days following the last spreading of screenings so that the department has ample time to resolve any pending claims .
after num days any remaining amount withheld is returned to you .
if no withheld funds remain or have been returned the department may pay any claims and seek reimbursement from you through an offset or any other legal means .
any reimbursement or offset to be recovered from you including all other paid claims is limited to num percent of the total bid .
section numb does not limit your obligation to defend and indemnify the department .
num personal liability neither the director the engineer nor any other officer or authorized employee of the state of california nor any officer or employee of any county city or district shall be personally responsible for any liability arising under or by virtue of the contract .
num reserved num federal laws for federalaid contracts numa general section num includes specifications required in a federalaid construction contract and applies to a federalaid contract .
a copy of form fhwanum is included in section numb .
the training and promotion section of section ii refers to training provisions as if they were included in the special provisions .
the department specifies the provisions in section numd of the standard specifications .
if a number of trainees or apprentices is required the department shows the number on the notice to bidders .
interpret each fhwanum clause shown in the following table as having the same meaning as the corresponding department clause fhwanum nondiscrimination clauses fhwanum section fhwanum clause department clause training and promotion in the event a special provision for training is provided under this contract this subparagraph will be superseded as indicated in the special provision .
if section numd applies section numd supersedes this subparagraph .
records and reports if onthejob training is being required by special provision the contractor will be required to collect and report training data .
if the contract requires on thejob training collect and report training data .
section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num numb fhwanum section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num numc female and minority goals to comply with section ii nondiscrimination of required contract provisions federalaid construction contracts the department is including in section numc female and minority utilization goals for federalaid construction contracts and subcontracts that exceed num .
the nationwide goal for female utilization is num percent .
the goals for minority utilization num fed reg num num are as shown in the following table section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num minority utilization goals economic area goal num num redding ca num nonsmsa counties ca lassen ca modoc ca plumas ca shasta ca siskiyou ca tehama num num eureka ca num nonsmsa counties ca del norte ca humboldt ca trinity num num san franciscooaklandsan jose ca smsa counties num salinasseasidemonterey ca ca monterey num num san franciscooakland ca ca alameda ca contra costa ca marin ca san francisco ca san mateo num num san jose ca ca santa clara ca num num santa cruz ca ca santa cruz num num santa rosa ca ca sonoma num num vallejofairfieldnapa ca ca napa ca solano num nonsmsa counties ca lake ca mendocino ca san benito num num num sacramento ca smsa counties num sacramento ca ca placer ca sacramento ca yolo num nonsmsa counties ca butte ca colusa ca el dorado ca glenn ca nevada ca sierra ca sutter ca yuba num num num stocktonmodesto ca smsa counties num modesto ca ca stanislaus num num stockton ca ca san joaquin num nonsmsa counties ca alpine ca amador ca calaveras ca mariposa ca merced ca tuolumne num num num fresnobakersfield ca smsa counties num bakersfield ca ca kern num num fresno ca ca fresno num nonsmsa counties ca kings ca madera ca tulare num num num los angeles ca smsa counties num anaheimsanta anagarden grove ca ca orange num num los angeleslong beach ca ca los angeles num section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num num oxnardsimi valleyventura ca ca ventura num num riversidesan bernardinoontario ca ca riverside ca san bernardino num num santa barbarasanta marialompoc ca ca santa barbara num nonsmsa counties ca inyo ca mono ca san luis obispo num num num san diego ca smsa counties num san diego ca ca san diego num nonsmsa counties ca imperial num for each july during which work is performed under the contract you and each nonmaterialsupplier subcontractor with a subcontract of num or more must complete form fhwa prnum appendix c to num cfr num .
submit the forms by august num .
numd training section numd applies if a number of trainees or apprentices is shown on the notice to bidders .
as part of your equal opportunity affirmative action program provide onthejob training to develop full journeymen in the types of trades or job classifications involved .
you have primary responsibility for meeting this training requirement .
if you subcontract a contract part determine how many trainees or apprentices are to be trained by the subcontractor .
where feasible num percent of apprentices or trainees in each occupation must be in their numst year of apprenticeship or training .
distribute the number of apprentices or trainees among the work classifications on the basis of your needs and the availability of journeymen in the various classifications within a reasonable recruitment area .
before starting work submit num .
number of apprentices or trainees to be trained for each classification num .
training program to be used num .
training starting date for each classification obtain the departments approval for this submitted information before you start work .
the department credits you for each apprentice or trainee you employ on the work who is currently enrolled or becomes enrolled in an approved program .
the primary objective of section numd is to train and upgrade minorities and women toward journeymen status .
make every effort to enroll minority and women apprentices or trainees such as conducting systematic and direct recruitment through public and private sources likely to yield minority and women apprentices or trainees to the extent they are available within a reasonable recruitment area .
show that you have made the efforts .
in making these efforts do not discriminate against any applicant for training .
do not employ as an apprentice or trainee an employee num .
in any classification in which the employee has successfully completed a training course leading to journeyman status or in which the employee has been employed as a journeyman num. who is not registered in a program approved by the us department of labor bureau of apprenticeship and training section num legal relations and responsibility to the public num ask the employee if the employee has successfully completed a training course leading to journeyman status or has been employed as a journeyman .
your records must show the employees answers to the questions .
in your training program establish the minimum length and training type for each classification .
the department and fhwa approves a program if one of the following conditions is met num .
program is calculated to num .
meet your equal employment opportunity responsibilities .
num .
qualify the average apprentice or trainee for journeyman status in the classification involved by the end of the training period .
num .
program is registered with the us department of labor bureau of apprenticeship and training and it is administered in a way consistent with the equal employment responsibilities of federalaid highway construction contracts .
obtain department approval for your training program before you start work involving the classification covered by the program .
provide training in the construction crafts not in clerktypist or secretarialtype positions .
training is allowed in lowerlevel management positions such as office engineers estimators and timekeepers if the training is oriented toward construction applications .
training is allowed in the laborer classification if significant and meaningful training is provided and approved by the fhwa division office .
offsite training is allowed if the training is an integral part of an approved training program and does not make up a significant part of the overall training .
the department reimburses you num cents per hour of training given an employee on this contract under an approved training program num .
for onsite training num .
for offsite training if the apprentice or trainee is currently employed under a federalaid contract and you do at least one of the following num .
contribute to the cost of the training num .
provide the instruction to the apprentice or trainee num .
pay the apprentices or trainees wages during the offsite training period num .
if you comply with section numd each apprentice or trainee must num .
start training on the project as soon as feasible after the start of work involving the apprentices or trainees craft num .
remain on the project as long as training opportunities exist in the apprentices or trainees work classification or until the apprentice or trainee has completed the training program furnish the apprentice or trainee num .
copy of the program you will comply with in providing the training num .
certification showing the type and length of training satisfactorily completed maintain records and submit reports documenting your performance under section numd .
num num prosecution and progress num general section num includes specifications related to prosecuting the contract and work progress .
num schedule numa general upon completion of all work the department returns the withholds associated with section num and makes a payment adjustment for work not performed in the same manner as workcharacter changes .
numb level num critical path method schedule numbnum general section numb applies to a contract with a total bid less than num million and less than num original working days .
before or at the preconstruction conference submit a cpm baseline schedule .
for each schedule submit num .
plotted original timescaled network diagram on a sheet at least num by num inches with a title block and timeline num .
readonly compact disc or other engineerauthorized datastorage device containing the schedule data if software is used to make the schedule .
label the device with num .
contract number num .
cpm schedule number and date produced num .
file name numbnum schedule format on each schedule show num .
planned and actual start and completion dates of each work activity including applicable num .
submittal development num .
submittal review and acceptance num .
material procurement num .
contract milestones and constraints num .
equipment and plant setup num .
interfaces with outside entities num .
erection and removal of falsework and shoring num .
test periods num .
major traffic stage change num .
final cleanup num .
order that you propose to prosecute the work num .
logical links between the timescaled work activities num .
all controlling activities num .
legible description of each activity num .
at least num predecessor and num successor to each activity except for project start and project end milestones num .
duration of at least num working day for each activity num .
start milestone date as the contract approval date numbnum updated schedule submit a monthly updated schedule that includes the status of work completed to date and the work yet to be performed as planned .
you may include changes to updated schedules that do not alter a critical path or extend the scheduled completion date compared to the current schedule .
changes may include num .
adding or deleting activities section num prosecution and progress num num .
changing activity constraints num .
changing durations num .
changing logic if any proposed change in planned work would alter the critical path or extend the scheduled completion date submit a revised schedule within num days of the proposed change .
numc level num critical path method schedule numcnum general section numc applies to a contract with num a total bid less than num million and num or more original working days num a total bid from num to num million or num a total bid over num million and less than num original working days .
submit baseline monthly updated and final updated schedules each consistent in all respects with the time and order of contract work requirements .
perform work in the sequence indicated on the current accepted schedule .
use computer software to prepare each schedule .
ensure that all activity sequences are logical and that each schedule shows a coordinated plan for completing of the work .
if the contract includes construction staging and you propose changes to the described staging do not perform work affected by the proposed changes until the engineer accepts your schedule .
a change to the schedule that changes the described staging is change order work .
the engineers review and acceptance of schedules does not void any contract part and does not void your responsibility for submitting complete and accurate information .
correct rejected schedules and resubmit them within num days of notification by the engineer .
allow num days for review of the resubmittal .
errors or omissions on schedules do not void your responsibility for completing all work within the time specified for completion of the work .
if either you or the engineer discovers that any aspect of the schedule has an error or omission after a schedule has been accepted correct it on the next updated schedule .
numcnum schedule format for the schedule format comply with the numst paragraph of section numbnum and show num .
calculations using the cpm to determine controlling activities .
num .
duration activities less than num working days .
num .
each required constraint .
constraints other than those required by the specifications may be included only if authorized .
numcnum computer software numcnuma general submit a description of your proposed schedule software for authorization .
software must be compatible with the current version of the microsoft windows operating system in use by the engineer .
the schedule software must include the latest version of primavera pnum for windows or equal .
any proposed schedule software equal to primavera pnum must be capable of num .
generating files that can be imported into primavera pnum num .
comparing num schedules and providing reports of changes in activity id activity description constraints calendar assignments durations and logic ties section num prosecution and progress num numcnumb reserved numcnum data and network diagrams for each schedule submit num .
num datastorage device containing the schedule data num .
num sets of originally plotted timescaled network diagrams the datastorage device must comply with item num of the numrd paragraph of section numbnum .
the timescaled network diagrams must num .
show a continuous flow of information from left to right num .
be based on early start and early finish dates of activities num .
clearly show the primary critical path using graphical presentation num .
be on num by num inches or larger sheets num .
include a title block and a timeline on each page numcnum baseline schedule submit a baseline schedule and all support data within num days of contract approval .
allow num days for review after the submittal .
starting the week the baseline schedule is first submitted meet with the engineer weekly to discuss and resolve schedule issues until the baseline schedule is accepted .
the baseline schedule must include the entire scope of work and how you plan to complete all work contemplated .
the baseline schedule must show the activities that define the critical path .
multiple critical paths and nearcritical paths must be kept to a minimum .
a total of not more than num percent of the baseline schedule activities must be critical or near critical unless otherwise authorized .
the baseline schedule must not extend beyond the number of original working days .
numcnum updated schedule each updated schedule must comply with section numbnum .
meet with the engineer to review work progress on or before the numst day of each month starting num month after the baseline schedule is accepted .
allow num days for review after the updated schedule and all support data are submitted .
the review period does not start until the previous months required schedule is accepted .
updated schedules not accepted or rejected within the review period are accepted .
the updated schedule must num .
have a data date of the numst day of the month or other date established by the engineer num .
show changes from accepted revised schedules numcnum final updated schedule submit a final updated asbuilt schedule with actual start and finish dates for the activities within num days after work completion .
submit a written certificate with this submittal signed by your project manager or an officer of the company stating to my knowledge and belief the enclosed final updated schedule reflects the actual start and finish dates of the actual activities for the project contained herein .
an officer of the company may delegate in writing the authority to sign the certificate to a responsible manager .
section num prosecution and progress num numd level num critical path method schedule numdnum general section numd applies to a contract with a total bid over num million and num or more original working days .
comply with section numcnum .
numdnum schedule format for the schedule format comply with section numcnum and show num .
at least num but not more than num activities unless authorized .
the number of activities must be sufficient to assure adequate planning of the project to permit monitoring and evaluation of progress and to do an analysis of time impacts .
num .
departmentowned float as the predecessor activity to the scheduled completion date .
num .
activities with identification codes for responsibility stage work shifts location and bid items .
you may show early completion time on any schedule if you comply with the contract .
early completion time is a resource for your exclusive use .
you may increase early completion time by improving production reallocating resources to be more efficient performing sequential activities concurrently or by completing activities earlier than planned .
you may also submit a vecp that will reduce construction time .
you may show a scheduled completion date that is later than the work completion date on an updated schedule after the baseline schedule is accepted .
provide an explanation for a late scheduled completion date in the narrative report included with the schedule .
numdnum computer software computer software must comply with section numcnum .
numdnum data network diagrams and reports for each schedule submittal submit num .
num datastorage device containing the schedule data num .
num sets of originally plotted timescaled network diagrams num .
num copies of a narrative report the datastorage device must comply with item num of the numrd paragraph of section numbnum .
the network diagrams must comply with section numcnum except the sheets must be num by num inches .
the narrative report must be organized in the following sequence with all applicable documents included num .
transmittal letter num .
work completed during the period num .
identification of unusual conditions or restrictions regarding labor equipment or material including multiple shifts numday work weeks specified overtime or work at times other than regular days or hours num .
description of the current critical path num .
changes to the critical path and scheduled completion date since the last schedule submittal num .
description of problem areas num .
current and anticipated delays including num .
cause of delay num .
impact of delay on other activities milestones and completion dates num .
corrective action and schedule adjustments to correct the delay num .
pending items and status of num .
permits num .
change orders num .
time adjustments num .
noncompliance notices num .
reasons for an early or late scheduled completion date in comparison to the work completion date section num prosecution and progress num numdnum preconstruction scheduling conference hold a preconstruction scheduling conference with your project manager and the engineer within num days after contract approval .
the engineer conducts the conference and reviews the specifications for a level num cpm schedule with you .
within num days after contract approval submit a general timescaled logic diagram showing the major activities and sequence of planned operations .
be prepared to discuss the proposed work plan and schedule methodology during the preconstruction scheduling conference .
if the contract includes construction staging and you propose changes to the described staging the general timescaled logic diagram must show the changes and resulting time impacts .
be prepared to discuss your proposal .
at this conference submit the alphanumeric coding structure and activity identification system for labeling work activities .
to easily identify relationships each activity description must indicate its associated scope or location of work by including such terms as quantity of material type of work bridge number station to station location side of highway such as left right northbound or southbound lane number shoulder ramp name ramp line descriptor or mainline .
the engineer reviews the logic diagram coding structure and activity identification system and provides any required baseline schedule changes to you for implementation .
numdnum baseline schedule the baseline schedule must comply with section numcnum .
the baseline schedule must have a data date of contract approval .
if you start work before contract approval the baseline schedule must have a data date of the numst day you performed work at the job site .
if you submit an early completion baseline schedule that shows work completion in less than num percent of the original working days the baseline schedule must be supplemented with resource allocations for every task activity and include timescaled resource histograms .
resource allocations must be shown to a level of detail that facilitates report generation based on labor crafts and equipment classes for you and your subcontractors .
use average composite crews to display the labor loading of job site construction activities .
optimize and level labor to reflect a reasonable plan for accomplishing the work and to assure that resources are not duplicated in concurrent activities .
the timescaled resource histograms must show labor crafts and equipment classes to be used .
the engineer may review the baseline schedule activity resource allocations using means productivity standards for construction or equivalent to determine whether the schedule is practicable .
numdnum updated schedule the updated schedule must comply with section numcnum except the numth paragraph .
the updated schedule must num .
have a data date of the numst day of the month or other date established by the engineer num .
show the status of work actually completed to date and the work yet to be performed as planned num .
show actual activity start dates percent complete and finish dates num .
show durations for work that has been completed as the work actually occurred including the engineers review and your resubmittal times justify in writing the reasons for any changes to planned work .
if any proposed changes in planned work results in altering a critical path or near critical path or extending the schedule completion date submit a revised schedule and a tia within num days of the proposed change .
section num prosecution and progress num numdnum time impact analysis numdnuma general submit a tia with each request for adjustment of contract time or whenever you or the engineer considers that an authorized or anticipated change may impact the critical path or work progress .
the tia must num .
illustrate the impacts of each change or delay on the current scheduled completion date or internal milestone .
num .
use the accepted schedule that has a data date closest to and before the event .
if the engineer determines that the accepted schedule used does not appropriately represent the conditions before the event the accepted schedule must be updated to the day before the event being analyzed .
num .
include an impact schedule developed from incorporating the event into the accepted schedule by adding or deleting activities or by changing durations or logic of existing activities .
if the impact schedule shows that incorporating the event modifies the critical path and scheduled completion date of the accepted schedule the difference between scheduled completion dates of the num schedules must be equal to the adjustment of contract time .
the engineer may construct and use an appropriate project schedule or other recognized method to determine adjustments in contract time until you submit the tia .
submit num copies of the tia within num days of receiving a written request for a tia .
allow num days for review of the submitted tia .
authorized tia schedule changes must be shown on the next updated schedule .
if a tia you submit is rejected meet with the engineer to discuss and resolve issues related to the tia .
if clarification is needed after you meet you are allowed num days to submit a protest .
if agreement is not reached you are allowed num business days from the date you receive the engineers response to your protest to submit an initial potential claim record form .
show only actual asbuilt work not unauthorized changes related to the tia in subsequent updated schedules .
if agreement is reached at a later date the authorized tia schedule changes must be shown on the next updated schedule .
the department withholds remaining payment on the progress schedule critical path method bid item if a tia is requested and not submitted within num days .
the department returns the withhold in the next progress payment after the submittal of the requested tia .
numdnumb departmentowned float prepare a tia whenever requested to determine the effect of departmentowned float .
department owned float is a resource for the exclusive use of the department .
the engineer may accrue departmentowned float by early review completion of any submittal if the early review completion saves time on the critical path .
the engineer documents departmentowned float by ordering you to update the departmentowned float activity on the next updated schedule .
include a log of the action on the departmentowned float activity and include a discussion of the action in the narrative report .
the engineer may use departmentowned float to mitigate past present or future department delays by offsetting a potential time extension for a change order .
numdnumc ordered changes for an ordered change that affects the scheduled completion date prepare a tia to determine the effect of adjusting contract working days .
include the impacts of the ordered change in the next updated schedule .
section num prosecution and progress num an ordered change that affects the controlling activity on the critical path is a basis for a time adjustment .
the department grants a time extension only if the total float is absorbed and the scheduled completion date is delayed num or more working days due to the ordered change .
numdnum final updated schedule the final updated schedule must comply with section numcnum .
numdnum payment the department pays you for progress schedule critical path method as follows num .
a total of num percent of the item total is paid upon num .
completion of num percent of all work num .
acceptance of schedules and authorization of tias required when num percent of all work is complete num .
a total of num percent of the item total is paid upon completion of num percent of all work and acceptance of schedules and authorization of tias required when num percent of all work is complete num .
a total of num percent of the item total is paid upon completion of num percent of all work and acceptance of schedules and authorization of tias required when num percent of all work is complete num .
a total of num percent of the item total is paid upon completion of all work acceptance of schedules and authorization of tias required when all work is complete and submittal of the certified final updated schedule the department does not adjust payment for any increased or decreased work ordered in submitting schedules .
numenumf reserved num preconstruction conference attend a preconstruction conference with key personnel including your assigned representative at a time and location determined by the engineer .
submit documents as required before the preconstruction conference .
you may start work before the preconstruction conference .
be prepared to discuss the topics and documents shown in the following table topic document potential claim and dispute resolution potential claim forms contractors representation assignment of contractors representative dbe and dvbe final utilization reports equipment equipment list labor compliance and equal employment opportunity job site posters and benefit and payroll reports material inspection notice of materials to be used form materials on hand request for payment for materials on hand form measurements partnering quality control qc plans safety injury and illness prevention program and job site posters schedule baseline schedule and weekly statement of working days form subcontracting subcontracting request form surveying survey request form traffic control traffic contingency plan and traffic control plans utility work weight limitations water pollution control swppp or wpcp work restrictions placs action submittals section num prosecution and progress num num start of job site activities numa general reserved numb standard start for a project that does not require a swppp start job site activities within num days after receiving notice that the contract has been approved by the attorney general or the attorney appointed and authorized to represent the department .
for a project that requires a swppp start job site activities within num days after receiving notice that the contract has been approved by the attorney general or the attorney appointed and authorized to represent the department .
submit a notice num hours before starting job site activities .
if the project has more than num work location submit a separate notice for each location .
you may start job site activities before receiving notice of contract approval if you num .
deliver the signed contract bonds and evidence of insurance to the department num .
submit a numhour notice num .
obtain an encroachment permit from the department num .
receive the departments authorization to start num .
perform work at your own risk num .
perform work under the contract if the contract is approved work already performed that complies with the contract is authorized .
if the contract is not approved leave the job site in a neat condition .
if a facility has been changed restore it to its former condition or an equivalent condition .
the department does not pay for the restoration .
the department does not adjust time for work performed before contract approval .
numc delayed start reserved numd early returnearly start reserved nume nextday start reserved numf flexible start reserved numg potential budget impasse start reserved numhnumj reserved num time the contract time starts on the earlier of the following num .
day you start job site activities after contract approval num .
last day specified to start job site activities in section num complete the work within the contract time .
meet each specified interim workcompletion date .
the engineer issues a weekly statement of working days form by the end of the following week .
the weekly statement of working days form shows section num prosecution and progress num num .
working days and nonworking days during the reporting week num .
time adjustments num .
calculations of work completion dates including working days remaining num .
controlling activities num suspensions the engineer may suspend work wholly or in part due to conditions unsuitable for work progress .
provide for public safety and a smooth and unobstructed passageway through the work zone during the suspension as specified in sections num and num .
providing the passageway is force account work .
the department makes a time adjustment for the suspension due to a critical delay .
the engineer may suspend work wholly or in part due to your failure to num fulfill the engineers orders num fulfill a contract part or num perform weatherdependent work when conditions are favorable so that weatherrelated unsuitable conditions are avoided or do not occur .
the department may provide for a smooth and unobstructed passageway through the work during the suspension and deduct the cost from payments .
the department does not make a time adjustment for the suspension .
upon the engineers order of suspension suspend work immediately .
resume work when ordered .
num delays numa general to request a delayrelated time or payment adjustment submit an rfi .
numb time adjustments the department may make a time adjustment for a critical delay .
the engineer uses information from the schedule to evaluate requests for time adjustments .
to request an adjustment submit a revised schedule showing the delays effect on the controlling activity .
if the delay has num .
occurred submit records of the dates and what work was performed during the delayed activity num .
not occurred submit the expected dates or duration of the delayed activity update the schedule to the last working day before the start of the delay if ordered .
numc payment adjustments the department may make a payment adjustment for an excusable delay that affects your costs .
only losses for idle equipment idle workers and moving or transporting equipment are eligible for delay related payment adjustments .
the engineer determines payment for idle time of equipment in the same manner as determinations are made for equipment used in the performance of force account work under section num with the following exceptions num .
delay factor in the labor surcharge and equipment rental rates applies to each equipment rental rate .
num .
daily number of payable hours equals the normal working hours during the delay not to exceed num hours per day .
num .
delay days exclude nonworking days .
num .
markups are not added .
the engineer determines payment adjustment for the idle workers under section numb but does not add markups .
the engineer includes costs due to necessary extra moving or transporting of equipment .
the department does not make a payment adjustment for overhead incurred during nonworking days of additional construction seasons experienced because of delay .
section num prosecution and progress num num reserved num liquidated damages numa general the department specifies liquidated damages pub cont code num .
liquidated damages if any accrue starting on the numst day after the expiration of the working days through the day of contract acceptance except as specified in sections numb and numc .
the department withholds liquidated damages before the accrual date if the anticipated liquidated damages may exceed the value of the remaining work .
liquidated damages for all work except plant establishment are as shown in the following table liquidated damages total bid liquidated damages per day from over to num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num if all work except plant establishment is complete and the total number of working days have expired liquidated damages are num per day .
numb failure to complete work parts within specified times the department may deduct specified damages from payments for each day needed to complete a work part in excess of the time specified for completing the work part .
damages for untimely completion of work parts may not be equal to the daily amount specified as liquidated damages for the project as a whole but the department does not simultaneously assess damages for untimely completion of work parts and for the whole work .
damages accrue starting the numst day after a work part exceeds the specified time through the day the specified work part is complete .
numc failure to complete work parts by specified dates the department may deduct specified damages from payments for each day needed to complete a work part in excess of the specified completion date for the work part .
damages for untimely completion of a work part may not be equal to the daily amount specified as liquidated damages for the project as a whole but the department does not simultaneously assess damages for untimely completion of a work part and the whole work .
damages accrue starting the numst day after an unmet completion date through the day the work part is complete .
numd reserved num reserved num contractors control termination the department may terminate your control of the work for failure to do any of the following pub cont code num num .
supply an adequate workforce num .
supply material as described num .
pay subcontractors pub cont code num num .
prosecute the work as described in the contract section num prosecution and progress num the department may also terminate your control for failure to maintain insurance coverage .
for a federalaid project the department may terminate your control of the work for failure to include required contract provisions federalaid construction contracts in subcontracts .
the department gives notice to you and your surety at least num business days before terminating control .
the notice describes the failures and the time allowed to remedy the failures .
if failures are not remedied within the time provided the department takes control of the work .
the department may complete the work if the department terminates the contractors control or you abandon the project pub cont code num .
the department determines the unpaid balance under pub cont code num and the contract .
at any time before final payment of all claims the department may convert a contractors control termination to a contract termination .
num contract termination numa general the director may terminate the contract if it serves the states best interest .
the department issues you a written notice implements the termination and pays you .
numb relief from responsibility for work upon receiving a termination notice num .
stop work num .
notify subcontractors and suppliers of the contract termination and stop contractrelated work num .
perform the engineerordered work to secure the job site for termination num .
remove equipment num .
subject to the engineers authorization settle terminationrelated claims and liabilities involving subcontractors and suppliers assign to the department the rights titles or interests held by you with respect to these parties numc responsibility for materials upon receiving a termination notice protect unused material until num .
you submit an inventory of materials already produced purchased or ordered but not yet used include the location of the material .
num .
the engineer identifies materials that will be retained by the department .
submit bills of sales or other records of material title .
num .
the engineer confirms that unused materials paid by progress payment and materials furnished by the state have been delivered and stored as ordered .
num .
the titles are transferred for materials purchased by the department .
dispose of materials that will not be retained by the department .
numd contract acceptance after termination the engineer recommends contract acceptance after determining the completion of num .
work ordered to be completed before termination num .
other work ordered to secure the project before termination num .
material delivery and title transfer the department pays you under section num .
nume payment adjustment for termination if the department issues a termination notice the engineer determines the payment for termination based on the following num .
direct cost for the work num .
including section num prosecution and progress num num .
mobilization .
num .
demobilization .
num .
securing the job site for termination .
num .
losses from the sale of materials .
num .
not including num .
cost of materials you keep .
num .
profit realized from the sale of materials .
num .
cost of material damaged by num .
act of god .
num .
act of a public enemy .
num .
fire .
num .
flood .
num .
governordeclared state of emergency .
num .
landslide .
num .
tsunami .
num .
other credits .
num .
cost of remedial work as estimated by the engineer is not reimbursed .
num .
allowance for profit not to exceed num percent of the cost of the work .
prove a likelihood of having made a profit had the contract not been terminated .
num .
material handling costs for material returned to the vendor or disposed of as ordered .
num .
costs in determining the payment adjustment due to the termination excluding attorney fees and litigation costs .
termination of the contract does not relieve the surety of its obligation for any just claims arising out of the work performed .
num reserved num num payment num general section num includes specifications related to work payment .
num measurement numa general the department determines bid item quantities under us customary units .
except for final pay item quantities the engineer measures quantities for payment .
numb weighing equipment and procedures numbnum general measure material quantities for payment with devices that comply with num .
num ca code of regs num et seq .
num .
bus prof code num et seq .
to determine the material payment quantities use measuring devices that have been sealed by the department of food and agricultures division of measurement standards or its designated representative .
if a device is not type approved by the division of measurement standards type approve it under california test num .
notify the engineer at least num business day before equipment testing .
use material plant controllers having elements affecting the data accuracy and delivery that have been sealed by the engineer .
make these elements available to the engineer for inspection .
if the elements are adequate for use the engineer seals them .
if manipulation of a security seal occurs stop material production .
do not resume production until the engineer reinspects and reseals the device .
measure material paid for by weight on sealed scales regularly inspected by the department of food and agricultures division of measurement standards or its designated representative .
obtain authorization of portable vehicle scale installations before sealing .
numbnum equipment each scale must be long enough to fit an entire vehicle or a combination vehicle on the scale deck .
the department allows you to weigh a combination vehicle separately if you disconnect the vehicles .
construct scale undersupports num .
using portland cement concrete containing at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard produced from commercial quality materials num .
such that footing heights are at least num inches thick num .
with a bearing surface at least num inches wide and bearing pressure on the footing not over num lbsq ft in constructing a scale num .
provide drainage to prevent water from saturating the ground under the scale num .
use bulkheads that prevent displacement num .
if shimming is necessary num .
use securely attached metal shims or grout num .
do not use wedges to shim the supports num .
do not use shim material in excess of num inches num .
install mechanical indicating elements level plumb and rigidly mounted on the concrete undersupports num .
for a hopper scale rigidly attach the lever systems and mechanical indicating elements such that no weight is lost from bending or support distortion section num payment num each scale used to determine material payment quantities must be operated by a licensed weighmaster bus prof code num et seq ..
submit a public weighmasters certificate or certified daily summary weigh sheets for each weighed material quantity .
the department may witness material weighing and check and compile the daily scale weight record .
each vehicle operator must obtain weight or load slips from the weighmaster .
submit these records at the delivery point .
numbnum procedures each day weigh empty vehicles used to haul material paid for by weight .
each vehicle must have a legible identification mark .
the department may verify a material weight by having an empty and loaded vehicle weighed on any scale the engineer designates .
if imported topsoil soil amendment or mulch is measured by volume num .
each vehicle must allow for an accurate determination of its contents num .
unless vehicles are of uniform capacity each vehicle must have a legible identification mark showing its volumetric capacity num .
load vehicles to at least the volumetric capacity num .
level vehicle loads on arrival at the delivery point if determining a quantity paid on a volume basis is impractical or if authorized weigh the material and the engineer converts the result to a volume measurement .
the engineer determines the conversion factors and if you agree adopts this method of measurement .
numc final pay item quantities the department shows a bid item quantity as a final pay item for payment purposes only .
for a final pay item accept payment based on the bid item list quantity regardless of the actual quantity used unless dimensions are changed by the engineer .
numd quantities of aggregate and other roadway materials the engineer determines the weights of aggregate and other roadway material that are being paid for by weight as shown in the following table and does not include the deducted weight of water in their payment quantities determination of quantities of aggregate and other roadway materials material quantity determination aggregate or other roadway material except as otherwise shown in this table by deducting the weight of water in the materiala in excess of num percent of the dry weight of the material from the weight of the material imported borrow imported topsoil ab by deducting the weight of water in the materiala in excess of num percent of the dry weight of the material from the weight of the material straw by deducting the weight of water in the materiala in excess of num percent of the dry weight of the material from the weight of the material fiberb engineer does not deduct the weight of water ab and aggregate for ctbs as specified in section num and section num note percentage of water is determined by california test num. aat the time of weighing bweight of water in the fibera must not exceed num percent of the dry weight of the fiber .
num payment scope the department pays you for furnishing the resources and activities required to complete the work .
the departments payment is full compensation for furnishing the resources and activities including num .
risk loss damage repair or cost of whatever character arising from or relating to the work and performance of the work section num payment num num .
placs and taxes num .
any royalties and costs arising from patents trademarks and copyrights involved in the work the department does not pay for your loss damage repair or extra costs of whatever character arising from or relating to the work that is a direct or indirect result of your choice of construction methods materials equipment or manpower unless specifically mandated by the contract .
payment is num .
full compensation for all work involved in each bid item shown on the bid item list by the unit of measure shown for that bid item num .
for the price bid for each bid item shown on the bid item list or as changed by change order with a specified price adjustment full compensation for work specified in divisions i ii and xi is included in the payment for the bid items involved unless num .
bid item for the work is shown on the bid item list num .
work is specified as change order work work paid for under one bid item is not paid for under any other bid item .
payment for a bid item includes payment for work in sections referenced by the section set forth by that bid item .
if an alternative is described in the contract the department pays based on the bid items for the details and specifications not described as an alternative unless the bid item is described as an alternative in which case the department pays based on the details and specifications for that alternative .
the department pays for change order work based on one or a combination of the following num .
bid item prices num .
force account num .
agreed price num .
specialist billing if the engineer chooses to pay for change order work based on an agreed price but you and the engineer can not agree on the price the department pays by force account .
if a portion of extra work is covered by bid items the department pays for this work as changed quantities in those items .
the department pays for the remaining portion of the extra work by force account or agreed price .
the department pays num percent annual interest for unpaid and undisputed num .
progress payments num .
afteracceptance payment except for claims for these payments interest starts to accrue num days after the numst working day following the numth day of the month that payment is due .
for a change order bill not submitted within num days after performing the work interest starts to accrue num days after the numst working day following the numth day of the month that payment is due .
the department pays num percent annual interest for unpaid and undisputed claims .
interest starts to accrue num days after the department accepts a claim statement .
the department pays num percent annual interest for awards in arbitration civ code num .
if the amount of a deduction or withhold exceeds the final payment the department invoices you for the difference to be paid upon receipt .
pay your subcontractors within num days of receipt of each progress payment under pub cont code num and num .
section num payment num num force account numa general for work paid by force account the engineer compares the departments records to your daily force account work report .
when you and the engineer agree on the contents of the daily forceaccount work reports the engineer accepts the report and the department pays for the work .
if the records differ the department pays for the work based only on the information shown on the departments records .
if a subcontractor performs work at force account accept an additional num percent markup to the total cost of that work paid at force account including markups specified in section num as reimbursement for additional administrative costs .
the markups specified for labor materials and equipment include compensation for all delay costs overhead costs and profit .
if an items unit price is adjusted for workcharacter changes the department excludes your cost of determining the adjustment .
payment for owneroperated labor and equipment is made at the marketpriced invoice submitted .
for nonsubcontracted work paid by force account for a contract with a tro bid item the markups are those shown in the following table instead of those specified in sections numbd cost percent markup labor num materials num equipment rental num numb labor labor payment is full compensation for the cost of labor used in the direct performance of the work plus a num percent markup .
forceaccount labor payment consists of num .
employer payment to the worker for num .
basic hourly wage num .
health and welfare num .
pension num .
vacation num .
training num .
other state and federalrecognized fringe benefit payments num .
labor surcharge percentage in labor surcharge and equipment rental rates current during the work paid at force account for num .
workers compensation insurance num .
social security num .
medicare num .
federal unemployment insurance num .
state unemployment insurance num .
state training taxes num .
subsistence and travel allowances paid to the workers num .
employer payment to supervisors if authorized the num percent markup consists of payment for all overhead costs related to labor but not designated as costs of the labor used in the direct performance of the work including num .
home office overhead num .
field office overhead num .
bond costs num .
profit num .
labor liability insurance num .
other fixed or administrative costs that are not costs of the labor used in the direct performance of the work section num payment num numc materials material payment is full compensation for materials you furnish and use in the work .
the engineer determines the cost based on the material purchase price including delivery charges except num .
num percent markup is added num .
supplier discounts are subtracted whether you took them or not num .
if the engineer believes the material purchase prices are excessive the department pays the lowest current wholesale price for a similar material quantity num .
if you procured the materials from a source you wholly or partially own the determined cost is based on the lower of the num .
price paid by the purchaser for similar materials from that source on contract items num .
current wholesale price for those materials num .
if you do not submit a material cost record within num days of billing the determined cost is based on the lowest wholesale price num .
during that period num .
in the quantities used numd equipment rental numdnum general equipment rental payment is full compensation for num .
rental equipment costs including moving the equipment to and from the change order work site using its own power .
num .
transport equipment costs for rental equipment that can not be transported economically using its own power .
no payment is made during transport for the transported equipment .
num .
num percent markup .
if you want to return the equipment to a location other than its original location the payment to move the equipment must not exceed the cost of returning the equipment to its original location .
if you use the equipment for work other than work paid by force account the transportation cost is included in the other work .
before moving or loading the equipment obtain authorization for the equipment rentals original location .
the engineer determines rental costs num .
using the rates in labor surcharge and equipment rental rates num .
by classifying equipment using manufacturers ratings and manufacturerapproved changes .
num .
current during the work paid by force account .
num .
regardless of equipment ownership but the department uses the rental document rates or minimum rental cost terms if num .
rented from an equipment business you do not own .
num .
hourly rate in labor surcharge and equipment rental rates is num per hour or less .
num .
using the rates established by the engineer for equipment not listed in labor surcharge and equipment rental rates .
you may submit cost information that helps the engineer establish the rental rate but the department uses the rental document rates or minimum rental cost terms if num .
rented from an equipment business you do not own .
num .
the engineer establishes a rate of num per hour or less .
num .
using rates for transport equipment not exceeding the hourly rates charged by established haulers .
equipment rental rates include the cost of num .
fuel num .
repairs and maintenance num .
oil num .
depreciation num .
lubrication num .
storage num .
supplies num .
insurance num .
small tools that are not consumed by use num .
incidentals num .
necessary attachments section num payment num the department pays for small tools consumed by use .
the engineer determines the payment for small tools consumed by use based on contractorsubmitted invoices .
the engineer may authorize rates in excess of those in the labor surcharge and equipment rental rates if num .
you submit a request to use rented equipment num .
equipment is not available from your normal sources or from one of your subcontractors num .
rented equipment is from an independent rental company num .
proposed equipment rental rate is reasonable num .
the engineer authorizes the equipment source and the rental rate before you use the equipment the department pays for fuel consumed during the operation of rented equipment not included in the invoiced rental rates .
numdnum equipment on the job site for equipment on the job site at the time required to perform work paid by force account the time paid is the time num .
to move the equipment to the location of work paid by force account plus an equal amount of time to move the equipment to another location on the job site when the work paid by force account is completed num .
to load and unload equipment num .
equipment is operated to perform work paid by force account and num .
hourly rates are paid in numhour increments num .
daily rates are paid in numday increments numdnum equipment not on the job site and not required for originalcontract work for equipment not on the job site at the time required to perform work paid by force account and not required for the original contract work the time paid is the time the equipment is operated to perform work paid by force account and the time to return the equipment to its source when the work paid by force account is completed .
the minimum total time paid is num .
num day if daily rates are paid num .
num hours if hourly rates are paid if daily rates are recorded equipment num .
idled is paid as num day num .
operated less than num hours is paid as num day num .
operated num hours or more is paid as num day if the minimum total time exceeds num hours and if hourly rates are listed the department rounds up hours operated to the nearest numhour increment and pays based on the hours shown the following table .
the table does not apply when equipment is not operated due to breakdowns in which case rental hours are the hours the equipment was operated .
equipment rental hours hours operated hours paid num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num section num payment num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num hours used numdnum equipment not on the job site and required for originalcontract work for equipment not on the job site at the time required to perform work paid by force account and required for the original contract work the time paid is the time num .
to move the equipment to the location of work paid by force account plus an equal amount of time to move the equipment to a location on the job site or its source when the work paid by force account is completed num .
equipment is operated to perform work paid by force account numdnum nonowneroperated dump truck rental submit the rental rate for a nonowneroperated dump truck .
the engineer determines the payment rate .
payment for the rental of a nonowneroperated dump truck is for the cost of renting a dump truck including its driver .
for the purpose of markup payment only the nonowneroperated dump truck is rental equipment and the owner is a subcontractor .
num extra work performed by specialists if the engineer determines that you or your subcontractors are not capable of performing specialty extra work a specialist may be used .
itemize the labor material and equipment rental costs unless it is not the special service industrys established practice to provide itemization in which case the engineer accepts current marketpriced invoices for the work .
the engineer may accept an invoice as a specialist billing for work performed at an offjob site manufacturing plant or machine shop .
the engineer determines the cost based on the specialist invoice price minus any available or offered discounts plus a num percent markup .
num changed quantity payment adjustments numa general the unit prices specified in section num are adjusted under section num .
numb increases of more than num percent if the total bid item quantity exceeds num percent of the quantity shown on the bid item list and if no approved change order addresses payment for the quantity exceeding num percent the engineer may adjust the unit price for the excess quantity under section num or the following num .
the adjustment is the difference between the unit price and the unit cost of the total item pay quantity .
num .
in determining the unit cost the engineer excludes the items fixed costs .
you have recovered the fixed costs in the payment for num percent shown on the bid item list .
num .
after excluding fixed costs the engineer determines the item unit cost under section num .
if the payment for the number of units of a bid item in excess of num percent of the bid item list is less than num at the unit price the engineer may not adjust the unit price unless you request it .
numc decreases of more than num percent if the total item pay quantity is less than num percent of the quantity shown on the bid item list and if no approved change order addresses payment for the quantity less than num percent you may request a unit price adjustment .
the engineer may adjust the unit price for the decreased quantity under section num or the following section num payment num num .
the adjustment is the difference between the unit price and the unit cost of the total pay quantity .
num .
in determining the unit cost the engineer includes the items fixed costs .
num .
after including fixed costs the engineer determines the item unit cost under section num .
the department does not pay more than num percent of the item total in the bid item list .
numd eliminated items if the engineer eliminates an item the engineer notifies you and the department pays your costs incurred before the notification date .
if you order authorized material for an eliminated item before the notification date and the order can not be canceled either of the following occurs num .
if the material is returnable to the vendor the engineer orders you to return the material and the department pays your handling costs and vendor charges .
num .
the department pays your cost for the material and its handling and becomes the material owner .
the engineer determines the payment for the eliminated bid item under section num .
num payment adjustments for price index fluctuations numa general section num applies to asphalt contained in materials for pavement structures and pavement surface treatments such as hma tack coat asphaltic emulsions bituminous seals asphalt binders and modified asphalt binders placed in the work .
section num does not apply if you opted out of payment adjustments for price index fluctuations at the time of bid .
the engineer adjusts payment whenever the california statewide crude oil price index for the month the material is placed is more than num percent higher or lower than the price index at the time of bid .
the department determines the california statewide crude oil price index each month on or about the numst business day of the month using the average of the posted prices in effect for the previous month as posted by chevron exxonmobil and conocophillips for the buena vista and midway sunset fields .
if a company discontinues posting its prices for a field the department determines the index from the remaining posted prices .
the department may include additional fields to determine the index .
for the california statewide crude oil price index go to the departments division of construction website .
if the adjustment is a decrease in payment the department deducts the amount from the monthly progress payment .
the department makes payment adjustments due to price index fluctuations for changed quantities under section num .
if you do not complete the work within the contract time payment adjustments during the overrun period are determined using the california statewide crude oil price index in effect for the month in which the overrun period began .
if the price index at the time of placement increases num .
num percent or more over the price index at bid opening notify the engineer .
num .
num percent or more over the price index at bid opening do not furnish material containing asphalt until the engineer authorizes you to proceed with that work .
the department may decrease bid item quantities eliminate bid items or terminate the contract .
before placing material containing asphalt submit the current sales and use tax rate in effect in the tax jurisdiction where the material is to be placed .
submit a public weighmasters certificate for hma tack coat asphaltic emulsions and modified asphalt binders including those materials not paid for by weight .
for slurry seals submit a separate public weighmasters certificate for the asphaltic emulsion .
section num payment num numb asphalt quantities numbnum general reserved numbnum hot mix asphalt the engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in hma using the following formula qh hmatt x xa where qh quantity in tons of asphalt used in hma hmatt hma total tons placed xa theoretical asphalt content from the job mix formula expressed as a percentage of the total weight of hma numbnum rubberized hot mix asphalt the engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in rhma using the following formula qrh rhmatt x num x xarb where qrh quantity in tons of asphalt in asphalt rubber binder used in rhma rhmatt rhma total tons placed xarb theoretical asphalt rubber binder content from the job mix formula expressed as a percentage of the total weight of rubberized hma numbnum hot mix asphalt with modified asphalt binder the engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in hma with modified asphalt binder using the following formula qmh mhmatt x num xamnum x xmab where qmh quantity in tons of asphalt in modified asphalt binder used in hma mhmatt modified asphalt binder hma total tons placed xam specified percentage of asphalt modifier xmab theoretical modified asphalt binder content from the job mix formula expressed as a percentage of the total weight of hma numbnum hot mix asphalt containing reclaimed asphalt pavement the engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in hma containing rap using the following formula qrap hmatt x xaa where xaa xta num xnew x xranum and qrap quantity in tons of asphalt used in hma containing rap hmatt hma total tons placed xaa asphalt content of hma adjusted to account for the asphalt content in rap expressed as a percentage of the total weight of hma xta total asphalt content of hma expressed as a percentage of the total weight of hma xnew theoretical percentage of new aggregate in the hma containing rap determined from the rap percentage in the job mix formula xra asphalt content of rap expressed as percentage numbnum tack coat the engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in tack coat qtc as either of the following section num payment num num .
asphalt binder using the asphalt binder total tons placed as tack coat num .
asphaltic emulsion by applying the formula in section numbnum to the asphaltic emulsion total tons placed as tack coat numbnum asphaltic emulsion the engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in asphaltic emulsions including fog seals and tack coat using the following formula qe aett x xenum where qe quantity in tons of asphalt used in asphaltic emulsions aett undiluted asphaltic emulsions total tons placed xe minimum percent residue specified in section num based on the type of emulsion used you may determine xe by submitting daily test results for asphalt residue for the asphaltic emulsion used .
if you choose this option you must num .
take num sample for every num tons but not less than num sample per day in the presence of the engineer from the delivery truck at midload from a sampling tap or thief and as follows num .
draw and discard the numst gallon num .
take num separate num gal samples num .
submit the numst sample at the time of sampling num .
furnish the numnd sample within num business days of sampling to an authorized laboratory that participates in the aashto proficiency sample program num .
submit test results from the laboratory within num business days of the sample date numbnum slurry seal the engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in slurry seals qss by applying the formula in section num numbnum to the quantity of asphaltic emulsion used in producing the slurry seal mix .
numbnum modified asphalt binder the engineer calculates the quantity of asphalt in modified asphalt binder using the following formula qmab mabtt x num xamnum where qmab quantity in tons of asphalt used in modified asphalt binder mabtt modified asphalt binder total tons placed xam specified percentage of asphalt modifier the quantity of extender oil is included in the quantity of asphalt .
numbnum other materials for materials containing asphalt not covered in sections numbnum through numbnum the engineer determines the method for calculating the quantity of asphalt qo .
numc payment adjustments the engineer includes payment adjustments for price index fluctuations in progress estimates .
if material containing asphalt is placed within num months during num estimate period the engineer calculates num separate adjustments .
each adjustment is calculated using the price index for the month in which the quantity of material containing asphalt subject to adjustment is placed in the work .
the sum of the num adjustments is used for increasing or decreasing payment in the progress estimate .
the engineer calculates each payment adjustment using the following formula pa qt x a where section num payment num pa payment adjustment in dollars for asphalt contained in materials placed in the work for a given month qt sum of all quantities of asphalt qh qrh qmh qrap qtc qe qss qmab qo a adjustment in dollars per ton of asphalt used to produce materials placed in the work rounded to the nearest num where a iuib num x ib x num tnum for an increase in the crude oil price index exceeding num percent a iuib num x ib x num tnum for a decrease in the crude oil price index exceeding num percent and iu california statewide crude oil price index for the month in which the quantity of asphalt subject to adjustment was placed in the work ib california statewide crude oil price index for the month in which the bid opening for the project occurred t sales and use tax rate expressed as a percent currently in effect in the tax jurisdiction where the material is placed .
if the tax rate information is not submitted timely the statewide sales and use tax rate is used in the payment adjustment calculations until the tax rate information is submitted .
num reserved num timerelated overhead numa general section num applies if a bid item for timerelated overhead is included in the contract .
if a bid item for timerelated overhead is included you must exclude the timerelated overhead from every other bid item price .
numb payment quantity the tro quantity does not include the number of working days to complete plant establishment work .
for a contract with a tro lump sum quantity on the bid item list the department pays you based on the following conversions num .
ls unit of measure is replaced with wday num .
lump sum quantity is replaced with the number of working days bid num .
lump sum unit price is replaced with the item total divided by the number of working days bid numc payment inclusions payment for the tro bid item includes payment for timerelated field and homeoffice overhead for the time required to complete the work .
the field office overhead includes timerelated expenses associated with the normal and recurring construction activities not directly attributed to the work including num .
salaries benefits and equipment costs of num .
project managers num .
general superintendents num .
field office managers num .
field office staff assigned to the project num .
rent num .
utilities num .
maintenance num .
security num .
supplies num .
office equipment costs for the projects field office the homeoffice overhead includes the fixed general and administrative expenses for operating your business including num .
general administration section num payment num num .
insurance num .
personnel and subcontract administration num .
purchasing num .
accounting num .
project engineering and estimating payment for the tro bid item does not include payment for num .
homeoffice overhead expenses specifically related to num .
your other contracts or other businesses num .
equipment coordination num .
material deliveries num .
consultant and legal fees num .
nontimerelated costs and expenses such as mobilization licenses permits and other charges incurred once during the contract num .
additional overhead involved in incentivedisincentive provisions to satisfy an internal milestone or multiple calendar requirements num .
additional overhead involved in performing additional work that is not a controlling activity num .
overhead costs incurred by your subcontractors of any tier or suppliers numd payment schedule for progress payments the total work completed for the tro bid item is the number of working days shown for the pay period on the weekly statement of working days form .
for progress payments the department pays a unit price equal to the lesser of the following amounts num .
price per working day as bid or as converted under section numb num .
num percent of the total bid divided by the number of original working days for a contract without plant establishment work the department pays you the balance due for the tro item total as specified in section numb .
for a contract with plant establishment work the department pays you the balance due for the tro item total in the numst progress payment after all nonplant establishment work is completed .
nume payment adjustments the overhead adjustment specified in section numc does not apply .
the department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the tro quantity except as specified in section nume .
section numdnumb does not apply to tro except as specified for the audit report below .
if the tro bid item quantity exceeds num percent of the quantity shown on the bid item list or as converted under section numb the engineer may adjust or you may request an adjustment of the unit price for the excess quantity .
for the adjustment submit an audit report within num days of the engineers request .
the report must be prepared as specified for an audit report for an overhead claim in section num numdnumb .
within num days of the engineers request make your financial records available for an audit by the state for the purpose of verifying the actual rate of tro described in your audit .
the actual rate of tro described is subject to the engineers authorization .
the department pays the authorized actual rate for tro in excess of num percent of the quantity shown on the bid item list or as converted under section numb .
the department pays for num the cost of the report the contractor pays for the other num .
the cost is determined under section num .
section num payment num num reserved num workcharacter changes the department adjusts a bid item unit price based on the difference between the cost to perform the work as planned and the cost to perform the work as changed .
the engineer determines the payment adjustment under section num .
the department adjusts payment for only the work portion that changed in character .
num progress payments numa general the department pays you based on engineerprepared monthly progress estimates .
each estimate reflects num .
total work completed during the pay period num .
change order bills if num .
submitted by the numth day of a month num .
approved by the numth day of a month num .
amount for materials on hand num .
amount earned for mobilization num .
deductions num .
withholds num .
resolved potential claims num .
payment adjustments submit certification stating the work complies with the qc procedures .
the engineer does not process a progress estimate without a signed certification .
numb schedule of values section numb applies to a lump sum bid item for which a schedule of values is specified to be submitted .
the sum of the amounts for the work units listed in the schedule of values must equal the lump sum price bid for the bid item .
obtain authorization for a schedule of values before you perform work shown on the schedule .
the department does not process a progress payment for the bid item without an authorized schedule of values .
accept progress payments for overhead profit bond costs and other fixed or administrative costs as distributed proportionally among the items listed except that for a contract with a bid item for mobilization accept progress payments for bond costs as included in the mobilization bid item .
for changed quantities of the work units listed the department adjusts payments in the same manner as specified for changed quantities of bid items under section num .
numc materials on hand a material on hand but not incorporated into the work is eligible for a progress payment if num .
listed in a special provision as eligible and is in compliance with other contract parts num .
purchased num .
invoice is submitted num .
stored within the state and you submit evidence that the stored material is subject to the departments control num .
requested on the departmentfurnished form numd mobilization numdnum general section numd applies if a bid item for mobilization is shown on the bid item list .
payments for mobilization made under section numd are in addition to the partial payments made under pub cont code num .
section num payment num section numdnum applies unless the contract includes a special provision for section numdnum that specifies section numdnum applies .
numdnum mobilization for projects except for those over water requiring marine access the department makes partial payments for mobilization under pub cont code numa except the amount of work completed does not include the amount earned for mobilization .
the partial payment amount is reduced by a prorated amount bid in excess of the maximum allowed under pub cont code numanum .
the department pays the item total for mobilization in excess of the maximum allowed under pub cont code numanum in the numst payment after contract acceptance .
numdnum mobilization for projects over water requiring marine access the department makes partial payments for mobilization under pub cont code numb except the amount of work completed does not include the amount earned for mobilization .
the partial payment amount is reduced by a prorated amount bid in excess of the maximum allowed under pub cont code numbnum .
the department pays the item total for mobilization in excess of the maximum allowed under pub cont code numbnum in the numst payment after contract acceptance .
nume withholds numenum general the department may withhold payment for noncompliance .
the department returns the noncompliance withhold in the progress payment following the correction of noncompliance except as specified in section numenum .
withholds are not retentions under pub cont code num and do not accrue interest under pub cont code num .
withholds are cumulative and independent of deductions .
section nume does not include all withholds that may be taken the department may withhold other payments as specified .
numenum progress withholds the department withholds num percent of a progress payment for noncompliant progress .
noncompliant progress occurs when num .
total days to date exceed num percent of the working days num .
percent of the working days elapsed exceeds the percent of value of the work completed by more than num percent the engineer determines the percent of the working days elapsed by dividing the total days to date by the revised contract working days and converting the quotient to a percentage .
the engineer determines the percent value of the work completed by summing payments made to date and the amount due on the current progress estimate dividing this sum by the current total estimated value of the work and converting the quotient to a percentage .
these amounts are shown on the progress payment voucher form .
when the percent of the working days elapsed minus the percent value of work completed is less than or equal to num percent the department returns the withhold in the next progress payment .
numenum performance failure withholds during each estimate period you fail to comply with a contract part including the submittal of a document as specified the department withholds a part of the progress payment except as specified below for the failure to submit a document during the last estimate period .
these documents include qc plans schedules traffic control plans and water pollution control submittals .
section num payment num for num performance failure the department withholds num percent of the progress payment but does not withhold more than num percent of the total bid .
for multiple performance failures the department withholds num percent of the progress payment but does not withhold more than num percent of the total bid .
during the last estimate period if you fail to submit a document as specified the department withholds num for each document .
the department returns the withhold within num days after receipt of the document .
numenum stop notice withholds the department may withhold payments to cover claims filed under civ code num et seq .
stop notice information may be obtained from the division of accounting office of external accounts payable .
numenum penalty withholds penalties include fines and damages that are proposed assessed or levied against you or the department by a governmental agency or private lawsuit .
penalties are also payments made or costs incurred in settling alleged violations of federal state or local laws regulations requirements or placs .
the cost incurred may include the amount spent for mitigation or correcting a violation .
if the department is assessed a penalty the department may withhold the penalty amount until the penalty disposition has been resolved .
the department may withhold penalty amounts without notifying you .
instead of the withhold you may provide a bond equal to the highest estimated liability for any disputed penalties proposed except you may not provide a bond for withholds related to labor compliance violations .
numenumenum reserved numf retentions section numf applies before january num num .
the department does not retain moneys from progress payments due to the contractor for work performed pub cont code num .
numgnumm reserved num payment after contract acceptance numa general reserved numb payment before final estimate after contract acceptance the department pays you based on the engineerprepared estimate that includes withholds and the balance due after the deduction of previous payments .
numc proposed final estimate the engineer estimates the amount of work completed and shows the amount payable in a proposed final estimate based on num .
contract items num .
payment adjustments num .
work paid by force account or agreed price num .
extra work num .
deductions submit either a written acceptance of the proposed final estimate or a claim statement postmarked or hand delivered before the numst day after receiving the proposed final estimate .
if you claim that the proposed final estimate is less than num percent of your total bid the department adjusts the final payment to cover your overhead .
the adjustment is num percent of the difference between section num payment num the total bid and the final estimate .
the department does not make this adjustment on a terminated contract .
numd final payment and claims numdnum general if you accept the proposed final estimate or do not submit a claim statement within num days of receiving the estimate the engineer provides you the final estimate and the department pays the amount due within num days .
this final estimate and payment is conclusive except as specified in sections num num num and num .
if you submit a claim statement within num days of receiving the engineers proposed final estimate the engineer provides you a semifinal estimate and the department pays the amount due within num days .
the semifinal estimate is conclusive as to the amount of work completed and the amount payable except as affected by any claims or as specified in sections num num and num .
numdnum claim statement numdnuma general for each claim submit a claim statement showing only the identification number that corresponds to the full and final potential claim record form and the final amount of the additional payment requested except num .
if the final amount of the requested payment differs from the amount requested in the full and final potential claim record form num .
for a claim for quantities withholds deductions liquidated damages or change order bills num .
for an overhead claim if the final amount of the requested payment differs from the amount requested in the full and final potential claim record form submit num .
identification number that corresponds to the full and final potential claim record form num .
final amount of additional payment requested num .
basis for the changed amount num .
contract documentation that supports the changed amount num .
statement of the reasons the contract documentation supports the claim the engineer notifies you of an omission of or a disparity in the exclusive identification number .
within num days of the notification correct the omission or disparity .
if the omission or disparity is not resolved after num days the engineer assigns a new number .
for a claim for quantities withholds deductions or change order bills submit num .
final amount of the additional payment requested num .
enough detail to enable the engineer to determine the basis and amounts of the additional payment requested numdnumb overhead claims include with an overhead claim num .
final amount of additional payment requested num .
independent cpa audit report failure to submit the audit report with an overhead claim with the claim statement is a waiver of the overhead claim and operates as a bar to arbitration on the claim pub cont code num .
the department deducts an amount for field and home office overhead paid on added work from any claim for overhead .
the value of the added work equals the value of the work completed minus the total bid .
the home office overhead deduction equals num percent of the added work .
the field office overhead deduction equals num percent of the added work .
if you intend to pursue a claim for reimbursement for field or home office overhead beyond that provided expressly by the contract section num payment num num .
notify the engineer within num days of receiving the proposed final estimate of your intent to seek reimbursement for specific overhead costs beyond that provided by the contract num .
specifically identify each claim and each date associated with each claim for which you seek reimbursement for specific overhead costs beyond that provided by the contract num .
timely submit all other claims num .
within num days of receiving the proposed final estimate submit an audit report prepared by an independent cpa including num .
calculations with supporting documentation of actual home office and project field overhead costs num .
calculations specifying the actual daily rates for both field and home office overhead not including a profit markup for the entire duration of the project expressed as a rate per working day num .
start and end dates of the actual project performance period number of working days overhead cost pools and all allocation bases used to calculate your actual field and home office overhead daily rates num .
field overhead costs from which the daily rate is calculated must be num .
allowable under num cfr num num .
supported by reliable records num .
related solely to the project num .
incurred during the actual project performance period num .
comprised of only timerelated field overhead costs num .
not a direct cost num .
homeoffice overhead costs from which the daily rate is calculated must be num .
allowable under num cfr num num .
supported by reliable records num .
incurred during the actual project performance period num .
comprised of only fixed homeoffice overhead costs num .
not a direct cost the actual rate of timerelated overhead is subject to authorization by the engineer .
the cpas audit must be performed as an examinationlevel engagement under the attestation engagements in the government auditing standards published by the comptroller general of the united states .
the cpas audit report must express an opinion of whether or not your calculations of your actual field and home office overhead daily rates comply with section numdnumb .
the attest documentation prepared by the cpa in connection with the audit must be reproduced and submitted for review with the audit report .
the department provides markups for all work paid by force account .
overhead for field and home office costs are included in the markups .
overhead claims in excess of contract markups are not allowed under the contract .
if you seek reimbursement for costs not allowed under the contract the department does not pay your cost of performing the independent cpa examination specified in section numdnumb including preparation of the audit report .
numdnumc declaration submit a declaration that includes the following language with the claim statement i declare under penalty of perjury according to the laws of the state of california that the foregoing claims with specific reference to the california false claims act govt code num et seq .
and to the extent the project contains federal funding the us false claims act num usc num et seq .
are true and correct and that this declaration was signed on ______date_______ num__ at _________________ california .
numdnumd waiver a claim is waived if num .
claim does not have a corresponding full and final potential claim record form identification number num .
claim does not have the same nature circumstances and basis of the claim as the corresponding full and final potential claim record form section num payment num num .
claim is not included in the claim statement num .
you do not comply with the claim procedures num .
you do not submit the declaration specified in section numdnumc numdnum final determination of claims failure to allow timely access to the supporting data for a claim when requested waives the claim .
the departments costs in reviewing or auditing a claim not supported by the contractors accounting or other records are damages incurred by the state within the meaning of the california false claims act .
if the engineer determines that a claim requires additional analysis the engineer schedules a review board meeting .
meet with the board of review and make a presentation supporting the claim .
after the engineer or review board finishes reviewing the claim the department makes the final determination of claims and provides it to you .
the engineer provides you a final estimate and the department pays the amount due within num days .
the final estimate is conclusive as to the amount of work completed and the amount payable except as specified in sections num num and num .
your failure to comply with the claim procedures is a bar to arbitration under pub cont code num .
num reserved num clerical errors for num years after contract acceptance estimates and payments are open to correction and adjustment for clerical errors .
either you or the department pays to the other the amount due except for clerical errors resulting in an adjustment less than num in which case no payment is made .
num arbitration pub cont code num through num provides for the resolution of contract claims by arbitration .
start arbitration by filing a complaint with the office of administrative hearings in sacramento num ca code regs num .
file the arbitration complaint no later than num days after receiving the departments final written decision on a claim pub cont code num .
num division ii general construction num general num general num general section num includes general specifications for performing construction work .
num work sequencing numa general reserved numb traffic elements if maintaining existing traffic management system elements during construction is shown on the bid item list conduct a preconstruction operational status check of the existing traffic management system elements and each elements communication status with the traffic management center before starting job site activities .
conduct the status check with the engineer and the departments traffic operations electrical representatives .
the status check must include existing traffic management system elements not shown and elements that may not be affected by your work activities .
the departments traffic operations representatives will provide you a certified list of num .
existing traffic management system elements and their locations within the project limits num .
fully functioning elements num .
nonoperational elements if maintaining existing traffic management system elements during construction is not shown or is not on the bid item list and an existing system element is discovered during the work conduct an operational status check .
this work is change order work .
numc landscaping and irrigation facilities numcnum general reserved numcnum irrigation facilities upon discovering an irrigation facility not described in the contract immediately notify the engineer .
the engineer orders the locating and protecting of the irrigation facility .
the locating and protecting is change order work .
numcnum landscaping reserved numd traffic stripes pavement markings and pavement markers before obliterating any traffic stripes pavement markings and pavement markers to be replaced at the same location reference the stripes markings and markers .
include limits and transitions with control points to reestablish the new stripes markings and markers .
submit your references to the control points at least num business days before obliterating the stripes markings and markers .
nume excavation if a difference in excess of num foot exists between the elevation of the existing pavement and the elevation of an excavation within num feet of the left edge or within num feet of the right edge of the traveled way at the end of each working day place and compact material against the vertical cut adjacent to the traveled way .
during the excavation you may use native material for this purpose except you must use structural material once you start placing the structural section .
place the material to the top of the existing pavement and taper at a slope of num horizontalvertical or flatter to the bottom of the excavation .
do not use treated base for the taper .
num time constraints reserved section num general num num training and meetings training and meetings are held at times and locations you and the engineer agree to .
num reserved num reserved num water usage section num includes general specifications for using water for construction activities .
the department encourages you to conserve water in all construction activities .
the engineer notifies you of any num water shortage or num mandate from a local water authority to ration water .
within num days of the notification submit a water conservation plan .
the plan must include num .
list of construction activities that require water num .
measures you will implement for each activity to conserve water num .
method for curing concrete other than the water method if included in the work num .
dust palliative you will use for dust control num dust control section num includes general specifications for controlling dust resulting from the work .
prevent and alleviate dust by num .
applying a dust palliative under section num num .
applying temporary soil stabilization under section num num .
managing material stockpiles under section numcnum num watering section num includes specifications for developing a water supply furnishing water and applying water .
developing a water supply includes developing a supply of water and furnishing pipes or other equipment needed to convey the water to the water application equipment .
water may be potable or nonpotable .
nonpotable water must be either recycled water or nonpotable water developed from other sources .
the sources and discharge of recycled water must comply with the waterrecycling criteria of the cdph and the requirements of the appropriate rwqcb .
obtain either a waste discharge permit or a waiver from the appropriate rwqcb for each water source .
submit a copy of the permit or waiver before using the water in the work .
if an available source of water is described in the information handout verify the quality and quantity of water .
nonpotable water must not be conveyed in tanks or drain pipes that will be used to convey potable water .
nonpotable water supplies and potable water supplies must not be connected .
nonpotable water supply tanks pipes and other conveyances of nonpotable water must be labeled nonpotable water do not drink .
each water storage tank and distribution system must be equipped with positive shutoff valves .
keep at least num mobile unit with a capacity of at least num gal the job site at all times for applying water unless all water is applied through pipes or another authorized method .
for compacting embankment material subbase base and surfacing material and for dust control apply water with equipment that will apply it uniformly .
for compaction you may use a chemical additive if authorized .
if a bid item for develop water supply is shown on the bid item list the department does not adjust the lump sum price for any increase or decrease in the quantity of water required or for change order work .
num reserved num num welding num general num general section num includes general specifications for welding where welding is specified to comply with an aws welding code .
do not perform welding using fluxcored welding electrodes that comply with aws anum enumxtnum or enumxtnum .
wherever reference is made to the following aws welding codes in the contract the year of adoption for these codes is as shown in the following table aws code year of adoption dnum num dnum num dnum num dnum num dnum num dnum num num definitions continuous inspection qc inspector must be within close proximity of all welders or welding operators such that inspections by the qc inspector of each welding activity at each welding location do not lapse for a period exceeding num minutes .
gross nonconformance rejectable indications are present in more than num percent of the tested weld length .
num quality control inspector replace clause num of aws dnum the numst paragraph of clause num of aws dnum and clause num of aws dnum with the qc inspector must be the duly assigned person who acts for and on your behalf for inspection testing and quality related matters for all welding .
the qa inspector is the authorized representative who acts for and on behalf of the engineer .
the qc inspector must be responsible for qc acceptance or rejection of materials and workmanship .
where the term inspector is used without further qualification it refers to the qc inspector .
the qc inspector must document inspection and approval of num .
all joint preparations assembly practices joint fitups and welding techniques num .
performance of each welder welding operator and tack welder on a daily basis for each day welding is performed for each inspection including fitup wps verification and final weld inspection the qc inspector must confirm and document compliance with the specifications aws welding codes and any referenced drawings .
num personnel qualifications and certifications the engineer has the authority to verify the qualifications or certifications of any welder qc inspector or ndt personnel to specified levels by retests or other means determined by the engineer .
if welding will be performed without gas shielding then qualification must also include welding without gas shielding .
replace clause num of aws dnum clause num of aws dnum and clause num of aws dnum with personnel performing ndt must be qualified and certified under american society for nondestructive testing asnt recommended practice no .
snttcnuma and the written practice of the ndt firm .
the written practice of the ndt firm must comply with or exceed the guidelines of the asnt section num welding num recommended practice no .
snttcnuma .
individuals who perform ndt review the results and prepare the written reports must be one of the following num .
certified ndt level ii technicians num .
level iii technicians certified to perform the work of level ii technicians num weld joint details if weld joint details proposed for use in the work are not prequalified under clause num of aws dnum or figure num or num of aws dnum submit the proposed wps and the intended weld joint locations .
upon authorization of the proposed joint detail locations and qualification of the proposed joint details welders and welding operators using these details must weld an additional qualification test plate using the wps variables and the weld joint detail to be used in production .
the test plate must num .
have the maximum thickness to be used in production and a minimum length of num inches .
num .
be mechanically and radiographically tested .
mechanical and radiographic testing and acceptance criteria must comply with the applicable aws codes .
if a nonprequalified weld joint configuration is proposed using a combination of wpss for work welded under aws dnum you may conduct a single test combining the wpss to be used in production if the essential variables including weld bead placement of each process are limited to those established in table num of aws dnum .
the engineer will witness all procedure qualification tests for wpss that were not previously authorized by the department .
submit an inspection request form to mets at least num days before performing any procedure qualification tests .
notify the engineer of your submittal .
witnessing of qualification tests by the engineer does not constitute authorization of the intended joint locations welding parameters or essential variables .
num nondestructive testing replace paragraph num of clause num of aws dnum with num .
if indications that exhibit these planar characteristics are present at scanning sensitivity or other evidence exists to suggest the presence of transverse cracks a more detailed evaluation of the discontinuity by other means must be performed e.g .
alternate ut techniques rt grinding or gouging for visual inspection or mt of the excavated areas .. for welds that have transverse cracks excavate the full length of the crack plus num inches of weld metal on each side adjacent to the crack and reweld .
clause num of aws dnum clause num of aws dnum and clause num of aws dnum do not apply .
the engineer may order you to perform ndt that is in addition to the visual inspection or ndt specified in the specifications or aws welding code .
the additional ndt and associated repair work is change order work .
if the ndt discloses an attempt to defraud or reveals a gross nonconformance the department does not pay for the costs associated with the repair of the deficient area the ndt of the weld and of the repair or any delays caused by the repair .
if less than num percent of ndt is specified for any weld the entire length of weld must comply with the specified acceptance criteria .
if any welding deficiencies are discovered by additional ndt ordered or performed by the engineer that uses the same ndt method as that originally specified the department does not pay for the costs associated with the repair of the deficient area including ndt of the weld and of the weld repair or any delays caused by the repair .
if any welding deficiencies are discovered by visual inspection ordered or performed by the engineer the department does not pay for the costs associated with the repair of a deficient area or any delays caused by the repair .
section num welding num num welding quality control num general section num applies to num work welded under sections num num num and num and num work in section num that must comply with an aws welding code .
section num does not apply to stud welding .
all welding requires inspection by the engineer .
you must provide continuous inspection when any welding is being performed .
num welding quality control manager assign a welding qc manager .
the welding qc manager must be registered as a civil engineer in the state or currently certified as a cwi .
num submittals numa general if welding is performed at the job site submit an inspection request form at least num business days before performing welding at the job site .
notify the engineer of your submittal .
numb welding quality control plan before submitting a welding qc plan hold a prewelding meeting to discuss the requirements for the welding qc plan .
the meeting attendees must include the engineer your welding qc manager and a representative from each entity performing welding or inspection for the contract .
for the contents format and organization required for a welding qc plan go to the mets web site .
submit num copies of a welding qc plan for each subcontractor or supplier for each item of work for which welding is performed .
submit an amended welding qc plan or an addendum to the welding qc plan for any changes to num .
wpss num .
ndt firms num .
qc personnel or procedures num .
ndt personnel or procedures num .
systems for tracking and identifying welds num .
welding personnel allow num days for the engineers review of an amended welding qc plan or an addendum to the welding qc plan .
submit num copies of each authorized qc plan and any authorized addendums .
make num copy available at each location where work is performed .
numc welding report submit a welding report within num days following the performance of any welding .
the welding report must include num .
daily production log for welding for each day that welding is performed num .
reports of all visual weld inspections and ndt performed whether specified additional or informational num .
radiographs and radiographic reports and other required ndt reports num .
summary of welding and ndt activities that occurred during the reporting period num .
reports of each application of heat straightening num .
summarized log listing the rejected lengths of weld by welder position process joint configuration and piece number num .
documentation that you have num .
evaluated all radiographs and radiograph reports and ndt and ndt reports num .
corrected all rejectable deficiencies and that all repaired welds have been reexamined using the required ndt and found acceptable section num welding num num .
reports or chart recordings of each application of any stress relieving used num .
reports and chart recordings for any electroslag welding used the daily production log must include num .
locations of all welding num .
for each location the welders names quantity of welding performed any problems or deficiencies discovered and any testing or repair work performed num .
daily report from each qc inspector clearly write the following information on the outside of radiographic film envelopes num .
name of the qc manager num .
name of the ndt firm num .
name of the radiographer num .
date num .
contract number num .
complete part description num .
all included weld numbers report numbers and station markers or views as detailed in the welding qc plan clearly write on all interleaves the part description and all included weld numbers and station markers or views as detailed in the welding qc plan .
use a maximum of num pieces of film for each interleave .
the qc inspector or certified technician must sign all visual inspection and ndt reports and submit them daily to the welding qc manager for review and signature before submittal to the engineer .
corresponding names must be clearly printed or typewritten adjacent to all signatures .
the engineer reviews the welding report to determine whether you are complying with the welding qc plan and the contract .
except for field welded steel pipe piling and field welded bar reinforcement in cip concrete piling num .
allow the engineer num days to review the report .
num .
you may encase in concrete or cover welds for which the welding report has been submitted before receiving authorization of the welding report .
if you choose this option you will not be relieved of the responsibility for incorporating material in the work that complies with the contract .
material not complying with the contract is subject to rejection .
for field welded steel pipe piling and field welded bar reinforcement in cip concrete piling num .
allow the engineer num business days to review the welding report num .
do not install the steel pipe piling or encase the reinforcement in concrete until the engineer has authorized the welding report numd certificates of compliance submit a certificate of compliance for each item of work for which welding is performed .
the certificate must be signed by the welding qc manager .
the certificate must state that all of the materials and workmanship incorporated in the work and all required tests and inspections of this work have been performed in compliance with the contract .
num personnel qualifications and certifications clauses num and num of aws dnum the numnd paragraph of clause num of aws dnum clauses num through num of aws dnum and clause num of aws dnum are replaced with the qc inspector must be currently certified as an aws certified welding inspector under aws qcnum .
the qc inspector may be assisted by an assistant qc inspector provided that this individual is currently certified as an aws certified associate welding inspector under aws qcnum .
the assistant qc inspector may perform inspection under the direct supervision of the qc inspector provided the assistant is always within visible and audible range of the qc inspector .
the qc inspector must be responsible for signing all reports and for determining if welded materials comply with the section num welding num workmanship and acceptance criteria .
the ratio of qc assistants to qc inspectors must not exceed num to num .
welding inspection personnel or ndt firms to be used in the work must not be employed or compensated by any subcontractor or by other persons or entities hired by subcontractors who will provide other services or materials for the contract unless one of the following conditions is met num .
work is welded at a permanent fabrication or manufacturing plant that is certified under the aisc certification program for steel bridge fabricators intermediate bridges and fracturecritical member endorsement if required .
num .
structural steel for building construction work is performed at a permanent fabrication or manufacturing plant that is certified under the aisc quality certification program category std standard for steel building structures .
except for the exempt facilities identified above an authorized independent third party must witness the qualification tests for welders or welding operators .
the independent third party must be currently certified as a cwi and must not be an employee of the contractor performing the welding .
allow num days for the engineer to review the qualifications and copy of the current certification of the independent third party .
num welding inspection replace clause num of aws dnum with the qc inspector must inspect and approve each joint preparation assembly practice welding technique joint fitup and the performance of each welder welding operator and tack welder to make certain that the applicable requirements of this code and the qualified wps are met .
the qc inspector must examine the work to make certain that it complies with clauses num and num .
the size and contour of all welds must be measured using suitable gauges .
visual inspection for cracks in welds and base metal and for other discontinuities must be aided by strong light magnifiers or other devices as necessary .
you may use acceptance criteria different from those specified in this code if authorized .
num welding procedures qualification welding procedures qualification for work welded under aws dnum must comply with clause num or num of aws dnum and the following num .
unless considered prequalified qualify fillet welds in each position .
conduct the fillet weld soundness test using the essential variables of the wps as established by the pqr .
num .
for qualifying joints that do not comply with figures num and num of aws dnum conduct the test complying with figure num using the welding parameters that were established for the test conducted complying with figure num .
num .
macroetch tests are required for wps qualification tests and acceptance must comply with clause num of aws dnum .
num .
if a nonstandard weld joint is to be made using a combination of wpss you may conduct a test under figure num combining the qualified or prequalified wpss to be used in production if the essential variables including weld bead placement of each process are limited to those established in table num of aws dnum .
num .
before preparing mechanical test specimens inspect the pqr welds by visual and radiographic tests .
the backing bar must be num inches in width and must remain in place during ndt .
results of the visual and radiographic tests must comply with clause num of aws dnum excluding clause num .
all other requirements for clause num are applicable .
num repair work notify the engineer immediately if you discover welding problems deficiencies base metal repairs or any other type of repairs not included in the welding qc plan .
submit the proposed repair procedures to correct them .
allow the engineer num days to review the repair procedures .
you must receive authorization before performing section num welding num num .
numrdtime excavations of welds or base metal to repair unacceptable discontinuities regardless of ndt method num .
repairs of cracks num .
repairs not included in the welding qc plan requests to perform numrdtime excavations repairs of cracks or repairs not included in the welding qc plan must include an engineering evaluation .
at a minimum the engineering evaluation must address num .
cause of each defect num .
why the repair will not degrade the material properties num .
what steps are being taken to prevent similar defects from happening again num welding for overhead sign structures standards and poles num general section num applies to work welded under sections num and num .
fabricate overhead sign structures standards and poles at a plant on the authorized facility audit list .
num welding inspection welding inspection personnel or ndt firms to be used in the work must not be employed or compensated by any subcontractor or by other persons or entities hired by subcontractors who provide other services or materials for the contract except for welding performed at a permanent fabrication or manufacturing plant that is certified under the aisc quality certification program .
the aisc certification category for overhead sign structures is bridge and highway metal component cpt or simple steel bridge structures sbr .
the aisc certification category for pole structures is bridge and highway metal component cpt or standard for steel building structures std .
num submittals submit a welding report under section numc except submit the welding report num business days before submitting the certificate of compliance .
num reserved num num temporary traffic control num general num general section num includes general specifications for providing temporary traffic control .
temporary traffic control including flagging apparel temporary traffic control devices and equipment for flaggers must comply with the california mutcd part num temporary traffic control .
num materials not used num construction assign flaggers to num .
control traffic num .
warn the public of any dangerous conditions resulting from the work activities num .
provide for the passage of traffic through the work as specified for the passage of traffic for public convenience and public safety maintain flagging apparel traffic control devices and equipment for flaggers in good repair .
num payment the department determines the cost of furnishing flaggers including transporting flaggers as specified for force account work and pays you num of that cost .
num reserved num temporary traffic control devices num general numa general numanum summary section num includes general specifications for providing temporary traffic control devices .
providing temporary traffic control devices includes installing placing maintaining repairing replacing and removing temporary traffic control devices .
do not use different types of channelizing devices on the same alignment .
the types include plastic drums portable delineators channelizers tubular markers traffic cones and type i and type ii barricades .
numanum definitions category num temporary traffic control devices small devices weighing less than num lb certified as crashworthy by crash testing or crash testing of similar devices .
category num temporary traffic control devices include traffic cones plastic traffic drums portable delineators and channelizers .
category num temporary traffic control devices small devices weighing less than num lb that are not expected to produce significant changes in vehicular velocity but could cause harm to impacting vehicles .
category num temporary traffic control devices include barricades and portable sign supports .
category num temporary traffic control devices devices weighing num lb or more that are expected to produce significant changes in the vehicular velocity of impacting vehicles .
category num temporary traffic control devices include crash cushions impact attenuator vehicles temporary railing temporary barrier and end treatments for temporary railings and barriers .
orange orange redorange fluorescent orange or fluorescent redorange .
useable shoulder area any longitudinal paved or unpaved contiguous surface adjacent to the traveled way with num .
enough weightbearing capacity to support temporary traffic control devices such as flashing arrow signs pcmss and impact attenuator vehicles section num temporary traffic control num num .
slope not greater than num horizontalvertical numanum submittals if requested submit the following as informational submittals num .
selfcertification for crashworthiness of category num temporary traffic control devices at least num business days before starting any work using the devices or within num business days after the request if the devices are already in use .
either you or the manufacturer must perform the selfcertification .
include the following information num .
date num .
federal aid number for a federalaid contract num .
contract number district county route and post miles of the project limits num .
company name street address city state and zip code of the certifying vendor num .
printed name signature and title of the certifying person num .
types of category num temporary traffic control devices num .
list of proposed category num temporary traffic control devices at least num business days before starting any work using the devices or within num business days after the request if the devices are already in use .
obtain a standard form for selfcertification from the engineer .
submit a sample of the type of portable delineator that you will be using before placing the delineators on the job site .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials the condition of temporary traffic control devices must comply with the most current edition of the american traffic safety services association publication quality guidelines for temporary traffic control devices and features .
category num temporary traffic control devices must be on fhwas list of acceptable crashworthy category num hardware for work zones .
for this list go to fhwas safety program website .
category num temporary traffic control devices must be labeled with the fhwa acceptance letter code and the name of the manufacturer .
the label must be legible and permanently affixed to the temporary traffic control device by the manufacturer .
category num temporary traffic control devices must be on the authorized material list for highway safety features .
retroreflectivity for the following materials must comply with table numanum minimum maintained retroreflectivity levels of the california mutcd and be on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials num .
retroreflective sheeting for barricades num .
retroreflective bands for portable delineators num .
retroreflective sheeting for construction area signs num .
retroreflective sheeting for channelizers num .
reflectors for type k temporary railing num .
retroreflective cone sleeves num .
white and orange retroreflective stripes for plastic traffic drums the following temporary traffic control devices must be visible from num feet during the hours of darkness under an illumination of legal highbeam headlights by persons with num vision or vision corrected to num num .
retroreflective bands on portable delineators num .
retroreflective sheeting on channelizers num .
retroreflective cone sleeves on traffic cones section num temporary traffic control num numc construction perform all layout work necessary to place channelizing devices num .
on the proper alignment num .
uniformly at the location and spacing described num .
straight on a tangent alignment num .
on a true arc in a curved alignment if temporary traffic control devices are damaged displaced or stop operating or functioning as described from any cause during the progress of the work immediately repair repaint or replace the components and restore them to their original locations and positions .
if ordered furnish and place additional temporary traffic control devices .
this work is change order work unless the temporary traffic control devices are being furnished and placed for public safety or public convenience .
numd payment not used num traffic cones numa general section num includes specifications for placing traffic cones .
numb materials a traffic cone must be flexible orange and manufactured from commercialquality material designed for the intended purpose .
the outer section of the portion above the base of the traffic cone must be translucent and fabricated of a highly pigmented orange pv compound .
the overall height of a traffic cone must be at least num inches and the bottom inside diameter of the traffic cone must be at least num inches .
during the hours of darkness a traffic cone must have a retroreflective cone sleeve .
retroreflective cone sleeves must be one of the following types num .
removable flexible retroreflective cone sleeves fabricated from numinchwide retroreflective sheeting with the cone sleeves placed a maximum of num inches from the top of the cone .
do not use the sleeves during daylight hours .
num .
permanently affixed semitransparent retroreflective cone sleeves fabricated from numinchwide semitransparent retroreflective sheeting with the cone sleeves placed a maximum of num inches from the top of the cone .
you may use traffic cones with semitransparent retroreflective cone sleeves during daylight hours .
num .
permanently affixed doubleband retroreflective cone sleeves consisting of num white retroreflective bands .
the top band must be num inches wide and placed a maximum of num inches from the top of the cone .
the lower band must be num inches wide placed num inches below the bottom of the top band .
you may use traffic cones with doubleband retroreflective cone sleeves during daylight hours .
numc construction use the same type of retroreflective cone sleeve for all cones used on the project .
anchor the base of a traffic cone if it does not have enough size and weight to keep the cone in an upright position .
numd payment not used section num temporary traffic control num num plastic traffic drums numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for placing plastic traffic drums .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit a certificate of compliance for plastic traffic drums .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials a plastic traffic drum must comply with the manufacturers instructions for weight and ballast .
a plastic traffic drum must num .
be orange ldpe num .
be flexible and collapsible upon vehicle impact num .
have a weighted base to maintain an upright position and prevent displacement by passing traffic num .
have a height such that the top of the drum is at least num inches above the traveled way the weighted base must num .
be detachable num .
be shaped to prevent rolling upon impact num .
have a numinch maximum outside diameter num .
have a numinch maximum height above the ground surface numc construction use num type of plastic traffic drum on the project .
use the same type and brand of retroreflective sheeting for all plastic traffic drums used on the project .
do not use sandbags or comparable ballast .
moving plastic traffic drums from location to location if ordered after initial placement is change order work .
numd payment not used num portable delineators numa general section num includes specifications for placing portable delineators .
numb materials a portable delineator including its base must be made of a material that has enough rigidity to remain upright when unattended and must be flexible or collapsible upon impact by a vehicle .
the base must be num shaped to prevent rolling after impact and num anchored or weigh enough to keep the delineator in an upright position .
ballast for a portable delineator must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
a portable delineator must be a minimum of num inches in height .
the vertical portion of a portable delineator must be predominantly orange .
the post must be not less than num inches in width or diameter .
retroreflectorization of a portable delineator that has a height of less than num inches must be provided by two numinchwide white bands placed a maximum of num inches from the top with a maximum of num inches between the bands .
retroreflectorization of a portable delineator that has a height of num inches or more section num temporary traffic control num must be provided by four num to numinchwide alternating orange and white stripes with the top stripe being orange .
numc construction use only num type of portable delineator on the project .
numd payment not used num channelizers numa general section num includes specifications for placing channelizers .
numb materials a channelizer must be on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials .
its post must be orange .
a channelizer must be affixed with numbynuminch retroreflective white sheeting .
numc construction install channelizers on clean dry surfaces .
cement the channelizer bases to the pavement as specified for cementing pavement markers to the pavement in section num .
when no longer required for the work remove the channelizers and the underlying adhesive used to cement the channelizer bases to the pavement .
do not remove channelizers that are shown to be left in place at the time of work completion .
numd payment not used num reserved num barricades numa general section num includes specifications for placing barricades .
numb materials markings for barricade rails must be alternating orange and white retroreflective stripes .
orange retroreflective sheeting must match color pr no .
num highway orange of the fhwa color tolerance chart .
the interface between the rail surface and the retroreflective sheeting must be free of air bubbles or voids .
the predominant color of barricade components other than the rails must be white or unpainted galvanized metal or aluminum .
you may use a type iii barricade as a sign support if the barricade has been successfully crash tested under nchrp report num criteria as a single unit with an attached sign panel of the size and type to be used .
a sign panel for a construction area sign or marker panel to be mounted on a barricade must comply with section numbnum .
do not imprint an owner identification on the retroreflective face of any rail .
numc construction place each barricade such that the stripes slope downward in the direction road users are to pass .
section num temporary traffic control num place each sandfilled bag near the ground level on the lower parts of the frame or stays to serve as ballast for the barricades .
do not place ballast on top of barricades or over any retroreflective barricade rail face that is facing traffic .
do not remove barricades that are shown to be left in place at the time of work completion .
moving a barricade from location to location is change order work if ordered after initial placement of the barricade .
numd payment not used num construction area signs numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for placing construction area signs .
construction area signs include all temporary signs and object markers required for the direction of traffic through or within the project limits and general information signs .
numanum definitions background dominant sign color .
legend letters numerals tildes bars arrows route shields symbols logos borders artwork and miscellaneous characters that are intended to convey specific meanings on traffic signs .
numanum submittals reserved numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials numbnum general a construction area sign must be the product of a commercial sign manufacturer and have type iii or higher grade retroreflective sheeting .
the style font size and spacing of the legend must comply with the standard alphabets published in the fhwas standard highway signs book .
the sign must be visible from num feet and legible from num feet at noon on a cloudless day and during the hours of darkness under an illumination of legal lowbeam headlights by persons with num vision or vision corrected to num .
a fabric sign panel on a portable sign is not subject to the visibility and legibility requirements for headlight illumination during the hours of darkness .
a construction area warning or guide sign must have a black legend on a retroreflective orange background .
a wnum advance warning sign for highwayrail grade crossings must have a black legend on a retroreflective yellow background .
numbnum stationarymounted signs materials for a stationarymounted sign must comply with section num for the type of panel involved .
a temporary sign support of any type placed within num feet from the edge of the traveled way must comply with the specifications for a category num temporary traffic control device .
the sign post must be good sound wood posts with the breakaway feature as shown for a roadside sign .
fastening hardware and back braces must be commercialquality materials .
numbnum portable signs each portable sign must consist of a base standard or framework and a sign panel .
units delivered to the job site must be capable of being placed into immediate operation .
section num temporary traffic control num a sign panel for a portable sign must comply with the specifications for a stationarymounted sign panel or be fabricated from one of the following materials num .
type vi retroreflective elastomeric rollup fabric on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials num .
nonretroreflective cotton drill fabric num .
nonretroreflective flexible industrial nylon fabric num .
another type of fabric if authorized do not use nonretroreflective portable signs during the hours of darkness .
the bottom of the portable sign panel must be at least num foot above the edge of the traveled way .
numbnum temporary object markers a temporary object marker must be mounted on a stationary wood or metal post and must comply with section num .
a marker panel for a type n ca type p ca or type r ca object marker must comply with the specifications for a marker panel for a stationary sign panel in section numbnum .
a target plate post and the hardware for a type k ca and type l ca temporary object marker must comply with the specifications for these items in section num .
numbnum general information signs reserved numc construction numcnum general place all construction area signs outside of the traveled way .
do not block a bicycle or pedestrian pathway with a construction area sign .
place install maintain and remove temporary object markers shown as construction area signs as specified for construction area signs .
maintain accurate information on construction area signs .
immediately replace or correct signs that convey inaccurate information .
during the progress of work immediately cover or remove unneeded signs .
cover each unneeded sign such that the message can not be seen .
securely fasten the cover to prevent movement from wind .
check each covered sign daily for damage to the cover and immediately replace any cover if needed .
clean each construction area sign panel at the time of installation and at least once every num months thereafter .
be prepared to furnish additional construction area sign panels posts and mounting hardware or portable sign mounts on short notice due to changing traffic conditions or damage caused by traffic or other conditions .
maintain an inventory of commonly required items at the job site or make arrangements with a supplier who is able to furnish the items daily on short notice .
replace any damaged construction area sign or repair the sign if authorized .
remove any sign panel that exhibits irregular luminance shadowing or dark blotches at nighttime under vehicular headlight illumination .
numcnum stationarymounted signs install stationarymounted signs as described for the installation of roadside signs except num .
back braces and blocks for sign panels are not required for signs num inches or smaller in width and diamondshaped signs num by num inches or smaller .
num .
bottom of the sign panel must be at least num feet above the edge of the traveled way .
section num temporary traffic control num num .
you may install a construction area sign on an aboveground temporary platform sign support or on an existing lighting standard or other support if authorized .
do not make holes in a standard to support the sign if it is installed on an existing lighting standard .
num .
post embedment must be at least num feet if the post hole is backfilled around the post with commercialquality concrete .
the concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
the engineer determines the post size and number of posts if the type of sign installation is not shown .
excavate each post hole by hand methods without the use of power equipment .
you may use power equipment where you determine that subsurface utilities are not present in the area of the proposed post hole if authorized .
the posthole diameter must be at least num inches greater than the longest cross sectional dimension of the post if it is backfilled with commercialquality concrete .
furnishing installing maintaining moving and removing any additional construction area signs if ordered is change order work .
numcnum general information signs reserved numd payment not used num telescoping flag trees numa general section num includes specifications for placing telescoping flag trees .
numb materials telescoping flag trees must be manufactured from commercialquality material designed for the intended purpose and capable of maintaining an upright position at all times while in use .
numc construction not used numd payment not used num reserved num type k temporary railing numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for placing type k temporary railing and type k temporary terminal sections .
type k temporary railing must consist of interconnected pc concrete barrier panels .
you may have your name or logo on each panel of type k temporary railing .
the name or logo must not be more than num inches in height and must be located not more than num inches above the bottom of the rail panel .
reinforcing steel must comply with section num .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit a certificate of compliance for type k temporary railing not cast at the job site .
numanum quality assurance reserved section num temporary traffic control num numb materials numbnum general concrete must comply with the specifications for minor concrete except load tickets and a certificate of compliance are not required .
steel bars to receive bolts at the ends of the concrete panels must comply with astm anumanumm .
the bolts must comply with astm anum .
you may substitute a round bar of the same diameter for the endconnecting bolt shown .
if a round bar is used the round bar must num .
comply with astm anumanumm num .
have a minimum length of num inches num .
have a numinchdiameter numinchthick plate welded on the upper end using a numinch fillet weld the final surface finish of the railing must comply with section numfnum .
cure the exposed surfaces of the railing by the water method the formsinplace method or the curing compound method using curing compound no .
num .
numbnum type k temporary terminal section the closure plate for a type k temporary terminal section must be a white commercialquality steel plate shaped to conform to the cross section of the barrier .
the mechanical expansion anchors for connecting the closure plate to the railings must comply with section num for concrete anchorage devices .
numc construction numcnum general before placing type k temporary railing on the job site paint the exposed surfaces of the railing with white paint complying with the specifications for acrylic emulsion paint for exterior masonry .
the repainting of the units is change order work if it is ordered after the units are in place .
place type k temporary railing on a firm stable foundation .
grade the foundation to provide a uniform bearing surface throughout the entire length of the railing .
structure excavation and backfill must comply with section num except compaction of earth fill placed behind type k temporary railing in a curved layout is not required .
place and maintain the abutting ends of pc concrete units in alignment without substantial offset from each other .
the drilling of holes and bonding of threaded rods or dowels must comply with the specifications for drilling and bonding dowels in section num .
install a reflector on the top or face of the rail of each rail unit placed within num feet of a traffic lane .
apply adhesive for mounting the reflector under the reflector manufacturers instructions .
install a type p marker panel at each end of railing placed adjacent to a numlane twoway highway and at the end facing traffic for railing installed adjacent to a oneway roadbed .
if the railing is placed on a skew install the marker at the end of the skew nearest the traveled way .
type p marker panels must comply with section num except you must furnish the marker panels .
after removing type k temporary railing num .
restore the area to its previous condition or construct it to its planned condition if temporary excavation or embankment was used to accommodate the railing .
num .
remove all threaded rods or dowels to a depth of at least num inch below the surface of the concrete .
fill the resulting holes with mortar under section num except cure the mortar by the water method or by the curing compound method using curing compound no .
num .
if the engineer orders a lateral move of type k temporary railing and repositioning is not shown the lateral move is change order work and the railing is not measured in the new position .
section num temporary traffic control num numcnum type k temporary terminal section when the type k temporary terminal section is no longer required remove the anchor bolts connecting the closure plate to the concrete barrier or cut the bolts flush with the face of the barrier .
if the anchor bolts are removed fill the holes with grout .
numd payment the payment quantity for temporary railing type k is the length measured along the top of the railing .
num temporary traffic screens numa general section num includes specifications for installing temporary traffic screens .
numb materials temporary traffic screen panels must be cdx grade or better plywood or weatherresistant strand board .
wale boards must be douglas fir rough sawn construction grade or better .
pipe screen supports must be schedule num galvanized steel pipe .
nuts bolts and washers must be cadmium plated .
screws must be black or cadmiumplated flat head crossslotted screws with fullthread length .
numc construction install and anchor temporary traffic screens to the top of the type k temporary railing .
the temporary traffic screen must have numfootlong openings spaced at numfoot intervals .
a lateral move of type k temporary railing with attached temporary traffic screen is change order work if ordered and repositioning is not shown .
numd payment the payment quantity for temporary traffic screen is the length measured along the line of the screen with no deductions for openings in the temporary traffic screen .
num temporary crash cushion modules numa general section num includes specifications for placing sandfilled temporary crash cushion modules in groupings or arrays .
if activities expose traffic to a fixed obstacle protect the traffic from the obstacle with a sandfilled temporary crash cushion .
the crash cushion must be in place before opening traffic lanes adjacent to the obstacle .
numb materials each sandfilled temporary crash cushion module must be manufactured after march num num and be on the authorized material list for highway safety features .
the color of each module must be standard yellow with black lids as furnished by the manufacturer .
each module must be free from structural flaws and objectionable surface defects .
for a module requiring a seal the top edge of the seal must be securely fastened to the wall of the module by a continuous strip of heavyduty tape .
fill each module with sand under the manufacturers instructions and to the sand capacity in pounds for each module shown .
sand for filling the modules must be clean commercialquality washed concrete sand .
when sand is placed in a module the sand must contain no more than num percent water when tested under california test num .
numc construction use the same type of crash cushion module for a single grouping or array .
temporary crash cushion arrays must not encroach on the traveled way .
section num temporary traffic control num secure the sandfilled modules in place before starting an activity requiring a temporary crash cushion .
maintain sandfilled temporary crash cushions in place at each location including times when work is not actively in progress .
you may remove the crash cushions during the work shift for access to the work if the exposed fixed obstacle is num feet or more from the nearest lane carrying traffic .
reset the crash cushion before the end of the work shift .
immediately repair sandfilled temporary crash cushion modules damaged due to your activities .
remove and replace any module damaged beyond repair .
repair and replacement of temporary crash cushion modules damaged by traffic are change order work .
you may place sandfilled temporary crash cushion modules on movable pallets or frames complying with the dimensions shown .
the pallets or frames must provide a fullbearing base beneath the modules .
do not move the modules and supporting pallets or frames by sliding or skidding along the pavement or bridge deck .
attach a type r or type p marker panel to the front of the temporary crash cushion if the closest point of the crash cushion array is within num feet of the traveled way .
firmly fasten the marker panel to the crash cushion with commercial quality hardware or by other authorized methods .
attach the type r marker panel such that the top of the panel is num inch below the module lid .
attach the type p marker panel such that the bottom of the panel rests upon the pallet or roadway surface if pallets are not used .
a lateral move of a temporary crash cushion module is change order work if ordered and the repositioning is not shown .
remove sandfilled temporary crash cushion modules including sand pallets or frames and marker panels at contract acceptance .
do not install sandfilled temporary crash cushion modules in the permanent work .
numd payment the payment quantity for temporary crash cushion module does not include num .
modules placed for public safety num .
modules placed in excess of the number described num .
repositioned modules num impact attenuator vehicles numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for using impact attenuator vehicles .
numanum definitions impact attenuator vehicle support truck towing a deployed attenuator mounted to a trailer or a support truck with a deployed attenuator mounted to the support truck .
numanum submittals submit a certificate of compliance for each attenuator .
numanum quality assurance before using an impact attenuator vehicle conduct a meeting with the engineer subcontractors and other parties involved with traffic control to discuss the operation of the impact attenuator vehicle during moving lane closures and when placing and removing components of a stationary traffic control system .
schedule the location time and date for the meeting with all participants .
furnish a meeting facility located within num miles of the job site or at another location if authorized .
numb materials an impact attenuator vehicle must be on the authorized material list for highway safety features .
the vehicle must comply with veh code div num .
section num temporary traffic control num each attenuator must be individually identified with the manufacturers name address attenuator model number and a specific serial number .
the name and number must be a minimum num inch high and located on the left street side lower front corner .
an impact attenuator vehicle must comply with the following test levels as specified in the national cooperative highway research program report num num .
test level num if the preconstruction posted speed limit is num mph or more num .
test level num or num if the preconstruction posted speed limit is num mph or less the impact attenuator vehicle must comply with the attenuator manufacturers instructions for num .
support truck except the weight of the support truck must be within the allowable vehicle weight limits shown on the authorized material list for highway safety features and the manufacturers instructions num .
trailermounted attenuator num .
truckmounted attenuator a flashing arrow sign must comply with section num except you may use a pcms instead of a flashing arrow sign .
a pcms used as a flashing arrow sign must comply with the specifications for an arrow board in the california mutcd .
each impact attenuator vehicle must have num .
inverted v chevron pattern placed across the entire rear of the attenuator composed of alternating num inchwide nonreflective black stripes and numinchwide yellow retroreflective stripes sloping at num degrees num .
type ii flashing arrow sign num .
flashing or rotating amber light num .
operable numway communication system for maintaining contact with workers numc construction do not use an impact attenuator vehicle until authorized .
monitor the placement and use of the attenuator vehicle on a regular basis and adjust the use of the attenuator to match changing field conditions as construction progresses .
after placing the components of a stationary traffic control system you may place the impact attenuator vehicle in advance of the work area or at another authorized location to protect traffic and workers .
secure objects including equipment tools and ballast on impact attenuator vehicles to prevent their loosening upon impact by an errant vehicle .
do not use a damaged attenuator in the work .
replace any attenuator damaged from an impact during work activities .
numd payment not used num reserved num flashing arrow signs numa general section num includes specifications for placing flashing arrow signs .
numb materials a flashing arrow sign must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num temporary traffic control num flashing arrow sign requirements type panel size min inches number of panel lights min legibility distancea min miles i num x num num num ii num x num num num athe legibility distance is the distance that a flashing arrow sign must be legible at noon on a cloudless day and during the hours of darkness by persons with num vision or vision corrected to num .
a flashing arrow sign must be finished with commercialquality nonreflective black enamel and must be equipped with yellow or amber lamps that form arrows or arrowheads .
each lamp must be equipped with a visor and the lamps must be controlled by an electronic circuit that provides from num to num complete operating cycles per minute for each of the displays and modes specified .
the control must be capable of dimming the lamps by reducing the voltage to num num percent for nighttime use .
type i signs must have both manual and automatic photoelectricdimming controls .
dimming in both modes must be continuously variable over the entire dimming range .
a flashing arrow sign must be capable of operating in the following display modes num .
pass left display num .
pass right display num .
simultaneous display num .
caution display or alternating diamond a flashing arrow sign must be capable of operating in the flashing arrow mode or the sequential mode .
in the flashing arrow mode all lamps forming the arrowhead and shaft must flash on and off simultaneously .
in the sequential mode either arrowheads or arrows must flash sequentially in the direction indicated .
in the simultaneous display mode the lamps forming both the right and left arrowheads and the lamps forming the arrow shaft or center num lamps for type i signs must flash simultaneously .
for type ii signs the lamps forming the right and left arrowhead but not the center lamp may be illuminated continuously the lamps forming the shaft and the center lamp of the arrowheads must flash on and off simultaneously .
in the caution display mode a combination of lamps not resembling any other display or mode must flash .
each flashing arrow sign must be num .
mounted on a truck or trailer num .
capable of operating when the vehicle is moving num .
capable of being placed and maintained in operation at locations described a type ii flashing arrow sign must be controllable by the operator of the vehicle while the vehicle is in motion .
the bottom of the flashing arrow sign must be a minimum of num feet above the roadway when mounted .
the trailer for a flashing arrow sign must be equipped with num devices to level and plumb the sign and num a supply of electrical energy capable of operating the sign .
numc construction not used numd payment not used num portable flashing beacons numa general section num includes specifications for placing portable flashing beacons .
section num temporary traffic control num numb materials each portable flashing beacon must have num .
standard and base num .
lighting unit num .
flasher unit num .
battery power source the components must be assembled to form a complete selfcontained flashing beacon that can be delivered to the job site and placed into immediate operation .
the lens for the beacon lighting unit must have a visible diameter of num inches .
the lens must be glass or plastic complying with ansi dnum for a yellow traffic signal lens .
the beacon lighting unit must be equipped with a visor and backplate except a visor is not required during hours of darkness .
the visor must be at least num inches long .
the flasher unit must be capable of flashing from num to num flashes per minute with a dwell time from num to num milliseconds .
the standard must be adjustable to allow variable mounting of the lighting unit from num to num feet measured from the bottom of the base to the center of the lens and be capable of being secured at the desired height .
the standard must be securely attached to the base and have a length of multiconductor neoprenejacketed cable long enough for the full vertical height .
the base must be num large enough to accommodate at least two num v automotivetype storage batteries and num a shape and weight such that the beacon will not roll if struck by a vehicle or pushed over .
the lamp must be rated at num w for operation on num v battery current .
the flashing beacon must be weatherproof and must be capable of operating a minimum of num hours between battery recharging and other routine maintenance .
the standard and base must be finished with num applications of commercialquality enamel matching color no .
num of fedstdnum .
the interior of the visor and the front face of the backplate must be finished with num applications of commercialquality nonreflective black enamel .
numc construction remove portable flashing beacons from the traveled way at the end of each nights work .
you may store the flashing beacon at selected central locations within the highway where designated by the engineer .
moving portable flashing beacons from location to location if ordered after initial placement is change order work .
numd payment the payment quantity for flashing beacon portable is the number of portable flashing beacon locations with each location counting as num measurement unit .
num portable changeable message signs numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for placing portable changeable message signs .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals if requested submit a certificate of compliance for each pcms .
submit your cell phone number before starting activities that require a pcms .
section num temporary traffic control num numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials each trailermounted pcms must consist of a controller unit a power supply and a structural support system .
the unit must be assembled to form a complete selfcontained pcms that can be delivered to the job site and placed into immediate operation .
the sign unit must be capable of operating in an ambient air temperature from num to num degrees f and must be unaffected by unauthorized mobileradio transmissions .
the trailer must be capable of being leveled and plumbed .
the text displayed on a sign must not scroll or travel horizontally or vertically across the face of the message panel .
the sign panel must be capable of displaying a numline message with at least num characters per line .
the characters must be at least num inches in height where the useable shoulder area is at least num feet wide .
to prevent encroachment onto the traveled way where the useable shoulder area is less than num feet wide you may use a smaller message panel with at least numinchhigh characters .
the message displayed on the sign must be visible from a distance of num feet and legible from a distance of num feet at noon on a cloudless day by persons with num vision or vision corrected to num .
the sign face must be nonreflective black and protected from the glare of the sun by a method that does not interfere with the clarity of the sign message .
the sign must be raised and lowered by means of a powerdriven lifting mechanism .
matrix signs must provide a complete alphanumeric selection .
matrixtype signs using lamps must be equipped with an automaticdimming mode that automatically compensates for the influence of temporary light sources or abnormal lighting conditions .
the sign must have num or more manual dimming modes of different lamp intensities .
during the hours of darkness matrix signs not using lamps must be either internally or externally illuminated .
the controller must be an all solidstate unit containing the necessary circuitry for the storage of at least num preprogrammed messages .
the controller must be installed at a location that allows the operator to perform all functions from a single position .
the controller must have a keyboard entry system that allows the operator to generate an infinite number of additional messages in addition to the preprogrammed stored messages .
the keyboard must be equipped with a security lockout feature to prevent unauthorized use of the controller .
the controller must have num .
nonvolatile memory that stores keyboardcreated messages during periods when the power is not activated num .
variable display rate that allows the operator to match the information display to the speed of approaching traffic the flashingoff time must be adjustable from within the control cabinet .
numc construction place a pcms as far from the traveled way as practicable where it is legible to approaching traffic without encroaching on the traveled way .
where the vertical roadway curvature restricts the sight distance of approaching traffic place the sign on or before the crest of the curvature where it is most visible to the approaching traffic .
where the horizontal roadway curvature restricts the sight distance of approaching traffic place the portable sign at or before the curve where it is most visible to approaching traffic .
where practicable place a sign behind guardrail or type k temporary railing .
make a taper consisting of num traffic cones placed num feet apart to delineate the location of a pcms except where the sign is placed behind guardrail or type k temporary railing .
section num temporary traffic control num when in full operation the bottom of a sign must be at least num feet above the ground and the top of the sign must be not more than num feet above the ground .
operate the pcms under the manufacturers instructions .
display only messages shown or ordered .
repeat the entire message continuously in not more than num phases of at least num seconds per phase .
approaching drivers must be able to read the entire message at least num times before passing the sign at the posted speed limit .
use more than num sign to comply with this requirement if necessary .
you must be available by cell phone during activities that require a sign .
be prepared to change the displayed message immediately upon request .
you may operate the sign with a numhour timer control or remote control if authorized .
after the initial placement move a sign from location to location as directed by the engineer .
when not in use move unprotected signs to an area at least num feet from the edge of the traveled way or remove them from the job site away from traffic .
numd payment not used num temporary signal systems numa general section num includes specifications for installing temporary signal systems including installing temporary traffic signals lighting and flashing beacons for traffic control .
temporary signal systems must comply with section num .
the system must operate on a continuous numhour basis unless traffic is controlled by flaggers .
numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum generators a generator system to power a temporary signal system must have an operating generator and backup generator .
in the event of a failure to supply voltage for the system the backup generator must start automatically and transfer the system load upon reaching the operating voltage .
the system must have enough fuel storage to operate when it is unattended .
if a generator to back up commercial power is specified in the special provisions the generator must have an automatic transfer switch .
each generator must num .
be num vac or num vac num hz num kw minimum continuousduty type num .
be powered by a gasoline lpg or diesel engine operating at approximately num rpm with an automatic oil feed num .
be equipped to provide automatic startstop operation with a num v starting system num .
have generator output circuits that have overcurrent protection with a maximum setting of num a numbnum automatic transfer switches an automatic transfer switch must provide the following functions num .
line voltage monitoring in the event of a power outage that signals the generator to start .
section num temporary traffic control num num .
engine start delay adjustable from num to num seconds to prevent starting if the power outage is only momentary and an engine stop delay adjustable from num to num minutes to allow the generator set to run unloaded to cool before shut down .
num .
transfer delay from num to num seconds to allow the generator to stabilize before connecting to the load and retransfer delay from num to num minutes to allow the line voltage to stabilize .
num .
loadno load switch to allow a test with or without load .
num .
normaltest switch that will start and run the generator in the test position .
normal position must return the generator to automatic operation .
num .
battery charger powered by the normal line voltage .
num .
generator voltage sensor that signals for a transfer if the generator output is ready .
the automatic transfer switch must be num .
rated at num a for num vac num .
num wire num .
single phase num .
compatible with the generator furnished the switch must have a mechanical interlock to prevent an application of power to the load from both sources and to prevent backfeeding from the generator to the line .
numc construction numcnum general use one of the following methods to provide power to the temporary signal system num .
commercial power from an existing utility company num .
generator system do not use electrical power from existing highway facilities unless authorized .
do not use power from private parties to provide power to the temporary signal system .
if the temporary signal system is out of operation provide flaggers to maintain traffic control until the traffic signals are returned to service .
numcnum commercial power commercial power must be num vac or num vac .
make arrangements with the utility company for providing service .
protect the power source in a locked enclosure .
provide keys to all locks to the engineer .
numd payment not used num temporary flashing beacon systems numa general section num includes specifications for installing temporary flashing beacon systems .
a temporary flashing beacon system must comply with section num .
numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum generators a generator system to power a temporary flashing beacon system must comply with section numbnum .
numbnum sign panels the sign panels installed on a temporary flashing beacon system must be stationarymounted construction area signs complying with section num .
section num temporary traffic control num numc construction relocate each system during the progress of the work such that the systems are located at the ends of the pavement at the end of each work shift .
use commercial power from an existing utility company or generator system to provide power to the temporary flashing beacon system .
do not use power from a private party to provide power to a temporary flashing beacon system .
commercial power must be num vac or num vac .
make arrangements with the utility company for providing service .
protect the power source in a locked enclosure .
provide keys to all locks to the engineer .
numd payment not used num automated work zone information systems numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for installing automated work zone information systems .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals reserved numanum quality assurance assign an onsite system coordinator .
the coordinator must be available locally to service maintain and relocate system components as necessary .
the coordinator must be accessible num while the system is deployed .
if the system fails to perform as specified perform any necessary remedial work and replace any failed components within num hours of notification of a system or component failure .
numb materials numbnum general the awis must be a proven system that has been successfully deployed and operated in actual work zones or congested areas .
the system must acquire traffic data throughout the work zone and automatically display predetermined information to motorists without operator intervention after system initialization .
realtime information must be displayed to motorists using a pcms .
the sign must comply with section num .
the system must be controlled either locally or remotely by a dedicated controller or computer .
authorized users must be able to both locally and remotely override motorist information messages .
traffic sensors must not require adjustments after the initial deployment .
numbnum general system function requirements the general system functions of the awis must be capable of num .
preventing any unauthorized users or systems from gaining access to the pcmss through an industry authentication and encryption standard level of security .
num .
providing current operational status locally and remotely .
operational status must include current traffic data and messages communications system and power status .
num .
delivering notifications either by telephone voice or text messages to alert support staff of trouble conditions .
num .
generating trouble alerts for conditions such as num low roadside equipment power or voltage num system communications failure num low speed traffic detected and num excessive delay detected .
section num temporary traffic control num num .
adjusting the thresholds of reduced speed and congestioninduced delay at which the system initiates a trouble alert .
num .
allowing programming of the hours during which the trouble condition alerting subsystem initiates notification to authorized users .
num .
measuring periodically and automatically the power levels of all equipment .
alert support staff locally and remotely via a telephone message in time to provide supplemental power before the system ceases to operate .
num .
displaying preprogrammed messages based on the time of day and day of week .
numbnum motorist information message requirements the awis must be capable of num .
displaying predetermined speed delay diversion and closure messages to motorists when user adjustable thresholds are exceeded .
num .
updating its speed and delay advisory messages at least once per minute .
the actual message updates must be consistent with traffic conditions .
num .
selecting messages for each pcms independently based on the traffic conditions downstream of the sign .
num .
recording motorist information messages in a commaseparated values file with time and date stamps including message overrides with user id .
num .
displaying default messages when traffic conditions system algorithms and user parameters do not dictate that an advisory message should be displayed .
num .
displaying separate independent default messages on each pcms .
num .
analyzing traffic parameters in work zones in which there are multiple speed limits .
the following parameters for the selection and presentation of information messages must be adjustable by the user num .
message update frequency num .
minimum delay necessary to trigger a delay advisory message num .
persistence of delay before a delay message is displayed num .
level of delay required to trigger a diversion message num .
change in delay needed to cause a delay advisory message update num .
change in downstream speed at which a speed advisory message update occurs numbnum system communication requirements the wireless communications subsystem of the awis must num .
operate independently of the public cellular phone system for receiving data to ensure reliable communications num .
communicate independent of the line of sight or distance num .
incorporate an error detection and correction mechanism to ensure the integrity of all traffic condition data and motorist information messages num .
configure automatically during system initialization numbnum traffic data acquisition requirements the awis must collect accurate traffic data using a speed measurement technique with an accuracy of num mph allowing specific information messages .
the system must collect data during reduced visibility conditions including precipitation fog darkness excessive dust and road debris .
the system must num archive the data with time and date stamps and num aggregate the data in operator definable time increments accessible num to the engineer in a commaseparated values file .
numbnum user interface the system must have a user interface to control the awis pcms communications .
the interface must be num software compatible with a windows environment or num a web service accessed by a web browser .
provide any software on a cd or other engineerauthorized datastorage device for installation at the departments transportation management center .
section num temporary traffic control num the user interface must at a minimum provide the user with a list of awis pcmss in the field location information for each awis pcms and a realtime onboard display of the message in the field .
control options must at a minimum provide the user the ability to change the onboard messages and flash rate .
numc construction obtain authorization for the message content and the threshold used for triggering the message before displaying any message on a pcms .
provide complete setup and support for the awis pcms communications .
numd payment not used num portable transverse rumble strips reserved num reserved num maintaining traffic num general numa general section num includes general specifications for maintaining traffic through construction work zones .
if local authorities regulate traffic notify them at least num business days before the start of job site activities .
cooperate with the local authorities to handle traffic through the work zone and to make arrangements to keep the work zone clear of parked vehicles .
numb materials not used numc construction furnishing and operating pilot cars if ordered is change order work .
numd payment not used num traffic control systems numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for providing a traffic control system to close traffic lanes shoulders ramps and connectors .
a traffic control system for a closure includes the temporary traffic control devices described as part of the traffic control system .
temporary traffic control devices must comply with section num .
numanum definitions designated holidays designated holidays are shown in the following table designated holidays holiday date observed new years day january numst washingtons birthday numrd monday in february memorial day last monday in may independence day july numth labor day numst monday in september veterans day november numth thanksgiving day numth thursday in november christmas day december numth section num temporary traffic control num if a designated holiday falls on a sunday the following monday is a designated holiday .
if november numth falls on a saturday the preceding friday is a designated holiday .
numanum submittals numanuma general submit a request for a minor deviation from the specified work hours .
your request may be authorized if num the department does not accrue a significant cost increase and num the work can be expedited and better serve the traffic .
if a closure is not opened to traffic by the specified time submit a work plan that ensures that future closures will be opened to traffic by the specified time .
allow num business days for review .
submit closure schedule requests and closure schedule amendments using lcs to show the locations and times of the requested closures .
numanumb closure schedules every monday by noon submit a closure schedule request for planned closures for the next week .
except for a project in district num the next week is defined as sunday at noon through the following sunday at noon .
for a project in district num the next week is defined as friday at noon through the following friday at noon .
submit a closure schedule request from num days to num days before the anticipated start of any job site activity that reduces num .
horizontal clearances of traveled ways including shoulders to num lanes or fewer due to activities such as temporary barrier placement and paving num .
vertical clearances of traveled ways including shoulders due to activities such as pavement overlays overhead sign installation or falsework girder erection submit closure schedule changes including additional closures by noon at least num business days before a planned closure .
cancel closure requests using lcs at least num hours before the start time of the closure .
the department notifies you through lcs of unauthorized closures or closures that require coordination with other parties as a condition for authorization .
numanumc contingency plans for closures submit a contingency plan for an activity that could affect a closure if a contingency plan is specified in the special provisions or if a contingency plan is requested .
if a contingency plan is requested submit the contingency plan within num business day of the request .
the contingency plan must identify the activities equipment processes and materials that may cause a delay in the opening of a closure to traffic .
the plan must include num .
list of additional or alternate equipment materials or workers necessary to ensure continuing activities and ontime opening of closures if a problem occurs .
if the additional or alternate equipment materials or workers are not on the job site specify their location the method for mobilizing these items and the required time to complete mobilization .
num .
general timescaled logic diagram displaying the major activities and sequence of the planned activities .
for each activity identify the critical event that will activate the contingency plan .
submit revisions to a contingency plan at least num business days before starting the activity requiring the contingency plan .
allow num business days for review .
numanum quality assurance reserved section num temporary traffic control num numb materials not used numc construction numcnum general work that interferes with traffic is limited to the hours when closures are allowed .
do not reduce an open traffic lane width to less than num feet .
if traffic cones or delineators are used for temporary edge delineation the side of the base of the cones or delineators nearest to traffic is considered the edge of the traveled way .
do not simultaneously close consecutive ramps in the same direction of travel servicing num consecutive local streets unless authorized .
notify the engineer of delays in your activities caused by the denial of either num an authorized closure or num a closure schedule request for the specified time frame allowed for closures .
discuss the contingency plan for any activity that could affect the closure schedule with the engineer at least num business days before starting the activity requiring the plan .
if you do not open a closure to traffic by the specified time suspend work and submit a work plan .
no further closures are allowed until your work plan has been authorized .
if the engineer orders you to remove a closure before the time designated in the authorized closure schedule any delay caused by this order is an excusable delay .
the engineer may reschedule a closure that was canceled due to unsuitable weather .
numcnum lane closure system training the department provides lcs training .
request the lcs training at least num days before submitting the numst closure request .
the department provides the training within num days after your request .
the training may be web based .
for webbased training the engineer provides you the website address to access the training .
within num business days after completion of the training the department provides lcs accounts and user ids to your assigned trained representatives .
each representative must maintain a unique password and current user information in the lcs .
the department terminates your lcs accounts after contract acceptance .
numcnum closure requirements and charts numcnuma general where num or more lanes in the same direction including the shoulders are adjacent to the area where the work is being performed close the adjacent lane under any of the following conditions num .
work is off the traveled way but within num feet of the edge of the traveled way and the approach speed is greater than num mph num .
work is off the traveled way but within num feet of the edge of the traveled way and the approach speed is less than num mph closure of the adjacent traffic lane is not required during any of the following activities num .
work behind a barrier num .
paving grinding or grooving num .
installation maintenance or removal of traffic control devices except for temporary railing numcnumb complete freeway or expressway closure requirements reserved section num temporary traffic control num numcnumc hov express and bus lane closure requirements reserved numcnumd city street closure requirements reserved numcnume closure restrictions for special events and venues reserved numcnumf closure restrictions for designated holidays and special days reserved numcnumg freeway or expressway lane requirement charts reserved numcnumh complete freeway or expressway closure hour charts reserved numcnumi complete connector closure hour charts and connector lane requirement charts reserved numcnumj complete ramp closure hour charts and ramp lane requirement charts reserved numcnumk conventional highway lane requirement charts reserved numcnuml complete conventional highway closure hour charts reserved numcnumm city street closure hour charts and city street lane requirement charts reserved numcnumn concrete slab and approach slab replacement closure hours table reserved numcnumonumcnums reserved numcnumcnum reserved numcnum traffic control system requirements numcnuma general control traffic using stationary closures .
if components of the traffic control system are displaced or cease to operate or function as specified immediately repair them to their original condition or replace them and place them back in their original locations .
vehicles equipped with attenuators must comply with section num .
each vehicle used to place maintain and remove components of a traffic control system on a multilane highway must have a type ii flashing arrow sign that must operate whenever the vehicle is used for placing maintaining or removing the components .
for a stationary closure vehicles with a type ii flashing arrow sign not involved in placing maintaining or removing the components must display only the caution display mode .
if a flashing arrow sign is required for a closure activate the sign before the closure is in place .
numcnumb stationary closures except for channelizing devices placed along open trenches or excavations adjacent to the traveled way remove the components of the traffic control system for a stationary closure from the traveled way and section num temporary traffic control num shoulders at the end of each work period .
you may store the components at authorized locations within the limits of the highway .
if a traffic lane is closed with channelizing devices for excavation work move the devices to the adjacent edge of the traveled way when not excavating .
space the devices as shown for the lane closure .
numcnumc moving closures for a moving closure use a pcms that complies with section num except the sign must be truck mounted .
the full operational height to the bottom of the sign may be less than num feet above the ground but must be as high as practicable .
if you use a flashing arrow sign in a moving closure the sign must be truck mounted .
operate the flashing arrow sign in the caution display mode if it is being used on a numlane twoway highway .
numcnum traffic control system signs numcnuma general traffic control system signs must comply with section num .
numcnumb connector and ramp closure signs inform motorists of a temporary closing of a num connector or a num freeway or expressway entrance or exit ramp using num .
scnumca ramp closed sign for closures of num day or less num .
scnumca ramp closed sign for closures of more than num day scnumca and scnumca signs must be stationary mounted at the locations shown and must remain in place and visible to motorists during the connector or ramp closure .
notify the engineer at least num business days before installing the sign and install the sign from num to num days before the closure .
numcnumcnum reserved numd payment the department pays for change order work for a traffic control system by force account for increased traffic control and uses a force account analysis for decreased traffic control .
num falsework openings reserved num pedestrian facilities numa general section num includes specifications for providing temporary pedestrian facilities .
temporary pedestrian facilities must comply with section num .
numb materials not used numc construction if pedestrian traffic is allowed to pass through work areas provide a temporary pedestrian facility through the construction areas within the highway .
include a protective overhead covering as necessary to ensure protection from falling objects and drippings from overhead structures .
if an activity requires a closure of a walkway provide another walkway nearby off of the traveled way .
where pedestrian openings through falsework are required provide a temporary pedestrian facility with a protective overhead covering during all bridge construction activities .
numd payment not used section num temporary traffic control num num bridge cleaning and painting activities numa general section num includes specifications for maintaining traffic during bridge cleaning and painting activities .
signs must comply with section num .
numb materials not used numc construction for bridge cleaning and painting activities place the signs shown in the following table in addition to those shown on the plans sign no .
sign description requirement wnum road work ahead place portable numbynuminch signs at locations where traffic approaches a bridge with work underway .
if the approach speed is greater than num mph the sign must be num by num inches .
the sign panel base material must not be plywood .
attach num orange num sq in flags to each sign .
cleaning and painting operations place a numbynuminch sign near each wnum sign .
use numinch high black lettering and include your name address and telephone number on an orange background .
the engineer determines the exact locations of the signs .
do not use signs until needed .
maintain the signs in place during bridge cleaning and painting activities .
remove the signs at the end of each work shift .
after each days bridge cleaning and painting activities remove obstructions from the roadway to allow for free passage for traffic .
remove blast cleaning residue from the traveled way before opening the area to traffic .
you may lay supply lines along the top of curbs adjacent to railing posts if the lines do not interfere with traffic .
remove the lines when work is not in progress .
numd payment not used num toll bridges reserved num reserved num reserved num temporary pavement delineation num general section num includes specifications for placing temporary pavement delineation except for delineation on a seal coat project .
temporary painted traffic stripes and painted pavement markings used for temporary delineation must comply with section num .
temporary signs for nopassing zones must comply with section num .
num materials numa general the following types of temporary pavement delineation must be on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials num .
temporary pavement markers for long term daynight use num days or less num .
temporary pavement markers for short term daynight use num days or less section num temporary traffic control num num .
temporary removable striping and pavement marking tape num days or less num .
permanent traffic striping and pavement marking tape num .
channelizers numb temporary pavement markers temporary pavement markers must be the same color as the lane line or centerline markers being replaced .
temporary pavement markers must be for longterm day or night use num days or less except you may use temporary pavement markers for shortterm day or night use num days or less if you place the permanent pavement delineation before the end of the num days .
numc channelizers channelizers used for temporary edge line delineation must be orange and surface mounted .
num construction numa general if work activities obliterate pavement delineation place temporary or permanent pavement delineation before opening the traveled way to traffic .
the temporary pavement delineation must consist of a lane line and centerline pavement delineation for traveled ways open to traffic .
on multilane roadways freeways and expressways the temporary pavement delineation must also include edge line delineation for traveled ways open to traffic .
establish the alignment for temporary pavement delineation including the required lines or markers .
surfaces to receive an application of paint or removable traffic tape must be dry and free from dirt and loose material .
do not apply temporary pavement delineation over existing pavement delineation or any other temporary pavement delineation .
maintain temporary pavement delineation until no longer needed or replace it with a new striping detail of temporary or permanent pavement delineation .
when the engineer determines the temporary pavement delineation is no longer required for the direction of traffic remove the temporary pavement markers and underlying adhesive and removable traffic tape from the final layer of surfacing and from the pavement to remain in place .
remove temporary pavement delineation that conflicts with any subsequent or new traffic pattern for the area .
numb temporary lane line and centerline delineation if lane lines or centerlines are obliterated and temporary pavement delineation to replace the lines is not shown the minimum lane line and centerline delineation must consist of temporary pavement markers placed longitudinally at numfoot maximum intervals .
for temporary lane line or centerline delineation consisting entirely of temporary pavement markers for shortterm day or night use num days or less do not use the markers for more than num days on lanes opened to traffic .
place the permanent pavement delineation before the end of the num days .
if the permanent pavement delineation is not placed within num days replace the temporary pavement markers with additional temporary pavement delineation equivalent to the pattern described for the permanent pavement delineation for the area .
if nopassing centerline pavement delineation is obliterated install the following temporary nopassing zone signs before opening lanes to traffic num .
wnum road work ahead sign from num to num feet in advance of the nopassing zone num .
rnum do not pass sign at the beginning of the nopassing zone and at numfoot maximum intervals within the nopassing zone num .
wnuma next ___ miles plaque beneath the wnum sign for continuous zones longer than num miles num .
rnum pass with care sign at the end of the nopassing zone the engineer determines the exact location of temporary nopassing zone signs .
maintain the temporary nopassing zone signs in place until you place the permanent nopassing centerline pavement delineation .
remove the temporary nopassing zone signs when the engineer determines they are no longer required for the direction of traffic .
section num temporary traffic control num numc temporary edge line delineation on multilane roadways freeways and expressways open to traffic where edge lines are obliterated and temporary pavement delineation to replace those edge lines is not shown provide temporary pavement delineation for num .
right edge lines consisting of any of the following num .
solid numinchwide traffic stripe tape of the same color as the stripe being replaced num .
traffic cones placed longitudinally at numfoot maximum intervals num .
portable delineators or channelizers placed longitudinally at numfoot maximum intervals num .
left edge lines consisting of any of the following num .
solid numinchwide traffic stripe tape of the same color as the stripe being replaced num .
traffic cones placed longitudinally at numfoot maximum intervals num .
portable delineators or channelizers placed longitudinally at numfoot maximum intervals num .
temporary pavement markers placed longitudinally at numfoot maximum intervals you may apply temporary traffic stripe paint of the same color as the stripe being replaced instead of solid numinchwide temporary traffic stripe tape where the removal of the temporary traffic stripe is not required .
the engineer determines the lateral offset for traffic cones portable delineators and channelizers used for temporary edge line delineation .
if traffic cones or portable delineators are used for temporary edge line delineation maintain the cones or delineators during the hours of the day when they are in use .
cement the bases of channelizers used for temporary edge line delineation to the pavement with hot melt bituminous adhesive as specified in section num for cementing pavement markers to pavement .
numd temporary traffic stripe pavement marking and pavement markers numdnum general reserved numdnum temporary traffic stripe tape except where the temporary traffic stripe is used for num days or less apply temporary removable traffic stripe tape under the manufacturers instructions and as follows num .
slowly roll the tape with a rubbertired vehicle or roller to ensure complete contact with the pavement surface .
num .
apply the tape straight on a tangent alignment and on a true arc on a curved alignment .
num .
do not apply the tape when the ambient air or pavement temperature is less than num degrees f unless otherwise authorized .
for temporary traffic stripe tape used for num days or less apply the temporary removable traffic stripe tape under the manufacturers instructions .
numdnum temporary traffic stripe paint apply temporary traffic stripe paint under section num except you may apply num or num coats of the temporary traffic stripe paint for new or existing pavement .
you are not required to remove painted temporary traffic stripe that will be covered by paving work .
numdnum temporary pavement marking tape apply temporary removable pavement marking tape as specified for applying temporary removable traffic stripe tape in section numdnum .
numdnum temporary pavement marking paint apply temporary pavement marking paint under section num except you may apply num or num coats of the temporary pavement marking paint .
you are not required to remove of painted temporary pavement markings that will be covered by paving work .
you may use permanent or temporary removable pavement marking tape instead of temporary pavement marking paint .
section num temporary traffic control num numdnum temporary pavement markers place temporary pavement markers under the manufacturers instructions .
cement temporary markers to the surfacing with the manufacturers recommended adhesive except do not use epoxy adhesive in areas where the removal of the pavement markers is required .
you may use retroreflective pavement markers instead of temporary pavement markers for longterm day or night use num days or less except to simulate patterns of broken traffic stripe .
retroreflective pavement markers used for temporary pavement markers must comply with section num except the waiting period before placing pavement markers on new asphalt concrete surfacing as specified in section num does not apply .
do not use epoxy adhesive to place pavement markers in areas where the removal of the pavement markers is required .
num payment the department does not pay for additional temporary pavement delineation used to replace temporary pavement markers .
temporary traffic stripe is measured as specified for traffic stripe in section num .
temporary pavement marking is measured as specified for pavement marking in section num .
num temporary pavement delineation for seal coats num general section num includes specifications for placing temporary pavement delineation for a seal coat project .
temporary signs for nopassing zones must comply with section num .
num materials temporary raised pavement markers for seal coat applications must be temporary pavement markers for shortterm day or night use num days or less on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials .
num construction before applying binder that will obliterate existing traffic stripes place temporary raised pavement markers on the existing traffic stripes except for right edge lines at numfoot maximum intervals .
place num markers side by side on double traffic stripes with num marker placed on each stripe longitudinally at numfoot maximum intervals .
place temporary raised pavement markers under the manufacturers instructions .
before opening the lanes to uncontrolled traffic remove the covers from the temporary raised pavement markers .
if you obliterate nopassing centerline pavement delineation install the following temporary nopassing zone signs before opening lanes to traffic num .
wnum road work ahead sign from num to num feet in advance of the nopassing zone num .
rnum do not pass sign at the beginning of the nopassing zone and at numfoot maximum intervals within the nopassing zone num .
wnuma next ___ miles plaque beneath the wnum sign for continuous zones longer than num miles num .
rnum pass with care sign at the end of the nopassing zone the engineer determines the exact location of the temporary nopassing zone signs .
maintain the temporary nopassing zone signs in place until you place the permanent nopassing centerline pavement delineation .
remove the temporary nopassing zone signs when the engineer determines they are no longer required for the direction of traffic .
maintain temporary pavement delineation until you replace it with the permanent pavement delineation .
num payment not used num reserved num num water pollution control num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for preventing controlling and abating water pollution within waters of the state .
information on forms reports and other documents is in the following department manuals num .
field guide to construction site dewatering num .
stormwater pollution prevention plan swppp and water pollution control program wpcp preparation manual num .
construction site best management practices bmps manual num .
construction site monitoring program guidance manual you may view these manuals at the stormwater and water pollution control information link at the departments division of construction website or purchase them at the departments publication distribution unit .
a wpcp and a swppp must comply with the departments stormwater pollution prevention plan swppp and water pollution control program wpcp preparation manual and must be prepared using the latest template posted on the construction stormwater website .
numb definitions active area area where soildisturbing work activities have occurred at least once within num days .
construction phase phase that includes num the highway construction phase for building roads and structures num the plant establishment and maintenance phase for placing vegetation for final stabilization and num the suspension phase for suspension of work activities or a winter shutdown .
the construction phase starts at the start of job site activities and ends at contract acceptance .
inactive area area where soildisturbing work activities have not occurred within num days .
qualifying rain event storm that produces at least num inch of precipitation with a numhour or greater period between rain events .
runon water that originates offsite and flows onto the job site .
storm event storm that produces or is forecasted to produce at least num inch of precipitation within a numhour period .
numc submittals numcnum general within num hours after num the end of a storm event resulting in a discharge num a nonstormwater discharge or num receiving a written notice or an order from the rwqcb or another regulatory agency submit the following information num .
date time location and nature of the activity and the cause of the discharge notice or order num .
type and quantity of the discharge num .
wpc practices in use before the discharge or before receiving the notice or order num .
description of wpc practices and corrective actions taken to manage the discharge or cause of the notice numcnum training records for all employees and subcontractors who will be working at the job site submit wpc training records as informational submittals .
the records must include the training subjects and dates for the initial training ongoing training and tailgate meetings .
submit records for num .
existing employees within num business days of obtaining the swppp or wpcp authorization num .
new employees within num business days of receiving the training section num water pollution control num num .
subcontractors employees at least num business days before a subcontractor starts work numcnum contractorsupport facilities at least num business days before operating any contractorsupport facility submit num .
plan showing the location and associated wpc practices num .
copy of the notice of intent approved by the rwqcb and the wpcp or swppp approved by the rwqcb if you will be operating a batch plant or a crushing plant under the general industrial permit numcnum water quality monitoring numcnuma general section numcnum applies if a bid item for a water quality monitoring report is shown on the bid item list .
numcnumb water quality monitor within num days after contract approval submit the name and qualifications of your water quality monitor .
include the monitors training and experience in collecting and analyzing water quality samples .
numcnumc water quality monitoring reports whenever work activities occur in water submit a monthly report of water quality monitoring by the numth of the month for the monitoring work conducted during the previous month .
the report must include num .
visual inspection reports for each storm event and nonstormwater discharge .
each visual inspection report must include num .
name of personnel performing the inspection inspection date and date the inspection report was completed num .
descriptions of storm and weather conditions num .
locations and observations num .
field inspection reports and sampling results including num .
description of the analytical methods used reporting units and detection limits num .
date location time of sampling visual observations photographs and measurements num .
estimate of water flow num .
calibration logs for field monitoring equipment num .
visual inspection reports and sampling results for a storm event that generates visible runoff including num .
date location and time of visual observations num .
photographs of the areas disturbed by project activities including material disposal areas num .
photographs showing the disturbed soil areas and documenting compliance for erosion control and revegetation measures including soil stabilization and sediment control num .
summary of wqo exceedance reports num .
summary of corrective actions if a wqo is exceeded during work activities in water submit a wqo exceedance report within num hours .
the report must include num .
field inspection reports and sampling results including num .
description of the analytical methods used reporting units and detection limits num .
date location time of sampling visual observations photographs and measurements num .
estimate of the water flow num .
description of wpc practices and corrective actions taken to manage wqo exceedance numcnumd water quality annual reports section numcnumd applies if a bid item for a water quality annual report is shown on the bid item list .
submit a water quality annual report for each reporting period from july numst to june numth .
if construction occurs through june numth submit the report no later than july numth for the previous reporting period .
if construction ends before june numth submit the report within num days after contract acceptance .
the report must be in an authorized format and include section num water pollution control num num .
projects description location and receiving waters num .
water quality monitoring information such as num .
summary and evaluation of sampling and analysis results and laboratory reports num .
analytical methods reporting units and detection limits for analytical parameters num .
summary of corrective actions num .
identification of corrective actions or compliance activities that were not implemented num .
summary of any exceedances num .
names of individuals performing water quality inspections and sampling num .
logistical information for inspections and sampling including the location date time and precipitation num .
visual observations and sample collection records num .
photographs documenting contract compliance for num .
disturbed soil areas created by work activities num .
erosion control and revegetation measures including soil stabilization and sediment control practices num .
completed work num .
records of training and meetings for water quality permit compliance submit num copies of the water quality annual report .
allow num days for review .
if revisions are required the engineer notifies you of the date the review stopped and provides comments .
submit a revised report within num business days of receiving the comments .
the departments review resumes when the complete report is resubmitted .
submit an electronic copy on a readonly cd dvd or other engineerauthorized datastorage device and num printed copies of the authorized water quality annual report .
include the signed certifications from the water quality monitor and the wpc manager .
numcnumcnum reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum regulatory requirements comply with the departments general permit issued by the swrcb for order no .
numdwq npdes no .
casnum national pollutant discharge elimination system npdes statewide storm water permit and waste discharge requirements wdrs for state of california department of transportation .
the departments general permit governs stormwater and nonstormwater discharges from the departments properties facilities and activities .
for the departments general permit go to the caltrans program link on the storm water program page of the swrcb website .
discharges from manufacturing facilities such as batch plants and crushing plants must comply with the general waste discharge requirements for order no .
numdwq npdes general permit no .
casnum issued by the swrcb for discharges of storm water associated with industrial activities excluding construction activities general industrial permit .
for the general industrial permit go to the swrcb website .
for a batch plant and crushing plant outside a job site or within a job site that serves one or more contracts obtain coverage under the general industrial permit before operating a batch plant to manufacture concrete hma or other material or a crushing plant to produce rock or aggregate .
numdnum training employees must receive initial wpc training before starting work at the job site .
for your project managers supervisory personnel subcontractors and employees involved in wpc work num .
provide stormwater training in the following subjects num .
wpc rules and regulations num .
implementation and maintenance of num .
temporary soil stabilization num .
temporary sediment control section num water pollution control num num .
tracking control num .
wind erosion control num .
material pollution prevention and control num .
waste management num .
nonstormwater management num .
conduct weekly training meetings covering num .
deficiencies and corrective actions for wpc practices num .
wpc practices required for work activities during the week num .
spill prevention and control num .
material delivery storage usage and disposal num .
waste management num .
nonstormwater management procedures training for personnel who collect water quality samples must include num. review of the sampling and analysis plan and the construction site monitoring program guidance manual num .
health and safety review num .
sampling simulations numdnum water pollution control manager numdnuma general assign a wpc manager to implement the wpcp or swppp .
numdnumb qualifications the wpc manager must num .
comply with the requirements provided in the construction general permit for num .
qsp if the project requires a wpcp num .
qsd if the project requires a swppp num .
complete the stormwater management training described at the stormwater and water pollution control information link at the departments division of construction website numdnumc responsibilities the wpc manager must num .
be the primary contact responsible for wpc work num .
oversee wpc work including num .
maintenance of wpc practices num .
inspections of wpc practices identified in the swppp or wpcp num .
inspections and reports for visual monitoring num .
preparation and implementation of the rain event action plans num .
sampling and analysis num .
preparation and submittal of num .
nal exceedance reports num .
violation reports for the receiving water monitoring trigger num .
swppp annual certification num .
annual reports num .
wpcpractice status reports num .
oversee and enforce hazardous waste management practices under section num including spill prevention and control measures num .
have the authority to num mobilize crews to make immediate repairs to wpc practices num stop construction activities damaging wpc practices or causing water pollution num .
ensure that all employees have current wpc training and provide training if collecting water quality samples is delegated num .
implement the authorized swppp or wpcp num .
revise the swppp or wpcp if required num .
be at the job site within num hours of being contacted section num water pollution control num numdnum quality control numdnuma general section numdnum applies if a bid item for a water quality monitoring report is shown on the bid item list .
projectspecific wqos for work activities in water are specified in the special provisions .
assign a water quality monitor to collect water samples and record water quality data .
the water quality monitor must have the same qualifications as the wpc manager including the requirements for a qsp and must have training and experience in collecting and analyzing water quality samples .
the water quality monitor may be the same person as the wpc manager .
the water quality monitor must be responsible for generating and submitting water quality reports .
the water quality monitor must notify the engineer within num hours of an unauthorized discharge .
the water quality monitor must inspect the job site and receiving waters after each storm event and nonstormwater discharge .
the inspection of a nonstormwater discharge must include observation of num .
receiving waters num .
num hours before starting work in water including the installation of any clearwater diversion num .
at least num times daily whenever work occurs in water including the installation operation and removal of any clear water diversion num .
for the presence of floating and suspended materials sheen on the surface discoloration turbidity and odors .
num .
job site for the presence of authorized and unauthorized nonstormwater discharges and their sources .
unauthorized discharges to surface waters include num .
soil silt and sand num .
bark sawdust and slash num .
rubbish and debris num .
cement concrete and concrete washings num .
oil and petroleum products num .
welding slag num .
other organic or earthen materials retain each visual inspection report at the job site .
numdnumb water quality sampling and analysis take water quality samples each day a construction activity has the potential to mobilize sediment or alter background conditions within waters of the state .
take water quality samples of surface water when num .
conducting inwater work num .
work activities result in materials reaching receiving waters num .
work activities result in the creation of a visible plume in receiving waters comply with the equipment manufacturers instructions for sample collection analysis methods and equipment calibration .
at least num hours before starting inwater work num .
establish locations for water quality sampling num .
upstream of the effluent discharge point or location of inwater work by no more than num feet num .
at the effluent discharge point including the location of inwater work num .
downstream of the effluent discharge point or location of inwater work between num and num feet num .
take water quality samples to document background conditions for upstream effluent and downstream locations .
test for each water quality objective shown in the table titled water quality objectives .
num .
estimate water flow .
during inwater work including the installation of a clear water diversion take water quality samples section num water pollution control num num .
at least num times daily for each water quality objective num .
at upstream effluent and downstream locations if a water quality objective is exceeded the water quality monitor must notify the engineer by phone or electronic media within num minutes and num .
conduct water quality sampling every hour until measurements comply with water quality objectives num .
measure the distance from the effluent location to the downstream extent of the exceedance num .
obtain photographs of the tributary upstream downstream and at the location of inwater work num .
if wpc practices are installed repaired or modified to control the source of the exceedance monitor the activity and document with samples photographs and a brief summary you are not required to collect samples num .
during dangerous weather conditions such as flooding or electrical storms num .
outside of normal working hours if downstream samples show levels outside of the acceptable range and indicate a possible water quality objective exceedance assess the wpc practices site conditions and surrounding influences to determine the probable cause for the increase .
retain calibration logs water quality sampling documentation and analytical results at the job site .
numdnumc reserved numdnumdnum reserved num materials not used num construction numa general monitor the nwss forecast daily at its website .
install facilities and devices used for wpc practices before performing other job site activities .
install soil stabilization and sediment control materials for wpc practices in all active areas or before any storm event .
repair or replace facilities and devices used for wpc practices within num hours of discovering any damage .
you may request or the engineer may order changes to the wpc work .
changes may include additional or new wpc practices .
additional wpc work is change order work .
retain a printed copy of the authorized wpcp or swppp at the job site .
numb contractorsupport facilities use wpc practices to protect stormwater systems or receiving waters from the discharge of potential pollutants from any contractorsupport facility .
contractorsupport facilities include num .
staging areas num .
storage yards for equipment and materials num .
mobile operations num .
batch plants for concrete and hma num .
crushing plants for rock and aggregate num .
other facilities installed for your convenience such as haul roads if you obtain or dispose of material at a noncommercially operated borrow or disposal site prevent water pollution due to erosion at the site during and after completion of your activities .
upon completion of your work leave the site in a condition such that water will not collect or stand in it .
section num water pollution control num numc inspections use the stormwater site inspection report form for documenting inspections .
inspect wpc practices identified in the swppp or wpcp num .
before a forecasted storm event num .
after a qualifying rain event that produces runoff num .
at numhour intervals during extended storm events num .
on a predetermined schedule of at least once a week inspect the following work activities and areas daily num .
storage areas for hazardous materials and waste as specified in section num num .
hazardous waste disposal and transporting activities as specified in section num num .
hazardous material delivery and storage activities num .
demolition sites within num feet of storm drain systems and receiving waters inspect vehicles and equipment at the job site daily for leaks and spills .
verify that operators are inspecting vehicles and equipment each day of use .
inspect the following work activities and areas daily if the activity occurs daily or weekly if the activity occurs weekly num .
vehicle and equipment cleaning facilities num .
vehicle and equipment maintenance and fueling areas num .
pile driving areas for leaks and spills num .
temporary concrete washouts num .
paved roads at job site access points for street sweeping num .
dewatering work num .
temporary ats num .
work over water numd deficiencies if the engineer or you identify a deficiency in the implementation of the authorized wpcp or swppp immediately correct the deficiency unless a later date is authorized but before precipitation occurs .
the department may correct the deficiency if you fail to correct it immediately by the agreed date or before the onset of precipitation .
the cost of this work is deducted .
numenumh reserved num payment the department does not pay for the cleanup repair removal disposal or replacement of wpc practices due to improper installation or your negligence .
the department does not pay for wpc practices at contractorsupport facilities and noncommercially operated borrow or disposal sites .
num water pollution control program num general numa summary section num includes specifications for preparing a water pollution control program .
preparing a water pollution control program includes developing and implementing the wpcp providing a wpc manager conducting wpc training and monitoring inspecting and correcting wpc practices .
if the department determines that the project qualifies for an erosivity waiver the conditions for the waiver are specified in the special provisions .
the erosivity waiver and rfactor are described in the npdes general permit for storm water discharges associated with construction and land disturbance activities order no .
numdwq npdes no .
casnum .
section num water pollution control num numb definitions reserved numc submittals within num days after contract approval submit num copies of your wpcp .
you may assign a qsp other than the wpc manager to develop the wpcp .
the wpcp must num .
show the location of disturbed soil areas water bodies and water conveyances num .
describe the work involved in the installation maintenance repair and removal of temporary wpc practices num .
show the locations and types of wpc practices that will be used for num .
stormwater and nonstormwater in contractorsupport facilities outside the job site but related to work activities including num .
staging areas num .
storage yards num .
access roads num .
activities or mobile activities related to all npdes permits num .
show the locations and types of temporary wpc practices that will be used in the work for each type of construction phase num .
show the locations and types of wpc practices that will be installed permanently under the contract num .
include a schedule showing when num .
work activities will be performed that could cause the discharge of pollutants into stormwater num .
wpc practices including soil stabilization and sediment control associated with each construction phase will be implemented num .
include a copy of each permit obtained by the department such as the department of fish and game permits us army corps of engineers permits rwqcb num certifications aerially deposited lead variance from dtsc aerially deposited lead variance notification and rwqcb waste discharge requirements for reuse of aerially deposited lead allow num business days for review .
after the engineer authorizes the wpcp submit an electronic copy on a readonly cd dvd or other engineerauthorized data storage device and num printed copies of the authorized wpcp .
if a rwqcb requires review of the authorized wpcp the review is specified in the special provisions and the engineer submits the authorized wpcp to the rwqcb for review and comment .
if the engineer orders changes to the wpcp based on the rwqcbs comments submit a revised wpcp within num business days .
do not start job site activities until the wpcp is authorized .
submit a revised wpcp if num .
changes in work activities could affect the discharge of pollutants num .
wpc practices are added as change order work num .
wpc practices are added at your discretion num .
changes in the quantity of disturbed soil are substantial num .
objectives for reducing or eliminating pollutants in stormwater discharges have not been achieved num .
project receives a written notice or order from the rwqcb or any other regulatory agency numd quality assurance reserved num materials not used section num water pollution control num num construction manage work activities such that you reduce the discharge of pollutants to surface waters groundwaters and municipalseparate storm sewer systems .
monitor and inspect wpc practices at the job site .
notify the engineer within num hours whenever you num .
identify discharges into receiving waters or drainage systems that are causing or could cause water pollution num .
receive a written notice or order for the project from the rwqcb or any other regulatory agency continue wpcp implementation during any suspension of work activities .
you must submit a swppp and pay all associated costs if you do any of the following num .
disturb num ac or more of soil on a project without an erosivity waiver num .
disturb more than num ac of soil on a project with an erosivity waiver num .
fail to comply with the schedule for soildisturbing activities for a project with an erosivity waiver and the delay voids the erosivity waiver num payment the department pays you for prepare water pollution control program as follows num .
total of num percent of the item total upon authorization of the wpcp num .
total of num percent of the item total upon contract acceptance num stormwater pollution prevention plan num general numa summary section num includes specifications for preparing a stormwater pollution prevention plan for projects that will disturb num ac or more of soil .
preparing a stormwater pollution prevention plan includes developing and implementing the plan providing a wpc manager conducting wpc training and monitoring inspecting and correcting wpc practices .
except for projects in the lake tahoe hydrologic unit the department establishes an environmental risk level for each project .
the projects risk level is specified in the special provisions .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general submit the documents shown with an x for the projects risk level in the following table section num water pollution control num submittal requirements document risk level num risk level num risk level num lake tahoe hydrologic unit swppp x x x x construction site monitoring program x x x xa job site monitoring reports x x x x sampling and analysis plan x x x x sampling and analysis plan for nonvisible pollutants x x x x sampling and analysis plan for ph and turbidity x x x nal reports x x x receiving water monitoring trigger reports x rain event action plan x x x annual certification x x x x stormwater annual report x x x x afor a project in the lake tahoe hydrologic unit this program is referred to as the construction site monitoring and reporting program .
numcnum stormwater pollution prevention plan numcnuma general within num days of contract approval submit num copies of your swppp .
you may assign a qsd other than the wpc manager to develop the swppp .
the swppp must num .
describe the work involved in the installation maintenance repair and removal of temporary and permanent wpc practices num .
include maps showing num .
locations of disturbedsoil areas num .
water bodies and conveyances num .
locations and types of wpc practices that will be used for each contractorsupport facility num .
locations and types of temporary wpc practices that will be used in the work for each construction phase num .
locations and types of wpc practices that will be installed permanently under the contract num .
water quality sampling locations num .
locations planned for the storage and use of potential nonvisible pollutants num .
receivingwater sampling locations num .
include a construction site monitoring program or construction site monitoring and reporting program as applicable num .
include a schedule showing when num .
work activities will be performed that could cause the discharge of pollutants into stormwater num .
wpc practices including soil stabilization and sediment control associated with each construction phase will be implemented num .
include a copy of each permit obtained by the department such as the department of fish and game permits us army corps of engineers permits rwqcb num certifications aerially deposited lead variance from dtsc aerially deposited lead variance notification and rwqcb waste discharge requirements for aerially deposited lead reuse num .
include training records for project personnel if revisions are required the engineer notifies you of the date when the review stopped and provides comments .
submit a revised swppp within num days of receiving the comments .
the departments review resumes when a complete swppp has been resubmitted .
submit an electronic copy on a readonly cd dvd or other engineerauthorized data storage device and num printed copies of the authorized swppp .
section num water pollution control num if the rwqcb requires review of the authorized swppp the engineer submits it to the rwqcb for review and comment .
if the engineer orders changes to the swppp based on the rwqcbs comments submit a revised swppp within num days .
do not start job site activities until num the swppp is authorized and num a waste discharge id number is issued .
submit a revised swppp annually before july numth and any time num .
changes in work activities could affect the discharge of pollutants num .
wpc practices are added as change order work num .
wpc practices are added at your discretion num .
changes in the quantity of disturbed soil are substantial num .
objectives for reducing or eliminating pollutants in stormwater discharges have not been achieved num .
you receive a written notice of a permit violation for the project from the rwqcb or any other regulatory agency numcnumb construction site monitoring program numcnumbi general submit a construction site monitoring program with your swppp .
the program must be prepared by a qsd .
for all projects submit num .
visual monitoring procedures num .
sampling and analysis plan for nonvisible pollutants num .
sampling and analysis plan for nonstormwater discharges num .
sampling and analysis plan for monitoring required by the rwqcb for a risk level num project also submit a sampling and analysis plan for ph and turbidity .
for a risk level num project also submit num .
sampling and analysis plan for ph and turbidity num .
sampling and analysis plan for receivingwater monitoring num .
sampling and analysis plan for any temporary ats for a project in the lake tahoe hydrologic unit the program must include all of the requirements for a risk level num project and num .
watershed monitoring option num .
qc procedures num .
reporting requirements and record retention num .
noncompliance reporting num .
annual report num .
final report change the program as needed to reflect the current job site activities .
numcnumbii site inspection reports submit a stormwater site inspection report as an informational submittal within num hours of completing a weekly inspection .
the wpc manager must oversee the preparation of this report .
the report must include the location and quantity of installed wpc practices and disturbed soil .
numcnumbiii visual monitoring reports submit a copy of the visual monitoring report on a stormwater site inspection report form for each storm event and nonstormwater discharges .
the visual monitoring report must include num .
name of personnel performing the inspection inspection date and date the inspection report is completed num .
storm and weather conditions section num water pollution control num num .
location of any of the following num .
floating and suspended material sheen on the surface discoloration turbidity odor and source of observed pollutants for flowing and contained stormwater systems num .
nonstormwater discharges and their sources num .
corrective action taken for each storm event the monitoring report must include num .
date time and rain gauge reading num .
visual observations num .
within num business days before the predicted storm for num .
spills leaks or uncontrolled pollutants in drainage areas num .
proper implementation of wpc practices num .
leaks and adequate freeboard in storage areas num .
every num hours during the storm event for num .
effectiveness of wpc practices num .
wpc practices needing maintenance and repair num .
within num business days after a qualifying rain event for num .
stormwater discharge locations num .
evaluation of design implementation effectiveness and locations of wpc practices including locations where additional wpc practices may be needed for nonstormwater discharges the monitoring report must cover each of the following periods num .
january through march num .
april through june num .
july through september num .
october through december retain a copy of the visual monitoring reports at the job site as part of the swppp .
numcnumbiv sampling and analysis plan submit a sampling and analysis plan that complies with the departments construction site monitoring program guidance manual .
the sampling and analysis plan must describe num .
sampling equipment and sample containers .
num .
preparation of samples .
num .
collection and holding times .
num .
field measurement methods .
num .
analytical methods .
num .
quality assurance and quality control .
num .
sample preservation and labeling .
num .
collection documentation including the names of personnel collecting samples and their training .
num .
shipment of samples .
num .
chain of custody .
num .
data management and reporting .
num .
precautions from the construction site health and safety plan including procedures for collecting samples during precipitation .
list the conditions under which you are not required to collect samples such as num .
dangerous weather num .
flooding or electrical storms num .
times outside of normal working hours num .
procedures for collecting and analyzing at least num samples for each day of each qualifying rain event for a risk level num or risk level num project .
num .
procedures for collecting effluent samples at all locations where the stormwater is discharged off the job site .
section num water pollution control num the sampling and analysis plan must identify the statecertified laboratory that will perform the analyses .
for a list of statecertified laboratories go to the swrcbs website .
submit a revised plan if discharges or sampling locations change because of changed work activities or knowledge of site conditions .
numcnumbv sampling and analysis plan for nonvisible pollutants submit a sampling and analysis plan for monitoring nonvisible pollutants .
the sampling and analysis plan must identify potential nonvisible pollutants present at the job site associated with any of the following num .
construction materials and wastes num .
existing contamination due to historical site usage num .
application of soil amendments including soil stabilization materials with the potential to change ph or contribute toxic pollutants to stormwater the sampling and analysis plan for nonvisible pollutants must include sampling procedures for the following conditions if observed during a stormwater visual inspection .
include a procedure for collecting at least num sample for each storm event for num .
materials or wastes containing potential nonvisible pollutants not stored under watertight conditions num .
materials or wastes containing potential nonvisible pollutants stored under watertight conditions at locations where a breach leak malfunction or spill occurred and was not cleaned up before the precipitation num .
chemical applications occurring within num hours before precipitation or during precipitation that could discharge pollutants to surface waters or drainage systems including applications of fertilizer pesticide herbicide methyl methacrylate concrete sealant or nonpigmented curing compound num .
applied soil amendments including soil stabilization materials that could change ph levels or contribute toxic pollutants to stormwater runoff and discharge pollutants to surface waters or drainage systems unless independent test data is available to indicate acceptable concentrations of nonvisible pollutants in the material num .
stormwater runoff from an area contaminated by the historical usage of the site that could discharge pollutants to surface waters or drainage systems the sampling and analysis plan for nonvisible pollutants must num .
include sampling procedures and a schedule for num .
sample collection during the first num hours of rain events that generate runoff num .
each nonvisible pollutant source num .
uncontaminated control sample num .
identify the locations for sampling downstream and collecting control samples and the reasons for selecting those locations .
select locations for control samples where the sample does not come in contact with materials wastes or areas associated with potential nonvisible pollutants or disturbed soil areas .
numcnumbvi sampling and analysis reports numcnumbvia general submit an electronic copy on a readonly cd dvd or other engineerauthorized data storage device and a printed copy of water quality analysis results and the qc report within num hours of field sampling and within num days of laboratory analysis .
the qc report must include an evaluation of whether the downstream samples show levels of the tested parameter that are higher than the control sample .
the evaluation must include num .
sample id number num .
contract number num .
constituent num .
reported value num .
analytical method num .
method detection limit section num water pollution control num num .
reported limit retain a copy of the water quality sampling and analysis results with the swppp at the job site .
numcnumbvib numeric action level exceedance reports if a nal is exceeded notify the engineer and submit an exceedance report within num hours after the conclusion of a storm event .
the report must include num .
field sampling results and inspections including num .
analytical methods reporting units and detection limits num .
date location time of sampling visual observations and measurements num .
quantity of precipitation from the storm event num .
description of wpc practices and corrective actions taken to manage exceedance of the nal numcnumbvic receivingwater monitoring trigger reports if a receivingwater monitoring trigger is exceeded notify the engineer and submit a monitoring trigger report within num hours after the conclusion of a storm event .
the report must include num .
field sampling results and inspections including num .
analytical methods reporting units and detection limits num .
date location time of sampling visual observations and measurements num quantity of precipitation from the storm event num .
description of the wpc practices and corrective actions numcnumbvidnumcnumbvif reserved numcnumbviinumcnumbx reserved numcnum rain event action plan for a risk level num or risk level num project submit a rain event action plan at least num hours before a forecasted storm event if the nws predicts a storm event with at least a num percent probability of precipitation within num hours .
for a project in the lake tahoe hydrologic unit submit a rain event action plan at least num hours before a forecasted storm event if the nws predicts a storm event with at least a num percent probability of precipitation in the project area within num hours for construction activities occurring num .
from may num through october num num .
during periods when construction is conducted under a variance to the land disturbance prohibition of the permit the rain event action plan must include num .
site location num .
project risk level num .
contact information including numhour emergency phone numbers for num .
wpc manager num .
erosion and sediment control providers or subcontractors num .
stormwater sampling providers or subcontractors num .
storm information num .
description of num .
construction phase including active and inactive areas num .
active areas and activities num .
subcontractors and trades on the job site num .
prestorm activities including num .
responsibilities of the wpc manager num .
responsibilities of the crew and crew size num .
stabilization for active and inactive areas num .
stockpile management num .
corrective actions taken for deficiencies identified during prestorm visual inspections num .
activities to be performed during storm events including num .
responsibilities of the wpc manager section num water pollution control num num .
responsibilities of the crew and crew size num .
wpc practices for maintenance and repair num .
flood contingency measures have the rain event action plan at the job site at least num hours before a forecasted storm event .
retain a printed copy of each rain event action plan at the job site as part of the swppp .
numcnum stormwater annual report submit num copies of a stormwater annual report before july numth for the preceding construction period from july numst through june numth or within num days after contract acceptance if construction ends before june numth .
for a project in the lake tahoe hydrologic unit submit the stormwater annual report before october numst for the preceding construction period from october numth through october numth or within num days after contract acceptance if construction ends before october numth .
the stormwater annual report must include num .
project information such as a description of the project and work locations num .
stormwater monitoring information including num .
summary and evaluation of sampling and analysis results and laboratory reports num .
analytical methods reporting units and detections limits for analytical parameters num .
summary of the corrective actions taken num .
identification of the corrective actions taken and compliance activities not implemented num .
summary of violations num .
names of the individuals performing stormwater inspections and sampling num .
logistical information for inspections and sampling including location date time and precipitation num .
visual observations and sample collection records num .
documentation of training for individuals responsible for num .
permit compliance num .
installation inspection maintenance and repair of wpc practices num .
development and revision of the swppp allow num days for review .
if revisions are required the engineer notifies you of the date the review stopped and provides comments .
submit a revised report within num business days of receiving the comments .
the departments review resumes when a complete report has been resubmitted .
submit an electronic copy on a readonly cd dvd or other engineerauthorized data storage device and num printed copies of the authorized stormwater annual report signed by the wpc manager .
numcnum annual certification submit an annual certification of compliance as described in the departments stormwater pollution prevention plan swppp and water pollution control program wpcp preparation manual before july numth of each year .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum regulatory requirements except for a project in the lake tahoe hydrologic unit discharges of stormwater from the project must comply with npdes general permit for storm water discharges associated with construction and land disturbance activities order no .
numdwq npdes no .
casnum referred to herein as permit .
for a project in the lake tahoe hydrologic unit discharges of stormwater from the project must comply with the npdes general permit for general waste discharge requirements and national pollutant discharge elimination system permit for storm water discharges associated with construction activity in section num water pollution control num the lake tahoe hydrologic unit counties of alpine el dorado and placer order no .
rnumtnum and npdes no .
cagnum .
the lake tahoe regional general permit may be viewed at the website for the swrcb storm water program lahontan region general permits .
numdnum water quality numdnuma general assign trained personnel to collect water quality samples .
the personnel must comply with the equipment manufacturers instructions for the collection of samples analytical methods and equipment calibration .
samples taken for laboratory analysis must comply with water quality sampling procedures and be analyzed by a statecertified laboratory under num cfr part num guidelines establishing test procedures for the analysis of pollutants .
for a risk level num or risk level num project take samples for ph and turbidity from representative and accessible locations upstream and downstream of the discharge point .
for multiple discharge points obtain samples from a single upstream and a single downstream location .
if the receiving water monitoring trigger for turbidity is exceeded for a risk level num project take samples and analyze the suspended sediment concentration under astm dnum at a minimum detection limit of num mgl .
numdnumb numeric action levels for a risk level num or risk level num project test the receiving water under the test methods and at the detection limits for the nals shown in the following table quality characteristic test method detection limit min nal turbidity max ntu field test with calibrated portable instrument num num ph field test with calibrated portable instrument num num for a project in the lake tahoe hydrologic unit test the receiving water under the test method and at the detection limits for the nals shown in the following table quality characteristic test method detection limit min nal ph field test with calibrated portable instrument num num the daily average sampling limits must be within the specified range .
numdnumc receivingwater monitoring triggers for a risk level num project test the receiving water under the test methods and at the detection limits for the monitoring triggers shown in the following table quality characteristic test method detection limit min monitoring trigger turbidity max ntu field test with calibrated portable instrument num num ph field test with calibrated portable instrument num num the storm event daily average for storms up to the numyear numhour storm must not exceed the receiving water monitoring trigger for turbidity .
the daily average sampling results must not exceed the receivingwater monitoring trigger for ph .
numdnumd numeric effluent limitations for a project in the lake tahoe hydrologic unit test the receiving water under the test methods and at the detection limits for the nals shown in the following table section num water pollution control num quality characteristic test method detection limit min nel turbidity max ntu field test with calibrated portable instrument num num the storm event daily average for storms up to the numyear numhour storm must not exceed the nel for turbidity .
numdnum water quality control for a risk level num or risk level num project collect water samples num .
during a storm event for num .
each nonvisible pollutant source and a corresponding uncontaminated control sample num .
all locations identified on the rain event action plan num .
during a qualifying rain event for num .
each nonvisible pollutant source and a corresponding uncontaminated control sample num .
turbidity ph and other constituents as required num .
all locations identified on the rain event action plan collect at least num samples for each day of a qualifying rain event .
collect samples during num normal working hours and num the first num hours of each storm event .
collect receiving water samples for a risk level num project and if a direct discharge to receiving waters occurs .
if a downstream sample shows an increased level of turbidity ph or other constituent assess wpc practices site conditions and surrounding influences to determine the probable cause for the increase .
you may request or the engineer may order laboratory analysis of stormwater samples .
if ordered laboratory analysis of stormwater samples is change order work .
numdnumdnum reserved num materials not used num construction obtain install and maintain a rain gauge at the job site .
observe and record precipitation daily .
for a project that requires a rain event action plan implement the plan including crew mobilization at least num hours before precipitation occurs .
continue swppp implementation during any suspension of work activities .
num payment for a project with num original working days or less the department pays for prepare stormwater pollution prevention plan as follows num .
total of num percent of the item total upon authorization of the swppp num .
total of num percent of the item total upon contract acceptance for a project with more than num original working days the department pays for prepare stormwater pollution prevention plan as follows num .
total of num percent of the item total upon authorization of the swppp num .
total of num percent of the item total upon work completion num .
total of num percent of the item total upon contract acceptance the department does not pay for the preparation collection laboratory analysis and reporting of stormwater samples for nonvisible pollutants if wpc practices are not implemented before precipitation or if you fail to correct a wpc practice before precipitation .
section num water pollution control num the department pays num .
num for each authorized rain event action plan num .
num for each authorized stormwater annual report the department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the quantity of num .
rain event action plan num .
storm water sampling and analysis day num .
storm water annual report num job site management num general numa summary section num includes specifications for performing job site management work .
job site management work includes spill prevention and control material management waste management nonstormwater management and dewatering activities .
temporary linear sediment barriers must comply with section num .
numb definitions minor spill spill of oil gasoline paint or other materials in such small quantities that can easily be controlled by a first responder upon discovery of the spill .
semisignificant spill spill of oil gasoline paint or other materials in quantities that can be controlled by a first responder with help from other personnel .
significant or hazardous spill spill of oil gasoline paint or other materials in quantities that can not be controlled by job site personnel .
numc submittals at least num days before the start of dewatering activities submit a dewatering and discharge work plan .
the dewatering and discharge work plan must include num .
title sheet and table of contents num .
description of dewatering and discharge activities detailing the locations quantity of water equipment and discharge point num .
estimated schedule for dewatering and the discharge start and end dates of intermittent and continuous activities num .
discharge alternatives such as dust control or percolation num .
visual monitoring procedures with inspection log num .
copy of the approval to discharge into a sanitary sewer system for material used or stored within the job site submit the following documents as informational submittals num .
sds at least num business days before material is used or stored num .
monthly inventory records submit approval from the local health agency city county and sewer district before discharging from a sanitary or septic system directly into a sanitary sewer system .
submit a discharge notification upon discovery of a spill or discharge of materials into a body of water .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials not used section num water pollution control num num construction numa general implement effective housekeeping practices for handling storing using and disposing of materials to prevent pollution .
limit potential pollutants at their source before they come in contact with stormwater .
numb spill prevention and control numbnum general keep material or waste storage areas clean well organized and equipped with enough cleanup supplies for the material being stored .
implement spill and leak prevention procedures for chemicals and hazardous substances stored on the job site .
if you spill or your equipment or materials leak chemicals or hazardous substances at the job site you are responsible for all associated cleanup costs and related liability .
prevent spills from entering stormwater runoff before and during cleanup activities .
do not bury the spill or wash it with water .
immediately report spills to the wpc manager .
as soon as it is safe contain and clean up spills of petroleum materials and sanitary and septic waste substances listed in num cfr parts num num and num .
comply with section num for a spill or leak that produces hazardous waste .
numbnum minor spills clean up a minor spill as follows num .
contain the spread of the spill .
num .
recover the spilled material using absorbents .
num .
clean the contaminated area .
num .
promptly dispose of the contaminated material and absorbents .
numbnum semisignificant spills immediately clean up a semisignificant spill as follows num .
contain the spread of the spill .
num .
on a paved or other impervious surface encircle and recover the spilled material with absorbents .
num .
on soil construct an earthen dike and dig up the contaminated soil for disposal .
num .
during precipitation cover the spill with nummil plastic sheeting or other material to prevent contamination of the runoff .
num .
promptly dispose of the contaminated material and absorbents .
numbnum significant or hazardous spills immediately notify the engineer and qualified personnel of a significant or hazardous spill .
handle the spill as follows num .
do not attempt to clean up the spill until qualified personnel have arrived .
num .
obtain the immediate services of a spill contractor or hazardous material team .
num .
notify local emergency response teams by dialing num and county officials by using the emergency phone numbers retained at the job site .
num .
notify the california state warning center at num num .
num .
notify the national response center at num num regarding spills of federal reportable quantities under num cfr num num and num .
num .
notify other agencies as appropriate including num .
fire department num .
public works department num .
us coast guard num .
california highway patrol num .
city police or county sheriffs department num .
dtsc num .
department of conservation division of oil gas and geothermal resources section num water pollution control num num .
calosha num .
rwqcb numbnumbnum reserved numc material management numcnum general minimize or eliminate discharge of material into the air storm drain systems and receiving waters while taking delivery of using or storing the following materials num .
hazardous chemicals including acids lime glues adhesives paints solvents and curing compounds num .
soil stabilizers and binders num .
fertilizers num .
detergents num .
plaster num .
petroleum materials including fuel oil and grease num .
asphalt and concrete components num .
pesticides and herbicides employees trained in emergency spill cleanup procedures must be present during the unloading of hazardous materials or chemicals .
minimize the use of hazardous materials if practicable .
perform each of the following activities at least num feet from a concentrated flow of stormwater a drainage course or an inlet wherever it is performed num within the floodplain or num at least num feet outside the floodplain num .
stockpiling materials num .
storing piledriving equipment and liquid waste containers num .
washing vehicles and equipment in outside areas num .
fueling and maintaining vehicles and equipment numcnum material storage store materials in their original containers with the original labels maintained in legible condition .
immediately replace damaged or illegible labels .
comply with section num for the storage of liquids petroleum materials and substances listed in num cfr num num and num .
store bagged or boxed material on pallets .
protect bagged or boxed material from wind and rain during nonworking days and whenever precipitation is forecasted .
numcnum stockpile management minimize stockpiling of materials at the job site .
do not allow soil sediment or other debris from stockpiles to enter storm drains open drainages or watercourses .
manage stockpiles by implementing wpc practices on num .
active stockpiles before a forecasted storm event num .
inactive stockpiles according to the wpcp or swppp schedule cover active and inactive soil stockpiles with soil stabilization material or a temporary cover and surround them with a linear sediment barrier .
cover stockpiles of concrete and asphalt concrete rubble hma ab or as with a temporary cover and surround them with a linear sediment barrier .
place stockpiles of pressuretreated wood on pallets and cover them with an impermeable material .
section num water pollution control num place stockpiles of cold mix asphalt concrete on an impervious surface and cover them with an impermeable material .
protect the stockpile from stormwater runon and runoff .
repair or replace linear sediment barriers and covers as needed to keep them functioning properly .
if sediment accumulates to num of the linear sediment barriers height remove the accumulated sediment .
numcnumcnum reserved numd waste management numdnum general manage solid waste under section num .
manage hazardous waste under section num .
numdnum paint waste clean waterbased and oilbased paint from brushes or equipment within a contained area to prevent contamination of soil receiving waters or storm drain systems .
handle and dispose of paints thinners solvents residues and sludges that can not be recycled or reused as hazardous waste under section num num .
when thoroughly dry dispose of dry latex paint paint cans used brushes rags absorbent materials and drop cloths as solid waste under section num .
numdnum concrete waste prevent the discharge of concrete and asphalt concrete waste into storm drain systems and receiving waters .
collect concrete waste including grout dust and debris from demolition saw cutting coring grinding or grooving simultaneously with the wasteproducing activity .
numdnum sanitary and septic waste do not bury or discharge wastewater from a sanitary or septic system within the highway .
a sanitary facility discharging into a sanitary sewer system must be properly connected and free from leaks .
place a portable sanitary facility at least num feet away from storm drains receiving waters and flow lines .
comply with local health agency regulations if using an onsite disposal system .
numdnum liquid waste prevent jobsite liquid waste from entering storm drain systems and receiving waters .
liquid wastes include num .
drilling slurries or fluids num .
grease and oilfree wastewater and rinse water num .
dredgings including liquid waste from cleaning drainage systems num .
liquid waste running off a surface including wash and rinse water num .
other nonstormwater liquids not covered by separate permits store liquid waste in structurally sound leakproof containers such as rolloff bins or portable tanks .
provide enough liquid waste containers with enough volume to prevent overflow spills and leaks .
store containers at least num feet from moving vehicles and equipment .
remove and dispose of deposited solids from sediment traps under section num unless another method is authorized .
liquid waste may require testing to determine hazardous material content before disposal .
dispose of drilling fluids and residue .
if an authorized location is available within the job site fluids and residue exempt under num ca code of regs numg may be dried by evaporation in a leakproof container .
dispose of the remaining solid waste under section num .
section num water pollution control num numdnumdnum reserved nume nonstormwater management numenum general use water for work activities such that erosion and the discharge of pollutants into storm drain systems and receiving waters are prevented .
obtain authorization before washing anything at the job site with water that could discharge into a storm drain system or receiving waters .
immediately report discharges .
sweep and vacuum paved areas .
do not wash paved areas with water .
direct runoff water including water from the repair of a water line from the job site to areas where it can infiltrate into the ground .
do not allow spilled water to escape the areas used to fill water trucks .
manage runon to minimize contact with job site water .
numenum illicit connection and illegal discharge detection and reporting before starting work and daily thereafter inspect the job site and its perimeter for the following evidence of illicit connections illegal discharges and dumping num .
debris or trash piles num .
staining or discoloration on pavement or soils num .
pungent odors coming from drainage systems num .
discoloration or an oily sheen on water num .
stains and residue in ditches channels or drain boxes num .
abnormal water flow during dry weather num .
excessive sediment deposits num .
nonstandard drainage junction structures num .
broken concrete or other disturbances at or near junction structures if evidence of an illegal connection discharge or dumping is discovered immediately notify the engineer .
do not take further action unless ordered .
assume that unlabeled or unidentifiable material is hazardous .
numenum vehicle and equipment cleaning limit vehicle and equipment cleaning or washing at the job site except for the safety and protection of the equipment and as needed to comply with placs .
notify the engineer before cleaning vehicles and equipment at the job site with soap solvents or steam .
contain and recycle or dispose of resulting waste under section num or section numdnum whichever is applicable .
do not use diesel to clean vehicles or equipment .
minimize the use of solvents .
clean or wash vehicles and equipment in a structure equipped with disposal facilities .
you may wash vehicles in an outside area if the area is num .
paved with concrete or asphalt concrete num .
surrounded by a containment berm num .
equipped with a sump to collect and dispose of wash water use as little water as practicable when washing vehicles and equipment .
hoses must be equipped with a positive shutoff valve .
discharge the liquid from wash racks to a recycling system or to another authorized system .
remove liquids and sediment as necessary .
numenum vehicle and equipment fueling and maintenance if practicable perform maintenance on vehicles and equipment offsite .
if fueling or maintenance must be performed at the job site obtain authorization for an assigned area or areas for these activities before using them .
minimize mobile fueling and maintenance activities .
perform fueling and maintenance activities on level ground in areas protected from stormwater runon and runoff .
use containment berms or dikes around fueling and maintenance areas .
keep enough absorbents and spill kits in the fueling or maintenance area and on fueling trucks to handle potential spills .
dispose of spillcleanup material and kits immediately after use .
use drip pans or absorbent pads during fueling or maintenance .
section num water pollution control num do not leave fueling or maintenance areas unattended during fueling and maintenance activities .
fueling nozzles must be equipped with num an automatic shutoff control and num vapor recovery where required by the air quality management district .
secure nozzles in an upright position when not in use .
do not top off fuel tanks .
recycle or properly dispose of used batteries and tires .
if leaks can not be repaired immediately remove the vehicle or equipment from the job site .
numenum material and equipment used over water place drip pans and absorbent pads under vehicles and equipment used over water .
keep enough spill cleanup material with the vehicles and equipment to handle potential spills .
place drip pans or plastic sheeting under vehicles and equipment on docks barges or other surfaces over water whenever the vehicles or equipment will be idle for more than num hour .
install watertight curbs or toe boards on barges platforms docks or other surfaces over water to contain material debris and tools .
secure any material or debris to prevent spills or discharge into the water due to wind .
report discharges to receiving waters immediately upon discovery .
numenum structure removal over or adjacent to water do not allow demolished material to enter storm drain systems and receiving waters .
use authorized covers and platforms to collect debris .
use attachments on equipment to catch debris during small demolition activities .
empty debriscatching devices daily and handle debris under section numd .
numenum paving sealing saw cutting grooving and grinding activities prevent the following materials from entering storm drain systems and receiving waters num .
cementitious material num .
asphaltic material num .
aggregate or screenings num .
saw cutting grooving and grinding residue num .
pavement chunks num .
shoulder backing num .
methacrylate resin num .
sandblasting residue cover drainage inlets and use linear sediment barriers to protect downhill receiving waters until paving saw cutting grooving and grinding activities are completed and excess material has been removed .
cover drainage inlets and manholes during the application of seal coat tack coat slurry seal or fog seal .
whenever precipitation is forecasted limit paving saw cutting and grinding to places where runoff can be captured .
do not start seal coat tack coat slurry seal or fog seal activities when precipitation is forecasted during the application and curing period .
do not grind or groove pavement during precipitation .
use a vacuum to remove slurry immediately after it is produced .
do not allow the slurry to run onto lanes open to traffic or off the pavement .
collect the residue from grooving and grinding activities with a vacuum attachment on the grinding machine .
do not leave the residue on the pavement or allow it to flow across the pavement .
you may stockpile material removed from existing roadways under section numcnum if authorized .
do not coat asphalt trucks and equipment with substances that contain soap foaming agents or toxic chemicals .
when paving equipment is not in use park the paving equipment over drip pans or plastic sheeting with absorbent material to catch drips .
section num water pollution control num numenum thermoplastic striping and pavement markers do not preheat transfer or load thermoplastic within num feet of drainage inlets or receiving waters .
do not unload transfer or load bituminous material for pavement markers within num feet of drainage inlets or receiving waters .
collect and dispose of bituminous material from the roadway after removing markers .
numenum pile driving keep spill kits and cleanup materials at pile driving locations .
park pile driving equipment over drip pans absorbent pads or plastic sheeting with absorbent material .
protect pile driving equipment by parking it on plywood and covering it with plastic if precipitation is forecasted .
store pile driving equipment on level ground and protect it from stormwater runon when not in use .
use vegetable oil instead of hydraulic fluid if practicable .
numenum concrete curing do not overspray chemical curing compounds .
minimize the drift by spraying as close to the concrete as practicable .
do not allow runoff of curing compounds .
cover drainage inlets before applying the curing compound .
minimize the use and discharge of water by using wet blankets or similar methods to maintain moisture when concrete is curing .
numenum concrete finishing collect and dispose of num water and solid waste from highpressure water blasting and num sand and solid waste from sandblasting .
before sandblasting cover drainage inlets within num feet of the sandblasting .
minimize the drift of dust and blast material by keeping the nozzle close to the surface of the concrete .
if the character of the blast residue is unknown test for hazardous materials and dispose of it .
inspect the containment structures for concretefinishing waste for damage before each day of use and before forecasted precipitation .
remove the liquid and solid waste from the containment structures after each work shift .
numenumenum reserved numf sweeping sweep by hand or mechanical methods such as vacuuming .
do not use mechanical kick brooms .
sweep paved roads at construction entrance and exit locations and paved areas within the job site num .
during clearing and grubbing activities num .
during earthwork activities num .
during trenching activities num .
during pavementstructure construction activities num .
when vehicles are entering and leaving the job site num .
after soildisturbing activities num .
after observing offsite tracking of material monitor paved areas and roadways within the project .
sweep within num .
num hour if sediment or debris is observed during activities requiring sweeping num .
num hours if sediment or debris is observed during activities not requiring sweeping remove collected material including sediment from paved shoulders drain inlets curbs and dikes and other drainage areas .
you may stockpile collected material at the job site .
dispose of collected material at least once per week if stockpiled .
you may dispose of sediment within the job site collected during sweeping activities .
protect the disposal areas against erosion .
keep dust to a minimum during street sweeping activities .
use water or a vacuum whenever dust generation is excessive or sediment pickup is ineffective .
section num water pollution control num numg dewatering dewatering consists of discharging accumulated stormwater groundwater or surface water from excavations or temporary containment facilities .
perform dewatering work as specified for the work items involved such as a temporary ats or dewatering and discharge .
if dewatering and discharging activities are not specified for a work item and you perform dewatering activities num .
conduct dewatering activities under the departments field guide for construction site dewatering .
num .
ensure any dewatering discharge does not cause erosion scour or sedimentary deposits that could impact natural bedding materials .
num .
discharge the water within the project limits .
dispose of the water if it can not be discharged within project limits due to site constraints or contamination .
num .
do not discharge stormwater or nonstormwater that has an odor discoloration other than sediment an oily sheen or foam on the surface .
immediately notify the engineer upon discovering any such condition .
numhnumj reserved num payment not used num temporary soil stabilization num general section num includes specifications for placing temporary soil stabilization materials .
movein and moveout for temporary erosion control includes num .
moving onto the job site when the engineer determines an area is ready to receive temporary soil stabilization materials num .
setting up all required personnel and equipment num .
moving out all personnel and equipment when work in that area is complete num materials numa general tackifier fiber seed and straw must comply with the specifications for the same materials in section num num except section num does not apply .
fiber for temporary hydraulic mulch tacked straw and hydroseed must be at least num percent wood fiber .
the remaining percentage must be cellulose fiber alternate fiber or a combination of these fibers .
numb erosion control blankets an erosion control blanket must comply with the specifications for recps in section numo except section num does not apply .
an erosion control blanket classified as longterm and nondegradable must be class num rsp fabric .
numc mulch temporary mulch must comply with section nume .
numd cementitious binder cementitious binder must be num .
calcium sulfate hemihydrate num .
at least num percent pure num .
functional for at least num days num .
miscible with water and fiber num .
nontoxic to aquatic organisms num .
free from growth or germinationinhibiting factors section num water pollution control num num .
nonflammable nume soil binder soil binder must comply with the material specifications for tackifier .
numf temporary covers a temporary cover must be a geosynthetic temporary cover plastic sheeting or a combination of both .
plastic sheeting must be a nummilthick singleply geomembrane material complying with astm dnum .
restrainers for securing the cover fabric or plastic sheeting to a slopes surface must be one of the following types num .
gravelfilled bags roped together and spaced not more than num feet apart .
num .
wooden board and steel restrainer .
the wooden board must be num by num inches num feet long and made from fir or pine .
steel reinforcing bars must be spaced not more than num feet apart along the wooden board .
num .
other authorized type .
rope must be at least num inch in diameter and be biodegradable or nondegradable .
biodegradable rope must be made from sisal manila or other natural fiber .
nondegradable rope must be made from nylon polypropylene or other geosynthetic fiber .
the linear sediment barrier must comply with section num .
numg gravelfilled bags a gravelfilled bag must num .
be a geosynthetic bag num .
have inside dimensions from num to num inches long and from num to num inches wide num .
have a bound opening sewn with yarn bound with wire or secured with a closure device num .
weigh from num to num pounds when filled with gravel gravel for a gravelfilled bag must be from num to num inch in diameter and must be clean and free of clay balls organic matter and other deleterious materials .
numhnumj reserved num construction numa general the engineer authorizes the areas to receive soil stabilization materials by approving the placement of stakes or other suitable markers in increments of num ac or less .
place temporary soil stabilization material within num hours after an area is ready to receive the material or before a forecasted storm event .
do not use a hydraulically applied material whenever num .
precipitation occurs num .
water is standing on or moving across the soil surface num .
soil is frozen num .
air temperature is below num degrees f during the tackifiers curing period unless allowed under the tackifier manufacturers instructions and authorized numb temporary erosion control blankets place a temporary erosion control blanket as specified for recps in section numo .
numc temporary mulch spread temporary mulch as specified for spreading mulch in section numenum .
if an application rate is not shown spread mulch to a uniform thickness of num inches .
numd temporary hydraulic mulch apply temporary hydraulic mulch as specified for hydromulch in section numd .
section num water pollution control num if application rates are not shown apply temporary hydraulic mulch at the following rates num .
fiber at num lbac num .
tackifier under the manufacturers instructions for the slope soil and wind conditions nume temporary bonded fiber matrix hydraulic mulch apply temporary bonded fiber matrix hydraulic mulch as specified for bonded fiber matrix in section num numh .
if an application rate is not shown apply temporary bonded fiber matrix hydraulic mulch at the rate of num lbac .
numf reserved numg temporary cementitious binder hydraulic mulch apply temporary cementitious binder hydraulic mulch as specified for hydromulch in section numd .
if application rates are not shown apply temporary cementitious binder hydraulic mulch at the following rates num .
fiber at num lbac num .
cementitious binder at num lbac numh temporary tacked straw apply temporary tacked straw as specified for straw in section numg .
if application rates are not shown apply temporary tacked straw at the following rates num .
straw at num tonsac num .
fiber at num lbac num .
tackifier at the manufacturers instructed rate for the slope soil and wind conditions numi temporary hydroseed apply temporary hydroseed as specified for hydroseed in section numd .
if application rates are not shown for fiber and tackifier apply temporary hydroseed at the following rates num .
seed at the rate shown num .
fiber at num lbac num .
tackifier at the manufacturers instructed rate for the slope soil and wind conditions numj temporary soil binder apply temporary soil binder as specified for hydromulch in section numd .
if application rates are not shown apply temporary soil binder at the manufacturers instructed rate for the slope soil and wind conditions .
numk temporary covers install temporarycover fabric as follows num .
place the fabric num .
loosely on the slope with the longitudinal edges perpendicular to the slope contours num .
on the upper portion of the slope to overlap the fabric on the lower portion of the slope num .
on the side facing the prevailing wind to overlap the fabric on the downwind side of the slope num .
anchor the perimeter edge of the fabric in key trenches .
num .
overlap the edges of the fabric by at least num feet .
num .
place restrainers at the overlap area and along the toe of the slope .
space the restrainers a maximum of num feet on center between the overlaps .
num .
if anchor restraints are used ensure that the leg of the steel reinforcing bar pierces the fabric and holds the wooden lath firmly against the surface of the slope .
section num water pollution control num install a temporary linear sediment barrier to protect excavation and embankment slopes from runon and concentrated flows of stormwater .
place the barrier parallel with the slope contour at the toe of the slope .
angle the last num feet of the barrier upslope at the downhill end of the run .
if you remove a temporary cover to perform other work replace and resecure it within num hour of stopping work .
maintain a temporary cover to minimize the exposure of slopes and prevent material movement beyond the linear sediment barrier .
relocate and secure restrainers to keep the temporary cover in place .
if a temporary cover breaks free immediately resecure it .
repair or replace a temporary cover if any of the following occurs num .
covered area becomes exposed or exhibits visible erosion num .
erosion occurs between the joints or beneath the linear sediment barrier num .
temporary cover becomes detached torn or unraveled numlnumn reserved num payment the payment quantity for temporary soil stabilization bid items paid for by the area is the area measured parallel with the ground surface not including the additional quantity used for overlaps .
the department determines the cost for maintaining soil stabilization measures under section num and pays you num of that cost .
num temporary sediment control num general section num includes specifications for installing temporary sediment control .
temporary linear sediment barriers must comply with section num .
num materials numa general an erosion control blanket must comply with section numonum except section num does not apply .
fiber rolls rope stakes gravelfilled bags and foam barriers must comply with section num .
numb rigid plastic barriers a rigid plastic barrier must num .
have an integrated filter num .
have a formed outer jacket of perforated hdpe or polyethylene terephthalate num .
have a flattened tubularshaped cross section num .
be made from virgin or recycled materials num .
be free of biodegradable filler materials that degrade the physical or chemical characteristics of the completed filter core or outer jacket num .
have a length of at least num feet per unit num .
have the ability to interlock separate units into a long barrier such that water does not flow between the units num .
comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num water pollution control num quality characteristic test method requirement grab tensile strength of outer jacket material min lbsq in each direction astm dnuma num break strength of outer jacket lbsq in astm dnuma num permittivity of filter core min numsec astm dnum num flow rate of filter core gpm per sq ft astm dnum num filter core aperture size max microns num uv stability of outer jacket and filter core min percent tensile strength after num hours xenonarc lamp and water spray weathering method astm dnum num ayou may use other appropriate test method for the specific polymer .
for an inlet with a curb opening but no grate the rigid plastic barrier must be sized to fit the opening and have num .
horizontal flap of at least num inches with an underseal gasket to prevent underflows num .
highflow bypass num .
vertical height of at least num inches after installation for a grated inlet without a curb opening the rigid plastic barrier must be sized to fit the inlet and num .
cover the grate by at least num inches on each side and have an underseal gasket to prevent underflows num .
have a highflow bypass num .
have a vertical height of at least num inches after installation for a grated inlet with a curb opening the rigid plastic barrier must be sized to fit and have num .
horizontal flap that covers the grate by at least num inches on the num sides away from the curb opening and must have an underseal gasket to prevent underflows num .
highflow bypass num .
section that covers at least num inches vertically above the flow line of the curb opening after installation numc sediment filter bags each sediment filter bag must be sized to fit the catch basin or drainage inlet and have a highflow bypass .
a sediment filter bag may include a metal frame .
if the sediment filter bag does not have a metal frame and is deeper than num inches it must include lifting loops dump straps and a restraint cord to keep the sides of the bag away from the walls of the catch basin .
numdnumf reserved num construction numa general remove sediment deposits if the sediment exceeds num inch in depth from the surface of an erosion control blanket .
remove sediment from a type num sediment trap of a temporary inlet if the volume has been reduced by approximately num .
remove sediment from a sediment filter bag if it becomes full or if the restraint cords are no longer visible .
empty a sediment filter bag num .
without a metal frame by placing no .
num steel reinforcing bars through the lifting loops and lifting the filled bag from the drainage inlet num .
with a metal frame by lifting the metal frame from the drainage inlet rinse the sediment filter bag before replacing it at the drainage inlet .
do not allow the rinse water to enter a drainage inlet or waterway .
section num water pollution control num if you place the removed sediment within the job site stabilize the sediment deposits to prevent erosion .
numb temporary check dams before placing a temporary check dam remove obstructions including rocks clods and debris greater than num inch in diameter from the ground .
if a temporary check dam is to be placed in the same area as an erosion control blanket install the blanket before placing the dam .
place a temporary check dam approximately perpendicular to the centerline of the ditch or drainage line .
install the dam with enough spillway depth to prevent flanking of a concentrated flow around its ends .
install a type num or type num dam if the ditch is unlined and a type num dam if the ditch is lined with concrete or asphalt concrete .
for a type num temporary check dam num .
secure the fiber rolls with rope and notched wood stakes .
num .
drive the stakes into the soil until the notch is even with the top of the fiber roll .
num .
lace rope between the stakes and over the fiber roll .
knot the rope at each stake .
num .
tighten by driving the stakes further into the soil and forcing the fiber roll against the surface of the ditch or drainage line .
place a type num temporary check dam as a single layer of gravelfilled bags placed endtoend to eliminate gaps .
if you need to increase the height of the dam add more layers of gravelfilled bags .
stack the bags in the upper row to overlap the joints in the lower row .
stabilize the rows by adding more rows of bags in the lower layers .
numc temporary drainage inlet protection provide temporary drainage inlet protection around drainage inlets as changing conditions require .
the drainage inlet protection must be type num type num type numa type numb type numa type numb type num type numa type numb or a combination of these as needed for the surrounding conditions .
for drainage inlet protection in paved or unpaved areas num .
prevent runoff ponds from encroaching onto the traveled way or overtopping the curb or dike .
use a linear sediment barrier to redirect runoff and control ponding .
num .
clear the area around each drainage inlet of obstructions including rocks clods and debris greater than num inch in diameter before installing the drainage inlet protection .
num .
install the linear sediment barrier upslope of the existing drainage inlet and parallel with the curb dike or flow line to prevent sediment from entering the drainage inlet .
if gravelfilled bags are used for type numa and type numb temporary drainage inlet protection place the gravelfilled bags endtoend to eliminate gaps .
stack the bags such that the upper row overlaps joints in the lower row .
arrange the bags to create a spillway by removing num or more gravelfilled bags from the upper layer .
place fiber rolls over the erosion control blanket for type numa temporary drainage inlet protection .
place the barrier to provide a tight joint with the curb or dike .
cut the cover fabric or jacket to ensure a tight fit .
if a rigid sediment barrier is used for type numa or type numb temporary drainage inlet protection at a grated inlet without a curb opening place the barrier using a gasket to prevent runoff from flowing under the barrier .
secure the barrier to the pavement with nails and adhesive gravelfilled bags or a combination of both .
install a sediment filter bag for type num temporary drainage inlet protection as follows num .
remove the drainage inlet grate .
num .
place the sediment filter bag in the opening .
num .
replace the grate to secure the sediment filter bag in place .
section num water pollution control num numd reserved nume temporary fiber rolls install a temporary fiber roll as specified for installing fiber rolls in section nump .
numf temporary gravel bag berms install a temporary gravel bag berm under section numc .
numf rigid plastic barriers secure a rigid plastic barrier to num .
pavement with numinch concrete nails with numinch washers and solventfree adhesive gravelfilled bags or a combination of both num .
soil with numinch nails with numinch washers and wood stakes numgnumj reserved num payment the payment quantity for temporary sediment control bid items paid for by the length is the length measured along the centerline of the installed material .
the payment quantity for temporary fiber roll does not include the additional quantity used for overlaps .
the department does not pay for the relocation of temporary drainage inlet protection during work progress .
the department determines the cost for maintaining sediment control measures under section num and pays you num of that cost .
num temporary tracking control num general numa general section num includes specifications for limiting and removing sediment and debris tracked onto roadway surfacing .
numb materials not used numc construction do not allow soil sediment or other debris that is tracked onto the surfacing to enter storm drains open drainage facilities and watercourses .
remove any material tracked onto the surfacing within num hours .
numd payment not used num street sweeping numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for sweeping streets .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals at least num business days before starting clearing and grubbing earthwork or any other activity with the potential for tracking sediment or debris submit the number and type of street sweepers that will be used on the project for each activity .
keep and submit records of street sweeping activities including sweeping times sweeping locations and the quantity of collected material .
section num water pollution control num numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials not used numc construction use one of the following types of street sweepers num .
mechanical sweeper followed by a vacuumassisted sweeper num .
vacuumassisted dry waterless sweeper num .
regenerativeair sweeper street sweeping does not void the requirements for residue collection included in other work activities such as grooving grinding or asphalt concrete planing .
sweep streets as specified for sweeping in section numf except use a street sweeper .
at least num street sweeper must be at the job site at all times when street sweeping work is required .
the street sweeper must be in good working order .
numd payment not used num temporary construction roadways and entrances numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for constructing temporary construction roadways and entrances .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals for a construction entrance submit details for alternatives at least num business days before installation .
you may propose alternatives for the sump and corrugated steel panels or eliminate the sump if authorized .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials numbnum general fabric for a temporary construction entrance must be class num rsp fabric .
fabric for temporary construction roadway must be class num rsp fabric .
numbnum rock use type a rock for a type num temporary construction entrance .
type a rock must comply with num .
quality characteristics for rock material in section num num .
sizes shown in the following table square screen size inches percentage passing percentage retained num num num num num num use type b rock for a type num temporary construction entrance .
section num water pollution control num type b rock must be no .
num railway ballast complying with the arema manual for railway engineering .
do not use blast furnace slag .
use type a or type b rock for a temporary construction roadway .
numbnum corrugated steel panels each corrugated steel panel must num .
be pressed or shop welded num .
have a slot or hook for connecting the panels together numc construction prepare the location for a temporary construction entrance or roadway as follows num .
remove vegetation to the ground level and clear away debris .
num .
grade the ground to a uniform plane .
num .
grade the ground surface to drain .
num .
remove sharp objects that could damage the fabric .
num .
compact the top num feet of the soil to at least a num percent relative compaction .
construct a temporary construction entrance or roadway as follows num .
position the fabric along the length of the entrance or roadway .
num .
overlap the sides and ends of the fabric by at least num inches .
num .
spread rock over the fabric in the direction of traffic .
num .
cover the fabric with rock within num hours .
num .
keep a numinch layer of rock over the fabric to prevent damage from the spreading equipment .
do not drive on the fabric until the rock is spread .
repair fabric damaged during rock spreading by placing new fabric over the damaged area .
the new fabric must be large enough to cover the damaged area and provide at least an numinch overlap on all edges .
maintain a temporary construction entrance or roadway to minimize the generation of dust and tracking of soil and sediment onto public roads .
place additional rock if dust or sediment tracking increases .
repair a temporary construction entrance or roadway if num .
fabric is exposed num .
depressions develop in the surface num .
rock is displaced for a type num temporary construction entrance place rock under the corrugated steel panels .
use at least num corrugated steel panels for each entrance .
couple the panels together to prevent movement .
if using a sump install the sump within num feet of each temporary construction entrance .
numd payment the department determines the cost for maintaining a temporary construction entrance or roadway under section num and pays you num of that cost .
the department does not pay for the relocation of temporary construction entrances or roadways during work progress .
num temporary active treatment systems num general numa summary section num includes specifications for providing a temporary active treatment system for the treatment and discharge of uncontaminated groundwater and accumulated stormwater from excavations or other areas requiring dewatering .
section num water pollution control num you may discharge into a publicly owned treatment works instead of using a temporary active treatment system .
if uncontaminated groundwater stormwater or both are discharged to a publicly owned treatment works obtain a municipal batch discharge permit .
the department does not pay for obtaining the municipal batch discharge permit or for discharging the water .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general submit records for the delivery and removal of ats components .
numcnum active treatment system plan within num days of contract approval submit num copies of the ats plan .
the plan must include num .
title sheet .
num .
table of contents .
num .
certification and approval sheet described in the departments stormwater prevention plan swppp and water pollution control program wpcp preparation manual .
num .
amendment log and format described in the departments stormwater prevention plan swppp and water pollution control program wpcp preparation manual .
num .
description and schedule of the discharge activities .
num .
discharge alternatives including num .
reuse of treated water for job site activities such as dust control irrigation fill compaction or concrete batch plant activities num .
percolation num .
discharge into storm sewers num .
discharge into surface waters num .
treatment system description and components .
num .
anticipated flow rates .
num .
operation and maintenance manual for the equipment .
num .
monitoring sampling and reporting plan including qa and qc .
num .
health and safety plan .
num .
spill prevention plan .
num .
fieldrecorded data visual inspection calibration procedures and examples of logs .
num .
descriptions of measuring equipment .
num .
shop drawings showing num .
section and plan views of stormwater effluent treatment systems num .
location of sampling points for water quality measurements num .
flow path and placement of pipes hoses pumps holding tanks and other equipment used to convey water num .
general position of treatment components relative to excavations or other areas requiring dewatering num .
point of stormwater discharge num .
daily inspection report form .
num .
municipal batch discharge permit from a publicly owned treatment works if required .
num .
coagulanthandling work plan if you use chemical coagulants inline flocculants or both in the treatment system .
the coagulanthandling work plan must include num .
description of wpc practices to prevent accidental spillage overfeeding into the treatment system or other mishandling of coagulant agents num .
monitoring plan for all coagulants flocculants or both num .
description of the coagulation and flocculating agents including chemical and trade names num .
determination of acute or chronic toxicity for aquatic organisms conforming to epa methods for the agents num .
monitoring plan to detect a residual agent at concentrations at or below the established acute toxicity levels for freshwater and marine conditions for that agent section num water pollution control num allow num days for review .
if revisions are required the engineer notifies you of the date the review stopped and provides comments .
submit a revised ats plan within num days of receiving the comments .
the departments review resumes when a complete plan has been resubmitted .
submit an electronic copy on a readonly cd dvd or other engineerauthorized data storage device and num printed copies of the authorized ats plan .
allow num days for the engineer to submit the plan to the swrcb and the rwqcb .
if the engineer requests revisions based on comments from the swrcb or rwqcb submit a revised plan within num business days .
numcnum inspection reports if the ats discharges treated effluent submit a daily inspection report within num hours .
the daily inspection report must include num .
discharge volumes num .
water quality monitoring records num .
discharge point information that includes num .
date and time num .
weather conditions including wind direction and velocity num .
presence or absence of water fowl or aquatic wildlife num .
color and clarity of the effluent discharge num .
erosion or ponding downstream of the discharge point num .
photographs labeled with the time date and location numcnum notice of discharge reports if observations and measurements confirm that a residual chemical or water quality standard is exceeded submit the notice of discharge within num hours after exceeding the limits .
the notice of discharge must include documentation of the reasons for exceeding the water quality standard and any corrective work performed to prevent a recurrence .
numcnum numeric effluent limitation violation reports if a nel is exceeded for a risk level num project notify the engineer and submit a violation report within num hours .
the report must include num .
field sampling results and inspections including num .
parameters analytical methods reporting units and detection limits num .
date location time of sampling visual observations and measurements num .
quantity of precipitation of the storm event num .
description of wpc practices and corrective actions taken to manage nel exceedance for a project in the lake tahoe hydrologic unit the nel violation report must be submitted within num hours .
the analytical results less than the method detection limits must be reported as less than the method detection limits .
numcnumcnum reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum regulatory requirements the design installation operation and monitoring of the temporary ats and monitoring of the treated effluent must comply with attachment f of npdes general permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction and land disturbance activities order no .
numdwq npdes no .
casnum .
for a project within the lake tahoe hydrologic unit the design installation operation and monitoring of the temporary ats and monitoring of the treated effluent must comply with attachment e of the npdes general permit for general waste discharge requirements and national pollutant discharge elimination system permit for storm water discharges associated with construction activity in the lake tahoe hydrologic unit counties of alpine el dorado and placer order no .
rnumtnum and npdes no .
cagnum .
section num water pollution control num for a project within the lake tahoe hydrologic unit the discharger must perform toxicity testing that complies with the following if operating a temporary ats in batchtreatment mode num .
discharger must initiate acute toxicity testing on effluent samples from each batch before discharge .
send bioassays to a laboratory certified by the department of public health elap .
the laboratory must test for whole effluent toxicity under test enum .
num .
conduct acute toxicity tests as outlined for a numhour acute test in methods for measuring the acute toxicity of effluents and receiving water to freshwater and marine organisms usepanumrnum num for fathead minnow pimephales promelas .
the acute toxicity for rainbow trout oncorhynchus mykiss may be used as a substitute for testing fathead minnows .
num .
toxicity tests must comply with qa criteria and test acceptability criteria in the most recent versions of the epa test method for whole effluent toxicity .
numdnum training provide training to each ats operator .
the training must num .
be specific to the operation of the ats and liquid coagulants for stormwater discharges in the state including num .
coagulation basics including chemistry and physical processes num .
system design and operating principles num .
control systems num .
coagulant selection such as jar testing and dose determination num .
handling and safety measures for the toxicity of coagulants num .
monitoring sampling and analysis num .
reporting and recordkeeping num .
emergency response num .
consist of a formal class with a certificate testing and certificate renewal requirements num .
provide a minimum of num hours of classroom and num hours of field training numdnum equipment calibration calibrate the flow meter and devices for taking water quality measurements under the manufacturers instructions and in the presence of the engineer .
numdnum quality control water discharged from a temporary ats must comply with the nels for discharge effluents and the receiving waters .
test the water discharged from an ats under the test methods shown in the following table numeric effluent limitations quality characteristic test method detection limit min requirement turbidity min ntu epa num or field test with calibrated portable instrument num num for daily flowweighted average num for any single sample ph field test with calibrated portable instrument num lower nel num upper nel num the residual chemical for the coagulant must be less than num percent of the maximum allowable threshold concentration for the most sensitive species .
take water quality measurements to verify the limit requirements for the receiving waters and discharge effluent for num .
discharges of water lasting more than num hours within a numhour period as follows num .
if the discharge could affect the receiving body of water in a stormwater drainage system take measurements at the background and receivingwater sampling locations not more than num hour before discharging the treated water .
section num water pollution control num num .
perform startupphase sampling num to num minutes after measurable runoff occurs during a storm .
startupphase sampling includes stormwater runoff background and receiving water measurements taken during the first num days of discharge .
take samples at regular intervals during the storm .
take at least num samples for each discharge lasting num hours or more .
the time between sampling must not exceed num hours .
num .
take regularphase samples at least twice daily .
regularphase sampling includes effluent background and receiving water measurements that occur after the numrd day of activities .
take samples at regular intervals .
num .
if the receiving body of water noticeably changes in color or clarity take additional effluent background and downstream measurements .
num .
if an initial measurement shows that the water quality limits have been exceeded take an additional measurement from num minutes to num hour after the initial measurement .
num .
if the numnd test confirms the limits were exceeded revert to the startupphase sampling requirements before resuming regularphase sampling .
num .
for cofferdam maintenance dewatering you may discontinue regularphase monitoring after num days if the effluent and receiving water measurements are consistently below the water quality limits .
num .
discharges of water lasting num hours or less within a numhour period as follows num .
if the discharge could affect the receiving body of water in a stormwater drainage system take measurements at the background and receiving watersampling locations not more than num hour before discharging the treated water .
num .
take effluent background and receiving water measurements from num to num minutes after initiating the discharge .
continue to take measurements every hour .
num .
if an initial measurement shows that the water quality limits have been exceeded take an additional measurement not more than num minutes after the initial measurement .
num .
if the receiving body of water noticeably changes in color or clarity take additional effluent background and downstream measurements .
num .
all other discharges of water as follows num .
measure the stormwater effluent turbidity and ph at the end of the outfall or inline sampling port .
num .
measure the receiving water turbidity ph and dissolved oxygen at num a point within the mixing zone and num a point within num feet downstream of the discharge point .
num .
measure the natural background turbidity dissolved oxygen and ph at a location that is from num to num feet upstream of the discharge point .
if another job site activity is being performed measure at least num feet upstream of the discharge point .
num .
if the discharge is made into a surface body of water or into a stormwater drainage system that produces an observable effect on a surface body of water monitor the receiving water .
for receiving water deeper than num feet take depthaveraged measurements by taking samples from num points within the water column and averaging the following num measurements num .
num inches below the surface num .
mid depth num .
num inches above the bottom for receiving water less than num feet deep take the measurement num inches below the surface .
num materials numa general an ats must be designed for the site conditions and anticipated flow rate and must include num a treatment system num a collection and conveyance system and num a discharge method and location .
the ats must be capable of capturing and treating within a numhour period a volume equal to the runoff from a numyear numhour storm event using a watershed coefficient of num .
monitoring equipment must be interfaced with the control system of the ats to provide shutoff or recirculation whenever effluent readings do not comply with the turbidity and ph limits .
the control system must default to recirculation or shutoff during a power failure or catastrophic event .
section num water pollution control num the control system must control the amount of the coagulant flocculant or both to prevent overdosing .
numb treatment system the treatment system must be capable of removing sediment and turbidityproducing suspended solids .
primary and secondary treatment may be required or the design of the treatment system may require combined use of the various treatment components in series to achieve effective treatment .
the treatment system must have components to num .
remove sediment and turbidityproducing suspended solids .
components may include desilting basins settling tanks sediment traps gravity bag filters sand media filters pressurized bag filters cartridge filters chemical coagulants and inline flocculants temporary holding tanks or any combination necessary to provide primary and secondary treatment .
num .
adjust the ph or dissolved oxygen by num .
addition of sulfuric phosphoric citric or nitric acid under the suppliers specifications for the treatment of water with high ph .
you may use hydrochloric acid if the water is dechlorinated before discharge .
num .
filtration through a limestone bed or the addition of sodium hydroxide for the treatment of water with a low ph .
num .
aeration for the treatment of water with low dissolved oxygen .
numc collection and conveyance system the collection and conveyance system must include pumps and piping to convey the water from the point of dewatering or stormwater capture to the treatment system and to the point of discharge .
pumps and piping must comply with section num .
numd monitoring equipment monitoring equipment for the ats must record data at least once every num minutes and cumulative flow data daily .
the recording system must have the capacity to record a minimum of num days of continuous data .
num construction numa general discharge treated water num .
to control dust in an active area num .
to land where the grade allows sheet flow and the soil allows infiltration num .
such that it does not num .
cause erosion and scour .
if scour occurs repair the damage and install an energy dissipater .
num .
impact the natural bedding and aquatic life .
maintain the ats to provide proper functioning and prevent leaks .
repair or replace the any component of the dewatering equipment that is not functioning properly .
remove sediment from the storage or treatment cells as necessary to ensure the cells maintain their required water storage capability .
sediments removed from the uncontaminated areas during maintenance of the treatment system must be dried distributed uniformly and stabilized at a location within the project limits where authorized .
relocate the ats as needed .
numb monitoring numbnum general while operating the ats monitor num .
influent and effluent turbidity num .
influent and effluent ph num .
residual chemical num .
effluent flow rate and flow volume section num water pollution control num use a flow meter to measure all discharges from treatment activities .
numbnum corrective measures if observations and measurements determine the water quality limits are exceeded immediately stop the discharge notify the engineer and start corrective measures to change repair or replace the equipment and procedures used to treat the water .
after the engineer inspects and authorizes your corrective measures resume treatment and discharge activities under the startupphase sampling requirements before resuming regularphase sampling .
num payment not used num temporary concrete washouts num general numa summary section num includes specifications for installing temporary concrete washouts .
you may use any of the following systems for a temporary concrete washout num .
temporary concrete washout facility num .
portable temporary concrete washout num .
temporary concrete washout bin numb definitions reserved numc submittals at least num business days before starting concrete activities submit an informational submittal that includes num .
location of each concrete washout num .
name and location of the offsite disposal site to receive the concrete waste num .
copy of the permit issued by the rwqcb for the offsite commercial disposal site num .
copy of the permit issued by the state or local agency with jurisdiction over a disposal site located outside of the state retain and submit tracking records for the disposal of concrete waste as an informational submittal .
submit a certificate of compliance for num the fabric bag for gravelfilled bags and num the plastic liner .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general the sign for a concrete washout must comply with section numbnum except the sign panel may be plywood .
the sign panel must be at least num by num feet .
the sign legend must read concrete washout in at least numinchhigh black letters on a white background .
numb temporary concrete washout facilities stakes for a temporary concrete washout facility must comply with section numc .
straw bales for a temporary concrete washout facility must comply with section numh .
gravelfilled bags for a temporary concrete washout facility must comply with section numg .
the plastic liner for a temporary concrete washout facility must be num .
new singleply polyethylene sheeting without seams or overlapping joints num .
at least num mils thick section num water pollution control num num .
free of holes punctures tears or other defects numc portable temporary concrete washouts a portable temporary concrete washout must be a commercially available watertight container with enough capacity to contain all liquid and concrete waste generated by washout activities without seepage or spills and be num .
at least num gallons in capacity .
num .
labeled for exclusive use as a concrete waste and washout facility .
concrete washout must be stenciled in numinchhigh black letters on a white background with the top of the letters placed num inches from the top of the container .
numd temporary concrete washout bins a temporary concrete washout bin must be a commercially available watertight container with enough capacity to contain all liquid and concrete waste generated by washout activities without seepage or spills and be num .
at least num cubic yards in capacity num .
rolloff type with or without folding steel ramps num .
labeled for exclusive use as a concrete waste and washout facility numenumg reserved num construction place a concrete washout at the job site num .
before starting concrete placement activities num .
in the immediate area of concrete work where authorized num .
no closer than num feet from any storm drain inlet open drainage facility esa or watercourse num .
away from traffic or public access areas install a concrete washout sign adjacent to each concrete washout location .
use a concrete washout to collect num .
washout from concrete delivery trucks num .
slurries containing concrete or asphalt from saw cutting coring grinding grooving and hydrodemolition num .
concrete waste from mortar mixing stations do not fill a concrete washout higher than num inches below the upper rim .
dispose of concrete waste within num business days after a concrete washout becomes full .
dispose of concrete waste from a concrete washout at a plant licensed to receive solid concrete waste liquid concrete waste or both .
relocate a portable temporary concrete washout or bin as needed for concrete work .
the department does not pay for relocating a portable temporary concrete washout or bin .
secure a portable temporary concrete washout or bin to prevent spilling concrete waste when relocating or transporting it within the job site .
if you spill concrete waste clean up the spilled material and place it back into the concrete washout unit .
num payment not used num temporary linear sediment barriers num general numa summary section num includes specifications for installing temporary linear sediment barriers .
section num water pollution control num numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for num .
fiber rolls num .
silt fence fabrics num .
sediment filter bags num .
foam barriers num .
fabric for gravelfilled bags if you substitute steel wire staples with an alternative attachment device submit a sample of the device at least num business days before its installation .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general stakes ropes and staples must comply with section numr except section num does not apply .
numb fiber rolls a fiber roll must comply with section nump except a fiber roll for a large sediment barrier must num .
have a diameter from num to num inches num .
be at least num feet long num .
weigh at least num lbft numc posts each post must comply with the specifications for a post for a highvisibility fence except num .
post length must be at least num feet except for a temporary reinforced silt fence that must have a post length of at least num .
num feet for a type num installation num .
num feet for a type num installation num .
steel is not allowed for a post for a temporary large sediment barrier numd highvisibility fabric the highvisibility fabric must comply with the specifications for fabric for a highvisibility fence .
nume wire mesh wire mesh for a temporary reinforced silt fence must num .
comply with section nume num .
be fabricated from at least numgauge horizontal and vertical wires welded at each intersection num .
have a maximum opening of num inches wide by num inches high num .
be supplied in numfoot rolls numf wire wire for guy wires and tie wires for a temporary reinforced silt fence must be numgauge iron or steel .
numg anchors anchors for a temporary reinforced silt fence must be fabricated from no .
num steel reinforcing bar .
numh straw bales straw for a straw bale must comply with section numh .
a straw bale must be section num water pollution control num num .
at least num inches wide num inches high num inches long and weigh at least num lb .
num .
composed entirely of vegetative matter except for the binding material .
num .
bound by wire nylon or polypropylene string .
do not use jute or cotton binding .
baling wire must be at least num gauge .
nylon or polypropylene string must be approximately num inch in diameter with num lb of breaking strength .
numi foam barriers a foam barrier must have num .
urethane foamfilled core num .
geosynthetic fabric cover and flap num .
triangular circular or square cross section num .
vertical height of at least num inches after installation num .
horizontal flap at least num inches in width num .
length of at least num feet per unit num .
ability to interlock separate units into a long barrier such that water will not flow between units the geosynthetic fabric cover and flap for a foam barrier must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement grab breaking load in each direction numinch grip min lb astm dnum num apparent elongation in each direction min astm dnum num water flow rate average roll value gpmsq ft astm dnum num permittivity min numsec astm dnum num apparent opening size max average roll value us standard sieve size astm dnum num uv resistance min percent retained grab breaking load at num hours astm dnum num numj gravelfilled bags gravelfilled bags for a temporary gravel bag berm must comply with section numg .
numknumm reserved num construction numa general before installing a temporary linear sediment barrier remove obstructions including rocks clods and debris greater than num inch in diameter from the ground .
maintain a temporary linear sediment barrier to provide sedimentholding capacity and to reduce concentrated flow velocities .
repair or adjust the barrier if rills or other evidence of concentrated runoff occur beneath the barrier .
repair or replace split torn or unraveled material .
add or replace posts stakes or fasteners as needed to prevent sagging or slumping .
reattach any barrier that becomes detached or dislodged from the pavement .
repair a split or torn rigid plastic barrier with numgauge galvanized steel wire or uvstabilized cable ties from num to num inches in length .
remove sediment deposits trash and other debris as needed or ordered .
remove sediment deposits if the sediment exceeds num of the height above the ground behind a barrier .
if you place the removed sediment deposits within the job site stabilize the sediment deposits to prevent erosion .
place gravelfilled bags behind type k temporary railing if used within a shoulder area .
section num water pollution control num numb temporary fiber rolls install temporary fiber rolls as specified for installing fiber rolls in section nump .
numc temporary gravel bag berms place gravelfilled bags endtoend to eliminate gaps in a temporary gravel bag berm .
place the bags approximately parallel with the slope contour .
angle the last num feet upslope at the downhill end of the run .
stack the bags such that the upper row overlaps the joints in the lower row .
add layers of gravelfilled bags to increase the height of a temporary gravel bag berm if needed .
stack the bags in the upper row to overlap the joints in the lower row .
stabilize the rows by adding rows of bags in the lower layers .
numd temporary large sediment barriers install a temporary large sediment barrier as follows num .
place a single row of fiber rolls endtoend approximately parallel with the slope contour .
for any num foot section of fiber roll do not allow the fiber roll to vary by more than num percent from level .
num .
place the fiber rolls in a furrow that is from num to num inches deep .
num .
secure the fiber rolls with wood stakes num feet apart .
num .
place a stake num inches from each end of each fiber roll .
num .
drive the stakes into the soil such that the top of the stakes are less than num inches above the top of the fiber rolls .
num .
angle the last num feet upslope at the downhill end of the run .
nume temporary reinforced silt fences place a temporary reinforced silt fence parallel with the slope contour .
for any numfoot section of reinforced silt fence do not allow the elevation at the base of the fence to vary by more than num of the fence height .
install a temporary reinforced silt fence as follows num .
dig a numinchdeep trench .
num .
place the wire mesh and the bottom of the silt fence fabric in the trench .
num .
place posts on the downhill side of the fabric and wire mesh .
num .
attach the silt fence fabric to the wire mesh with tie wires or locking plastic fasteners along the length of the fence at not more than numfoot horizontal spacing and from top to bottom at not more than numinch vertical spacing .
num .
backfill the trench with soil by hand or mechanical tamping to secure the silt fence fabric and the wire mesh in the trench .
num .
attach guy wires and anchors at each post .
install at least num anchors and guy wires at angle points and end posts .
connect sections of temporary reinforced silt fence as follows num .
join separate sections to form reaches not more than num feet without openings .
num .
secure the end posts of each section by wrapping the tops of the posts with at least num wraps of num gauge tie wire .
if temporary reinforced silt fence type num is shown attach highvisibility fabric to the steel posts with tie wires or locking plastic fasteners .
numf temporary silt fences construct a temporary silt fence with silt fence fabric posts and fasteners assembled at the job site or with prefabricated silt fence .
if prefabricated silt fence is used attach the fabric to the posts by inserting the posts into the sewn pockets .
if the fence is assembled at the job site num .
fasten the fabric to the posts with staples or nails if wood posts are used num .
fasten the fabric to the posts with tie wires or locking plastic fasteners if steel posts are used num .
space the fasteners no more than num inches apart section num water pollution control num place a temporary silt fence parallel with the slope contour .
for any numfoot section of temporary silt fence do not allow the base elevation of the fence to vary by more than num of the height of the fence above the ground .
install a temporary silt fence as follows num .
place the bottom of the fabric in a numinchdeep trench .
num .
secure it with the posts placed on the downhill side of the fabric .
num .
backfill the trench with soil and compact by hand or mechanical methods to secure the fabric in the trench .
connect sections of a temporary silt fence as follows num .
join separate sections to form reaches not more than num feet without openings .
num .
secure the end posts of each section by wrapping the tops of the posts with at least num wraps of num gauge tie wire .
you may install the silt fence by mechanically pushing the silt fence fabric vertically into the soil .
mechanically installed fabric must not slip out of the soil or allow sediment to pass under it .
numg temporary straw bale barriers install a temporary straw bale barrier as follows num .
place a single row of straw bales endtoend and parallel with the slope contour .
for any numfoot section of straw bale barrier do not allow it to vary by more than num percent from level .
num .
place straw bales in a trench or key them into the slope .
place the bales such that the binding wire or string does not come in contact with the soil .
use wood or metal posts as stakes .
num .
secure each straw bale with num stakes .
the numst stake in each bale must be driven toward the previously laid bale to force the bales together .
num .
drive the stakes into the soil such that the top of the stake is less than num inches above the top of the straw bale .
num .
angle the last num feet upslope at the downhill end of the run .
numh temporary foam barriers secure a foam barrier to num .
pavement with num numinch concrete nails numinch washers and solventfree adhesive num gravelfilled bags or num a combination of both num .
soil with numinch nails and numinch washers secure the barrier with num nails at the connection points where barriers overlap .
do not pierce the barriers core with nails .
numi temporary earthen berms construct a temporary earthen berm with native soil or selected material at least num inches high by num inches wide .
compact it by hand or mechanical methods .
numjnuml reserved num payment not used num reserved num num environmental stewardship num general num general section num includes specifications relating to environmental compliance and environmental resource management .
num environmentally sensitive area if an esa is shown the boundaries shown are approximate .
the department marks the exact boundaries on the ground .
do not enter an esa unless authorized .
if an esa is breached immediately num .
stop all work within num feet of the esa boundary num .
secure the area num .
notify the engineer if an esa is damaged the department determines the necessary remediation and the party to perform the work .
the department deducts the cost for this work .
num reserved num cultural resources num general section num includes specifications relating to cultural resources .
num definitions archaeological monitoring area area within or near construction limits where access is allowed but work is subject to archaeological monitoring .
archaeological resources remains of past human activity including historic and prehistoric material such as tools and tool fragments hearth and food remains structural remains and human remains .
num archaeological resources numa general if archaeological resources are discovered within or near construction limits do not disturb the resources and immediately num .
stop all work within a numfoot radius of the discovery num .
secure the area num .
notify the engineer the department investigates the discovery .
do not move archaeological resources or take them from the job site .
do not resume work within the radius of discovery until authorized .
if ordered furnish resources to assist in the investigation or recovery of archaeological resources .
this work is change order work .
numb archaeological monitoring area if an archaeological monitoring area is shown within near or straddling the job site the boundaries shown are approximate .
the department assigns an archaeological monitor to observe work activities within the archaeological monitoring area .
do not work within the area unless the archaeological monitor is present .
the engineer and the archaeological monitor will conduct a field review with you at least num business days before the start of job site activities .
the department marks the exact boundaries of the archaeological monitoring area on the ground .
if a highvisibility fence is shown install it or other authorized enclosure to protect the area and define its section num environmental stewardship num boundaries before starting other job site activities .
submit a schedule showing the days and hours that work will be performed in an archaeological monitoring area at least num business days before starting work in the monitoring area .
submit an updated schedule at least num business days before any changed work day .
num historic structures reserved num reserved num community impacts and environmental justice reserved num native american concerns reserved num aesthetics reserved num biological resources num general section num includes specifications relating to biological resources .
num definitions listed species species listed as threatened or endangered under num the federal endangered species act of num num usc num et seq .
num california endangered species act fish game code num or num both .
listed salmonid salmon steelhead or trout that are listed as a threatened or endangered species under the federal endangered species act or listed or proposed as a threatened or endangered species under the california endangered species act .
nongame birds birds identified in the fish and game code as nongame birds .
permitted biological activities monitoring surveying or other practices that require a take permit and projectspecific permission from the us fish and wildlife service or noaa fisheries or a take permit or memorandum of understanding from the department of fish and wildlife .
protective radius minimum distance between construction activities and a regulated species .
regulated species species protected by one or a combination of the following num .
federal endangered species act of num num usc num et seq .
num .
california endangered species act fish game code num num .
fish game code num num .
national environmental policy act num usc num et seq .
num .
california environmental quality act pub res code num et seq .
num .
other law or regulation governing activities that affect species or their habitats regulated fish listed fish species that are protected by law or regulation .
routine biological activities biological monitoring surveying or other activity that does not require a take permit from the us fish and wildlife service or noaa fisheries or a take permit or memorandum of understanding from the department of fish and wildlife .
serviceapproved biologist biologist whose activities must be approved by a state or federal agency as provided in placs .
take legal definition regarding harm to listed species as defined in num usc num and fish game code num .
section num environmental stewardship num take permit permit granted by the us fish and wildlife service or the noaa fisheries that allows take of federallisted species under num usc num or by the department of fish and wildlife that allows take of statelisted species under fish game code num. temporary wetland protection mat device placed temporarily on a wetland to minimize damage to the soils and habitat .
num species protection numa general section numa applies if species protection areas and requirements are specified in the special provisions .
protect regulated species and their habitat that occur within or near the job site .
upon discovery of a regulated species immediately num .
stop all work within a numfoot radius of the discovery num .
notify the engineer numb bird protection protect migratory and nongame birds their occupied nests and their eggs .
the department anticipates nesting or attempted nesting from february num to september num .
the federal migratory bird treaty act num usc num num cfr num and fish game code num num and num protect migratory and nongame birds their occupied nests and their eggs .
the federal endangered species act of num num usc num and num and the california endangered species act fish game code num prohibit the take of listed species and protect occupied and unoccupied nests of threatened and endangered bird species .
the bald and golden eagle protection act num usc num prohibits the destruction of bald and golden eagles and their occupied and unoccupied nests .
if you find an injured or dead bird or discover migratory or nongame bird nests that may be adversely affected by construction activities immediately num .
stop all work within a numfoot radius of the discovery num .
notify the engineer the department investigates the discovery .
do not resume work within the radius of the discovery until authorized .
if ordered perform one or a combination of the following protection measures num .
install exclusion devices num .
use nestingprevention measures num .
remove and dispose of partially constructed and unoccupied nests of migratory or nongame birds on a regular basis to prevent their occupation these protection measures are change order work .
prevent nest materials from falling into waterways .
numc fish protection protect all life stages of anadromous fish in streams and conduct work activities to allow free passage of anadromous migratory fish .
ensure work activities do not produce sound in streams that causes unauthorized take of listed species .
pump screens must comply with the juvenile fish screen criteria for pump intakes developed by the noaa fisheries .
electrofishing for salmonids must comply with guidelines for electrofishing waters containing salmonids listed under the endangered species act published by the noaa fisheries .
section num environmental stewardship num numd contractorsupplied biologist numdnum general section numdnum applies if a bid item for a contractorsupplied biologist is shown on the bid item list .
the contractorsupplied biologist monitors work activities for the protection of regulated species .
the contractorsupplied biologist must num .
monitor regulated species within the project area num .
ensure that construction activities do not result in the take of regulated species num .
ensure that construction activities comply with placs num .
immediately notify the engineer of any take of regulated species num .
prepare submit and sign notifications and reports all reports must include num .
description of the implementation of plac requirements num .
names of the biologists conducting biological activity num .
dates and times of monitoring num .
locations and activities monitored num .
representative photographs num .
findings num .
recommended protective measures if regulated species are observed num .
name of the biologist who prepared the report num .
signature of the biologist certifying the accuracy of the report submit the name resume and statement of qualifications for a contractorsupplied biologist within num days after contract approval .
if the submittal is incomplete the department provides comments .
submit a revised statement of qualifications within num days of receiving comments .
if required under placs the department sends the biologists statement of qualifications to regulatory agencies for review .
biologists who perform specialized activities must have field experience working with the regulated species or performing the specialized task .
all projectspecific authorizations must be current and valid from start of work until work completion .
do not start work until the contractorsupplied biologist is authorized .
numdnum natural resource protection plan section numdnum applies if a bid item for a natural resource protection plan is shown on the bid item list .
the plan must describe your measures for protecting biological resources and complying with environmental laws regulations and placs .
the plan must be prepared and signed by a contractorsupplied biologist knowledgeable of the regulated species and their habitats .
submit your plan within num days after contract approval .
if the submittal is incomplete the department provides comments .
submit a revised plan within num days of receiving comments .
the natural resource protection plan must include num .
list of species and habitats addressed in the plan num .
list of protocols for species protection surveys with full protocols in an appendix num .
protection measures for regulated species expected at the job site num .
protective radii for encounters with regulated species num .
implementation plan and monitoring schedule for protection measures num .
monitoring duties num .
justification for each instance where protection measures and an implementation plan are not necessary for a regulated species num .
schedule for inspecting protection measures num .
schedule for maintaining protection measures num .
schedule for submittal of monitoring reports num .
response plan for encounters with regulated species section num environmental stewardship num num content and schedule for the biological resource information program num .
location and schedule of fence installation and removal including identification of the species or habitats to be protected within each esa or species protection area num .
protection measures required within each species protection area numdnum biological resource information program reserved num wetland protection prevent permanent damage and minimize temporary damage to wetlands when any motorized equipment or vehicles cross the wetlands .
you may use temporary wetland protection mats to cross wetlands if allowed by regulatory agencies .
num reserved num paleontological resources num general section num includes specifications relating to paleontological resources .
num definitions paleontological resources fossils and the deposits they are found in .
fossils are evidence of ancient life preserved in sediments and rock .
examples of paleontological resources are the remains of num animals num animal tracks num plants and num other organisms .
archaeological resources are not paleontological resources .
fossils found within an archaeological resource are generally considered archaeological not paleontological resources .
paleontological resources mitigation monitoring for fossils and salvage or inplace stabilization if fossils are found .
num discovery of unanticipated paleontological resources if unanticipated paleontological resources are discovered at the job site do not disturb the resources and immediately num .
stop all work within a numfoot radius of the discovery num .
secure the area num .
notify the engineer the department investigates the discovery and modifies the dimensions of the secured area if needed .
do not move paleontological resources or take them from the job site .
do not resume work within the radius of discovery until authorized .
num paleontological resources mitigation reserved num reserved num noise and vibration num general section num includes specifications for controlling noise and vibration .
num noise control control and monitor noise resulting from work activities .
do not exceed num dba lmax at num feet from the job site from num p.m. to num a.m. num reserved num air quality num general section num includes specifications relating to air quality .
section num environmental stewardship num num air pollution control comply with airpollutioncontrol rules regulations ordinances and statutes that apply to work performed under the contract including those provided in govt code num pub cont code num .
do not dispose of material by burning .
num air monitoring reserved num reserved num solid waste disposal and recycling num general section num includes specifications for managing solid waste .
dispose of or recycle solid waste from the job site .
do not allow litter trash or debris to accumulate anywhere on the site including storm drain grates trash racks and ditch lines .
pick up and remove litter trash and debris from the job site at least once a week .
the wpc manager must monitor solid waste storage and disposal procedures .
if practicable recycle nonhazardous waste and excess material .
if recycling is not practicable dispose of the material .
furnish enough closedlid dumpsters of sufficient size to contain the solid waste generated by work activities .
when waste reaches the fill line empty the dumpsters .
dumpsters must be watertight .
do not wash out dumpsters at the job site .
furnish additional containers and more frequent pickup during the demolition phase of construction .
solid waste includes num .
brick num .
mortar num .
timber num .
metal scraps num .
sawdust num .
pipe num .
electrical cuttings num .
nonhazardous equipment parts num .
styrofoam and other packaging materials num .
vegetative material and plant containers from highway planting num .
litter and smoking material including litter generated by the public num .
other trash and debris furnish and use trash containers in the jobsite yard field trailers and locations where workers gather for lunch and breaks .
num solid waste disposal and recycling report submit a solid waste disposal and recycling report between january num and num for each year work is performed under the contract at any time during the previous calendar year .
show the types and amounts of projectgenerated solid waste taken to or diverted from landfills or reused on the project from january num to december num of the previous calendar year .
submit a final solid waste disposal and recycling report within num business days after contract acceptance .
show the types and amounts of projectgenerated solid waste taken to or diverted from landfills or reused on the project from january num to contract acceptance .
for each failure to submit a completed report the department deducts num .
section num environmental stewardship num num reserved num hazardous waste and contamination num general section num includes specifications relating to hazardous waste and contamination .
if hazardous waste is or will be generated on the job site the wpc manager must be knowledgeable of proper handling and emergency procedures for hazardous waste under num cfr numdnumiii and must have successfully completed training under num ca code of regs num .
the wpc manager must num .
oversee and enforce hazardous waste management practices num .
inspect hazardous waste storage areas daily including temporary containment facilities and satellite collection locations num .
oversee hazardous waste transportation activities on the job site num discovery of unanticipated asbestos and hazardous substances upon discovery of unanticipated asbestos or a hazardous substance immediately stop working in the area of discovery and notify the engineer if num .
you reasonably believe the substance is asbestos as defined in labor code num or a hazardous substance as defined in health safety code num and num .
num .
its presence is not described in the contract .
num .
the substance has not been made harmless .
num hazardous waste management handle store and dispose of hazardous waste under num ca code of regs div num .
use the following storage procedures num .
store hazardous waste and potentially hazardous waste separately from nonhazardous waste at the job site .
num .
store hazardous waste using metal containers approved by the us department of transportation for the transportation and temporary storage of hazardous waste .
num .
store hazardous waste in sealed covered containers labeled with the contents and accumulation start date under num ca code of regs div num .
labels must comply with the provisions of num ca code of regs div num .
num and num .
immediately replace damaged or illegible labels .
num .
handle the containers such that no hazardous waste is spilled .
num .
store hazardous waste away from storm drains watercourses moving vehicles and equipment .
num .
furnish containers with enough storage volume at convenient satellite locations for collection of hazardous waste .
when full or no longer needed immediately move the containers to secure temporary containment facilities .
num .
store hazardous waste and potentially hazardous waste in secure temporary containment enclosures within secondary containment facilities .
the secondary containment facilities must be impervious to the stored materials for a minimum contact time of num hours .
locate the temporary enclosures away from public access .
acceptable secure enclosures include a locked chainlink fenced area or a lockable shipping container located on the job site until disposal as authorized .
num .
design and construct secondary containment facilities with the capacity to contain the greater of num precipitation from a numhourlong numyear storm and num percent of the aggregate volume of all containers num entire volume of the largest container within the facility num .
cover secondary containment facilities during nonworking days and if a storm event is predicted .
secondary containment facilities must be adequately ventilated .
num .
keep secondary containment facilities free of accumulated rainwater or spills .
after a storm event or a spill or leak collect the accumulated liquid and place it into storage drums within num hours .
handle these liquids as hazardous waste unless testing determines them to be nonhazardous .
num .
do not store incompatible wastes such as chlorine and ammonia in the same secondary containment facility .
section num environmental stewardship num num .
provide enough separation between storage containers to allow for cleanup of spills or emergency response access .
keep storage areas clean organized and equipped with supplies appropriate for cleaning up the hazardous wastes being stored .
num .
inspect storage areas at least daily and before and after a storm event .
num .
repair or replace perimeter controls containment structures covers and liners as needed .
do not num .
overfill storage containers num .
spill hazardous waste or potentially hazardous waste num .
mix hazardous wastes num .
allow hazardous waste or potentially hazardous waste to accumulate on the ground dispose of hazardous waste within num days of the start of generation .
use a hazardous waste manifest and a transporter registered with the dtsc to transport the waste to an appropriatelypermitted hazardous waste facility .
the transporter must have completed the california highway patrols biennial inspection of terminals program .
num dust control excavation transportation and handling of material containing hazardous waste or contamination must result in no visible dust migration .
when clearing grubbing and performing earthwork operations in areas containing hazardous waste or contamination provide a water truck or tank on the job site .
num stockpiling numa general do not stockpile material containing hazardous waste or contamination unless ordered .
stockpiles containing hazardous waste or contamination must not be placed where affected by surface runon or runoff .
cover stockpiles with a minimum nummilsthick plastic sheeting or num foot of nonhazardous material .
do not place stockpiles in esas .
stockpiled material must not enter storm drains inlets or waters of the state .
numb liner reserved num contractorgenerated hazardous waste numa general you are the generator of hazardous waste produced from materials you bring to the job site .
manage this waste as hazardous waste under section num if it is produced from the following substances num .
petroleum materials num .
asphalt materials num .
concrete curing compound num .
pesticides num .
acids num .
paints num .
stains num .
solvents num .
wood preservatives num .
roofing tar num .
road flares num .
lime num .
glues and adhesives num .
materials classified as hazardous waste under num ca code of regs div num if concentrations of hazardous waste constituents are unknown use a laboratory certified by the swrcbs elap to analyze a minimum of num discrete representative samples of the waste .
determine num whether it is a hazardous waste and num the safe and lawful methods for storage and disposal .
perform sampling and analysis under us epa test methods for evaluating solid waste physicalchemical methods swnum and num ca code of regs div num .
section num environmental stewardship num use your own generators epa identification number and sign hazardous waste manifests for the hazardous waste you generate .
within num hours of transporting contractorgenerated hazardous waste submit a copy of the uniform hazardous waste manifest .
numb contractorgenerated contaminated soil identify contaminated soil resulting from spills or leaks by looking for discoloration or differences in soil properties .
immediately notify the engineer of spills or leaks .
clean spills and leaks as ordered .
sample soil with evidence of contamination and send the samples for analysis to a laboratory certified by the swrcbs elap .
you are the generator of hazardous waste produced by spills and leaks that you cause .
if the soil is determined to be a hazardous waste handle and dispose of it under section num .
prevent the flow of water including groundwater from mixing with contaminated soil by using one or a combination of the following measures num .
berms num .
cofferdams num .
grout curtains num .
freeze walls num .
concrete seal course if water mixes with contaminated soil and becomes contaminated sample the water and send the samples for analysis to a laboratory certified by the swrcbs elap .
if analysis demonstrates that the water is a hazardous waste manage and dispose of it under section num .
num departmentgenerated hazardous waste numa general if the department is the generator of hazardous waste produced from work activities manage this hazardous waste under section num .
numb storage of departmentgenerated hazardous waste labels on storage containers must comply with num ca code of regs num and num .
mark labels with num .
date the hazardous waste was generated num .
hazardous waste num .
composition and physical state of the hazardous waste e.g .
asphalt grindings with thermoplastic or paint num .
toxic num .
name address and telephone number of the engineer num .
contract number num .
name of the contractor or subcontractor handle the storage containers such that no hazardous waste is spilled .
you are the generator of hazardous waste produced from your spills of departmentgenerated hazardous waste .
numc transport and disposal of departmentgenerated hazardous waste dispose of hazardous waste at a california disposal site operating under a dtsc permit .
the engineer provides the departments epa identification number for hazardous waste disposal .
the engineer signs the hazardous waste manifests .
notify the engineer num business days before the manifests are to be signed .
the department does not consider you the generator of hazardous waste and you are not obligated for further cleanup removal or remedial action for departmentgenerated hazardous waste handled and disposed of under num .
section num section num environmental stewardship num num .
state and federal laws and regulations governing hazardous waste num .
county and municipal ordinances and regulations governing hazardous waste within num business days of transporting departmentgenerated hazardous waste submit documentation of proper disposal from the receiving landfill .
num material containing hazardous waste concentrations of aerially deposited lead numa general section num applies if management of material containing hazardous waste concentrations of adl is specified in the special provisions .
section num includes specifications for hazardous waste management while excavating stockpiling transporting placing and disposing of material containing hazardous waste concentrations of adl .
excavate reuse and dispose of material containing adl under the rules and regulations of the following agencies num .
us department of transportation num .
us epa num .
california environmental protection agency num .
cdph num .
dtsc num .
calosha num .
california department of resources recycling and recovery num .
california air resources board numb definitions type ynum material california hazardous waste that may be reused under a variance from the dtsc if the contaminated soil is placed at least num feet above the maximum historic elevation of the water table and covered with at least num foot of nonhazardous soil .
this material contains adl in average concentrations of num mgl or less extractable lead and num mgkg or less total lead .
the average concentrations are calculated using the num percent upper confidence limit .
the extractable lead concentrations are determined by a modified waste extraction test using deionized water as the extractant .
type ynum material california hazardous waste that may be reused under a variance from the dtsc if the contaminated soil is placed at least num feet above the maximum historic elevation of the water table and protected from infiltration by pavement that will be maintained by the department .
this material contains adl in average concentrations between num and num mgl extractable lead and between num mgkg and num mgkg total lead .
the average concentrations are calculated using the num percent upper confidence limit .
the extractable lead concentrations are determined by a modified waste extraction test using deionized water as the extractant .
type znum material departmentgenerated california hazardous waste that must be disposed of at a california class i disposal facility .
type znum material is either num .
surplus material that contains adl in average concentrations greater than or equal to num mgkg total lead or num mgl soluble lead .
the average concentrations are calculated using the num percent upper confidence limit .
the soluble lead is tested using the california waste extraction test .
num .
material that contains adl in average concentrations greater than num mgkg total lead or num mgl extractable lead .
the average concentrations are calculated using the num percent upper confidence limit .
the extractable lead concentrations are determined by a modified waste extraction test using deionized water as the extractant .
type znum material departmentgenerated federal hazardous waste that must be disposed of at a california class i disposal site .
this material contains adl in average concentrations greater than num mgl soluble lead using a num percent upper confidence limit as tested under the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure .
section num environmental stewardship num numc site conditions concentration data and sample location maps for adl are included in the information handout .
numd submittals numdnum general reserved numdnum excavation and transportation plan within num days of contract approval submit num copies of an excavation and transportation plan for material containing hazardous waste concentrations of adl .
if the plan requires revisions the department provides comments .
submit a revised plan within num days of receiving comments .
the engineer may allow construction to proceed while minor revisions or amendments are being completed .
the excavation and transportation plan must comply with num .
dtsc regulations num .
variance regarding the use of material containing adl num .
calosha regulations num .
requirements for the design and development of a sampling plan statistical analysis and reporting of test results under us epa sw num test methods for evaluating solid waste volume ii field manual physicalchemical chapter num section num numdnum burial location report reserved numdnum bill of lading submit copies of the bills of lading as an informational submittal upon placement of type ynum or ynum material in its final location .
nume dust control prevent visible dust migration during excavation transportation placement and handling of material containing hazardous waste concentrations of adl under section num .
numf air monitoring reserved numg material management reserved numh surveying type ynum or ynum material burial locations survey the bottom and top perimeters of each location where you bury type ynum or type ynum material .
the survey must be performed by or under the direction of one of the following num .
land surveyor licensed under the bus prof code ch num starting with num num .
civil engineer licensed before january num num under the bus prof code ch num starting with num survey num points to identify each burial location horizontally and vertically within the specified accuracies and to create closed polygons of the bottom and top perimeters of the burial location .
if needed to adequately define the polygon survey additional points .
establish the position of the bottom and top perimeters before placing subsequent layers of material that obstruct the location .
report each burial location in california state plane coordinates in us survey feet within the appropriate zone of the california coordinate system of num ccsnum and in latitude and longitude .
reference horizontal positions to ccsnum epoch num or later national geodetic survey ngs or california spatial reference center csrc published epoch to an accuracy of num feet horizontally .
identify the survey points to an accuracy of num foot vertically .
reference the top and bottom elevations of the burial section num environmental stewardship num locations to north american vertical datum of num navdnum .
report the accuracy of spatial data in us survey feet under federal geographic data committee fgdcstdnum .
the department does not pay for num .
stockpiling of material containing adl unless the stockpiling is ordered num .
sampling and analysis unless it is ordered numi material transportation before traveling on public roads remove loose and extraneous material from surfaces outside the cargo areas of the transport vehicles .
place tarpaulins or other cover over the cargo as described in the authorized excavation and transportation plan .
you are responsible for costs due to spillage of material containing adl during transport .
transportation routes for type ynum or type ynum material must only include the highway .
numj disposal transport and dispose of material containing hazardous waste levels of lead under federal and state laws and regulations and county and municipal ordinances and regulations .
laws and regulations that govern this work include num .
health safety code num et seq num .
num ca code of regs num et seq num .
num ca code of regs the department does not pay for additional sampling and analysis required by the receiving landfill .
num minimal disturbance of material containing hazardous waste concentrations of aerially deposited lead numa general section num applies if minimal disturbance of material containing hazardous waste concentrations of adl is specified in the special provisions .
section num includes specifications for handling and managing material containing hazardous waste concentrations of adl when there is a minimal disturbance .
compliance with num ca code of regs is not required where there is minimal disturbance of hazardous waste concentrations of adl .
hazardous waste concentrations of adl are typically found within the top num feet of material in unpaved areas of the highway .
management of this material exposes workers to health hazards that must be addressed in your lead compliance plan .
numb material management handling of material containing adl must result in no visible dust migration .
use dust control measures .
a means of controlling dust must be available at all times when handling material in work areas containing adl at hazardous waste concentrations .
separate material from vegetation .
the resulting soil must remain on the job site .
surplus material from the areas containing hazardous waste concentrations of adl must remain in the area of disturbance .
do not dispose of surplus material outside the highway .
num naturally occurring asbestos reserved num departmentgenerated contaminated soil reserved section num environmental stewardship num num removal of yellow traffic stripe and pavement marking with hazardous waste residue numa general section num applies if the removal of existing yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking that will produce hazardous waste residue is specified in the special provisions .
section num includes specifications for removing handling and disposing of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking .
the residue from the removal of this material is a departmentgenerated hazardous waste .
residue from the removal of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking contains lead chromate .
the average lead concentration is at least num mgl soluble lead or num mgkg total lead .
when applied to the roadway the yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking contained as much as num percent lead .
residue produced from the removal of this yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking contains heavy metals in concentrations that exceed thresholds established by the health safety code and num ca code of regs .
for bidding purposes assume the residue is not regulated under the federal resource conservation and recovery act num usc num et seq .
the work associated with the disposal of hazardous waste residue identified by test results to be regulated under the resource conservation and recovery act is change order work .
removal of existing yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking exposes workers to health hazards that must be addressed in your lead compliance plan .
yellow thermoplastic and yellow paint may produce toxic fumes when heated .
numb submittals numbnum general reserved numbnum work plan submit a work plan for the removal containment storage and disposal of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking .
the work plan must include num .
objective of the operation num .
list of removal equipment num .
procedures for the removal and collection of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking residue including dust num .
type of hazardouswaste storage containers num .
description of storage location and how it will be secured num .
hazardous waste sampling protocol and qa requirements and procedures num .
qualifications of sampling personnel num .
name and address of the analytical test laboratory certified by the swrcbs elap for all analyses to be performed num .
name of the hazardous waste transporter and the transporters num dtsc registration certificate num proof of compliance with the california highway patrol biennial inspection of terminals program num .
name and address of the disposal site that will accept the hazardous waste residue if ordered submit a revised work plan within num business days of notification .
numbnum analytical test results submit analytical test results of the residue and chain of custody documentation before num .
requesting the engineers signature on the waste profile document for the disposal facility num .
requesting the generators epa identification number for disposal from the engineer num .
removing the residue from the job site section num environmental stewardship num numbnum disposal documentation submit documentation of proper disposal from the receiving landfill within num business days of transporting residue from the job site .
numc removal when grinding or other authorized methods are used to remove yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking that produces a hazardous waste residue num .
immediately contain and collect the residue including dust num .
use a hepa filterequipped vacuum attachment operated concurrently with the removal operations or other equivalent approved method for collection of the residue numd sampling and testing of residue hazardous waste residue from the removal of yellow thermoplastic and yellow painted traffic stripe and pavement marking must be tested as required by the disposal facility and including num .
total lead by us epa method numb num .
total chromium by us epa method numb num .
soluble lead by the california waste extraction test num .
soluble chromium by the california waste extraction test num .
soluble lead by the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure num .
soluble chromium by the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure from the first num gal of hazardous waste or portion thereof if less than num gal are produced a minimum of num randomly selected samples must be taken and analyzed individually .
samples must not be composited .
from each additional num gal of hazardous waste or portion thereof if less than num gal are produced a minimum of num additional random sample must be taken and analyzed .
use chain of custody procedures consistent with chapter num of us epa test methods for evaluating solid waste physicalchemical methods swnum while transporting samples from the job site to the analytical laboratory .
before performing the analyses the laboratory must homogenize each sample .
the homogenization process must not include grinding of the samples .
the aliquot taken from the sample must be num .
obtained in an amount large enough for all analyses to be performed num .
homogenized a numnd time num .
used for the total and soluble analyses after the numnd homogenization nume transport and disposal of residue request the generators epa identification number when the engineer accepts waste characterization test results documenting that the residue is a hazardous waste .
the engineer signs the manifests as the hazardous waste generator within num business days of num receiving and accepting the analytical test results and num receiving your request for the generators epa identification number .
if test results demonstrate that the residue is a nonhazardous waste and the engineer accepts this determination dispose of the residue at an appropriately permitted ca class ii or ca class iii facility .
the department does not adjust payment for the disposal of nonhazardous residue at ca class ii or class iii facility .
num disturbance of existing paint systems on bridges numa general section num applies if disturbance of the existing paint system on a bridge is specified in the special provisions .
section num includes specifications relating to the disturbance of an existing paint system on a bridge .
any work that disturbs the existing paint system exposes workers to health hazards which must be addressed in your lead compliance plan and produces section num environmental stewardship num num .
debris containing heavy metals in amounts that exceed the thresholds established in num ca code of regs and num ca code of regs .
this debris is a departmentgenerated hazardous waste .
num .
toxic fumes when heated .
grime and detritus already on the bridge before the start of work may also contain lead .
consider the grime and detritus part of the existing paint system .
the department is the hazardous waste generator if the engineer accepts waste characterization test results demonstrating that the debris is a hazardous waste .
contain all debris produced when the existing paint system is disturbed .
if containment measures are inadequate to contain and collect debris produced when the existing paint system is disturbed stop work until num .
revised debris containment and collection plan has been authorized num .
released material has been collected and contained in areas without exposed soil the concentrations of heavy metals in the work area must not increase when the existing paint system is disturbed .
any visible increase in the concentrations of heavy metals must be removed .
handle store transport and dispose of debris produced when the existing paint system is disturbed under applicable federal state and local hazardous waste laws .
numb submittals numbnum general reserved numbnum debris containment and collection plan submit a debris containment and collection plan .
the plan must num .
identify materials equipment and methods to be used when the existing paint system is disturbed num .
include shop drawings of num containment systems complying with section numcnum num components that provide ventilation air movement and visibility for worker safety num .
include the name and location of the analytical laboratory that will perform the analyses num .
identify the hazardous waste transporter that will haul the debris and provide documentation of num current dtsc registration num compliance with the california highway patrols biennial inspection of terminals program num .
include the name and location of the disposal facility that will accept the hazardous waste allow num days for review .
if required submit a revised debris containment and collection plan .
numbnum air monitoring reports reserved numbnum soil sampling results for debris containment verification reserved numbnum waste characterization test results submit waste characterization test results and chain of custody documentation for the debris before num .
requesting the engineers signature on the waste profile document for the disposal facility num .
requesting the generators epa identification number for disposal num .
removing the debris from the job site numbnum disposal documentation submit documentation from the receiving landfill or recycling facility confirming proper disposal within num business days of transporting debris from the project .
section num environmental stewardship num numc safety and health protection measures comply with num ca code of regs including num .
supply clean protective work clothing for num department personnel num .
whenever there is possible exposure to heavy metals or silica dust num .
during application of paint undercoats replace protective work clothing as needed .
do not start any work activities with the potential for lead exposure until the engineer inspects and authorizes protective work clothing and washing facilities .
protective work clothing remains your property upon completion of the contract .
numd work area monitoring reserved nume debris storage debris produced when the existing paint system is disturbed must not be temporarily stored on the ground .
before the end of each work shift remove accumulated debris from the containment system .
store the debris as hazardous waste .
numf debris waste characterization perform waste characterization testing on the debris as required by department and the disposal facility .
from the first num gal of hazardous waste or portion thereof if less than num gal are produced a minimum of num randomly selected samples must be taken and analyzed individually .
samples must not be composited .
from each additional num gal of hazardous waste or portion thereof if less than num gal are produced a minimum of num additional random sample must be taken and analyzed .
use chain of custody procedures consistent with chapter num of us epa test methods for evaluating solid waste physicalchemical methods swnum while transporting samples from the job site to the analytical laboratory .
the laboratory must be certified by the swrcbs elap for all analyses to be performed .
before performing the analyses the laboratory must homogenize each sample .
the homogenization process must not include grinding of the samples .
a sample aliquot must be num .
obtained in an amount large enough for all analyses to be performed num .
homogenized a numnd time num .
used for the total and soluble analyses after the numnd homogenization numg debris transport and disposal numgnum general for bidding purposes assume the debris is a hazardous waste .
numgnum hazardous waste debris request the generators epa identification number when the engineer accepts waste characterization test results documenting that the debris is a hazardous waste .
use a hazardous waste manifest and a transporter whose vehicles have current dtsc registration certificates when transporting hazardous waste .
the engineer provides the generators epa identification number and signs the manifests as the hazardous waste generator within num business days of accepting the waste characterization test results and receiving your request for the generators epa identification number .
numgnum nonhazardous waste debris if waste characterization test results demonstrate that the debris is a nonhazardous waste and the engineer accepts the results dispose of the debris at an appropriately permitted ca class ii or ca class iii facility or recycle it .
make all arrangements with the operator of the disposal facility and comply with the facilitys requirements .
section num environmental stewardship num you may dispose of nonhazardous debris at a facility equipped to recycle the debris if num .
copper slag abrasive blended by the supplier with a calcium silicate compound is used for blast cleaning num .
you make all arrangements with the recycling facilitys operator and perform any facilityrequired testing of the debris the department does not adjust payment for disposal of nonhazardous debris at a recycling facility .
num treated wood waste numa general section num applies if treated wood waste is shown on the bid item list .
section num includes specifications for handling storing transporting and disposing of treated wood waste .
manage treated wood waste under num ca code of regs div num ch num .
numb submittals within num business days of disposing of treated wood waste submit as an informational submittal a copy of each completed shipping record and weight receipt .
numc training provide training to personnel who handle or may come in contact with treated wood waste .
training must include num .
requirements of num ca code of regs num .
procedures for identifying and segregating treated wood waste num .
safe handling practices num .
requirements of num ca code of regs div num ch num num .
proper disposal methods maintain training records for num years .
numd storage of treated wood waste until disposal store treated wood waste using the following methods num .
raise the waste on blocks above a foreseeable runon elevation and protect it from precipitation for no more than num days .
num .
place the waste on a containment surface or pad protected from runon and precipitation for no more than num days .
num .
place the waste in waterresistant containers designed for shipping or solid waste collection for no more than num year .
num .
place the waste in a storage building as defined in num ca code of regs div num ch num numanumc .
prevent unauthorized access to treated wood waste using a secure enclosure such as a locked chain linkfenced area or a lockable shipping container located within the job site .
resize and segregate treated wood waste at a location where debris including sawdust and chips can be contained .
collect and manage the debris as treated wood waste .
identify treated wood waste and accumulation areas using waterresistant labels that comply with num ca code of regs div num ch num num .
labels must include num .
the words caltrans district and the district number num .
the words construction contract and the contract number num .
district office address num .
engineers name address and telephone number num .
contractors contact name address and telephone number num .
date placed in storage section num environmental stewardship num nume transport and disposal of treated wood waste dispose of treated wood waste within num .
num days of generation if stored on blocks num .
num days of generation if stored on a containment surface or pad num .
num year of generation if stored in a waterresistant container or within num days after the container is full whichever is shorter num .
num year of generation if stored in a storage building as defined in num ca code of regs div num ch num numanumc before transporting treated wood waste obtain agreement from the receiving facility that it will accept the waste .
protect shipments of the waste from loss and exposure to precipitation .
for projects generating num lb or more of treated wood waste request a generators epa identification number from the engineer at least num business days before the numst shipment .
each shipment must be accompanied by a shipping record such as a bill of lading or invoice that includes num .
the words caltrans district and the district number num .
the words construction contract and the contract number num .
district office address num .
engineers name address and telephone number num .
contractors name contact person and telephone number num .
receiving facilitys name and address num .
description of the waste e.g .
treated wood waste with preservative type if known or unknownmixture num .
project location num .
estimated weight or volume of the shipment num .
date of transport num .
date of receipt by the treated wood waste facility num .
weight of shipment measured by the receiving facility num .
generators us epa identification number for projects generating num lb or more of treated wood waste the shipping record must be num by num inches and a numpart carbon or carbonless form to provide copies for the engineer transporter and treated wood waste facility .
dispose of treated wood waste at an approved california disposal site operating under a rwqcb permit that includes acceptance of treated wood waste .
num disposal of electrical equipment requiring special handling reserved num reserved num other agency regulatory requirements num general section num includes specifications relating to other agencies environmental regulations and placs .
num state parks section num includes specifications for working in areas under the jurisdiction of state parks .
comply with the state parks regulations and placs .
protect natural and cultural features within the park .
num state reclamation board section num includes specifications for working in areas under the jurisdiction of the state reclamation board .
comply with the state reclamation boards regulations and placs .
section num environmental stewardship num submit proposed changes to the plac requirements for transmittal to the state reclamation board .
do not implement these changes until the engineer receives written approval from the state reclamation board .
num reserved num num existing facilities num general section num includes general specifications for performing work on existing facilities .
performing work on existing facilities includes abandoning adjusting modifying obliterating reconstructing relaying relocating remodeling removing repairing resetting or salvaging a facility .
do not perform work on an existing facility until the facility is no longer needed .
reconstructed facilities must comply with the design of and be equal to the best parts of the existing facilities .
reconstruction work must comply with the specifications for new work of similar character .
num materials materials for adjusting facilities to grade must be similar in character to the existing materials .
num construction numa general backfill trenches holes depressions and pits caused by performing work on an existing facility .
in an unsurfaced area backfill with embankment material under section num .
in a surfaced area backfill with material equal to or better than the surrounding material .
grade backfilled areas to drain and blend in with the surrounding area .
clean earth and other foreign material including concrete from material to be salvaged or incorporated into the work .
dispose of removed facilities not to be salvaged or incorporated into the work .
if you damage a facility or a portion of a facility to remain in place repair or replace it .
the repair or replacement must be equal or better in quality than the original portion .
repair or replace materials to be salvaged or incorporated into the work that are lost or damaged during work activities .
the repair or replacement must be equal or better in quality than the original portion .
instead of this repair or replacement the department may deduct the repair or replacement cost .
replace material from existing facilities described to be reused in the work if the engineer determines the material is unsuitable .
furnishing the replacement material is change order work .
if you damage a part of a loop conductor specified to remain in place including the part leading to the adjacent pull box replace the entire loop detector and any adjacent loops damaged during the replacement .
break the floors of structures within the roadway that are not required to be removed such that water will not be entrapped .
where abrasive blasting is performed within num feet of a lane open to traffic remove residue with a vacuum attachment operating concurrently with the blast cleaning equipment .
numb removing concrete where concrete is described to be removed remove the concrete to a depth of at least num feet below finished grade .
concrete removal includes removal of any steel embedded in the concrete .
before removing a portion of a monolithic concrete element make a numinchdeep saw cut to a true line along the limits of removal on faces of the element that will be visible in the completed work .
protect existing reinforcement to be incorporated into the new work from damage .
where new concrete is to join existing concrete remove enough concrete to allow splicing of new reinforcement .
section num existing facilities num thoroughly remove all material adhering to the existing reinforcement before embedding it in new concrete .
instead of disposing of removed concrete you may num .
incorporate it in adjacent embankments if it is num .
broken into parts at most num inches in greatest dimension num .
buried at least num feet below the finished grade and slope lines num .
buried at least num feet from trees or highway facilities num .
not buried where piling is to be constructed num .
place it at authorized locations such that it will not present an unsightly appearance from the highway numc salvaging facilities tag the bundles packages and individually salvaged material .
show the following information on the tags num .
name or description of the material num .
type or model number num .
dimensions num .
quantity if more than num haul salvaged material directly to the location specified in the special provisions and stockpile it .
if authorized you may temporarily stockpile salvaged material at the job site .
replace any salvaged material that is lost before it is stockpiled at the location specified in the special provisions .
numdnumk reserved num payment not used num num temporary facilities num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing temporary facilities .
constructing temporary facilities includes placing temporary devices .
num materials you may use used materials for temporary facilities if the used materials comply with the specifications for new materials .
num construction maintain temporary facilities until they are no longer needed .
excavate and backfill as necessary to remove temporary facilities .
backfill with materials of equal or better quality and to a comparable density of the surrounding materials and grade the surface to match the existing grade and cross slope .
dispose of temporary facilities when they are no longer needed .
num payment not used num miscellaneous temporary facilities num general numa general section num includes specifications for constructing miscellaneous temporary facilities .
miscellaneous temporary facilities include temporary facilities that apply to multiple sections or are not closely associated with other sections .
numb materials not used numc construction not used numd payment not used num temporary pedestrian facilities numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for constructing temporary pedestrian facilities .
temporary pedestrian facilities must comply with the california mutcd part num chapter numd pedestrian and worker safety .
lighting must comply with the specifications for falsework lighting in section num .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit shop drawings and supporting calculations for temporary pedestrian facilities with a protective overhead covering .
shop drawings and calculations must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
section num temporary facilities num numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials numbnum general the walkway must be surfaced with asphalt concrete commercialquality concrete or wood .
the surface must be skid resistant and free of irregularities .
hand railings must be snums lumber and painted white .
the protective overhead covering of a temporary pedestrian facility must be plywood at least num inch thick or wood planking with a nominal minimum thickness of num inches .
numbnum design requirements design a temporary pedestrian facility with a protective overhead covering to support all imposed loads .
the design load and maximum allowable stresses for a temporary pedestrian facility with protective overhead covering must comply with section numb .
the minimum design live load for a temporary pedestrian facility with a protective overhead covering must be num psf for the entire structure .
numc construction construct handrails on each side of a temporary pedestrian facility as necessary to protect pedestrian traffic from hazards due to work activities or adjacent vehicular traffic .
the minimum width between the inside face of the handrails must be num inches .
the clear height of the facility measured from the floor surface to the canopy overhead must be at least num feet .
provide adequate lighting at all times .
extend overhead protection for pedestrians at least num feet beyond the edge of the bridge deck .
illuminate all pedestrian openings through falsework .
maintain a temporary pedestrian facility in good condition and keep it clear of obstructions .
numd payment not used num highvisibility fences numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for constructing highvisibility fences .
a highvisibility fence is shown on the bid item list as a temporary fence type esa .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit a certificate of compliance for the highvisibility fabric .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials highvisibility fabric must be manufactured from polypropylene polyethylene or a combination of both .
identify store and handle the fabric under astm dnum .
the fabric must be orange contain uv inhibitors and have a width of at least num inches and openings from num by num inch to num by num inches .
the minimum roll weight for a numbynumfoot roll of fabric must be num lb .
section num temporary facilities num the minimum tensile strength of the fabric must be num lb when tested under astm dnum .
posts must be either wood or steel .
each wood post must num .
be untreated fir redwood cedar or pine and cut from sound timber num .
be straight and free from loose or unsound knots or other defects that would make it unfit for use num .
have a cross section of at least num by num inches num .
have a length of at least num feet num .
have a pointed bottom end each steel post must have num .
u t l or other crosssectional shape that resists failure from lateral loads .
num .
weight of at least num lbft .
num .
length of at least num feet .
num .
pointed bottom end .
num .
safety cap attached to the exposed end .
the cap must be orange or red plastic and fit snugly to the post .
numc construction install posts at a maximum numfoot centertocenter spacing .
embed each post in the ground at least num inches .
attach fabric to wood posts with nails or staples .
attach fabric to steel posts with tie wires or locking plastic fasteners at a maximum spacing of num inches .
maintain posts in a vertical position .
reattach any detached fabric .
replace any damaged fabric .
numd payment not used num temporary construction mats numa general numanum general numanuma summary section numa includes general specifications for constructing temporary construction mats .
a temporary construction mat is shown on the bid item list as a temporary wetland protection mat .
numanumb definitions reserved numanumc submittals submit a schedule for the placement and removal of the mats .
include the location mat type and placement and removal dates for each location .
describe the method of installing and removing the mats .
numanumd quality assurance reserved numanum materials a temporary construction mat must be manufactured num for use as a temporary roadway num to protect the ground without ground preparation and num to prevent permanent damage and minimize temporary damage to a wetland .
section num temporary facilities num numanum construction the mats must provide a continuous cover over the wetlands .
seal openings around any columns or other obstacles .
obtain authorization for the seals .
mats must be free from soil seeds or other organic or hazardous material before entering the work area .
conduct temporary installation activities on the mats or outside of wetlands .
do not install mats whenever the national weather service predicts at least a num percent probability of precipitation within num hours .
clean debris from the mats daily .
inspect the mats and immediately replace or repair damaged or broken mats .
when no longer needed move mats to a washout location and clean them before removing them from the job site .
the washout location must be outside of wetlands and esas and inside the cleared work area where wash water and other material will not enter any wetlands streams or esas .
numanum payment not used numb hdpe mats numbnum general section numb includes specifications for constructing hdpe temporary construction mats .
numbnum materials an hdpe mat must num .
be made of hdpe num .
be at least num feet wide by num feet long and num inch thick num .
have a loadbearing capacity of at least num tons numbnum construction not used numbnum payment not used numcnumg reserved num job site water control numa general numanum general section num includes specifications for controlling water to provide a dry working area at the job site .
numanum materials not used numanum construction not used numanum payment not used numb waterfilled cofferdam reserved numcnumg reserved num reserved num division iii earthwork and landscape num general num general num general section num includes general specifications for grading .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num clearing and grubbing num general section num includes specifications for clearing and grubbing .
clearing and grubbing consists of removing objectionable material from the following construction areas num .
highways num .
bridges and other structures num .
roads road approaches streets and ramps num .
material sites num .
ditches and channels num .
areas enclosed by interchange loops and ramps num .
other described areas the department may salvage materials from improvements before the bid opening date .
num materials not used num construction numa general complete the work specified in section numcnum before clearing and grubbing .
clear and grub before performing earthwork in an area .
do not injure standing trees plants and improvements shown to be protected .
clear and grub the entire length of the job site to the following widths num .
num feet outside of excavation and embankment slope lines where slopes are not rounded num .
outside limits of slopes where slopes are rounded num .
num feet outside of structures num .
num feet outside of slope lines for ditches and channels with a bottom width of less than num feet num .
num feet outside of slope lines for ditches and channels with a bottom width of num feet or more if the construction area includes an orchard vineyard or other cultivated area remove all orchard trees vines and other vegetation in the entire highway to rightofway lines .
numb clearing clear all construction areas above original ground of num all vegetation such as trees logs upturned stumps roots of downed trees brush grass and weeds and num other objectionable material including concrete masonry and debris .
section num general num cut tree branches that extend over the roadway and hang within num feet of finished grade .
cut other branches to give each tree a balanced appearance .
cut off branches close to the trunk under section num numcnum .
numc grubbing grub all construction areas to a depth necessary to remove all trees existing stumps roots buried logs and other objectionable material except embankment areas where the grading plane is num feet or more above original ground .
in embankment areas where the grading plane is num feet or more above original ground cut off trees stumps and roots not more than num foot above original ground except remove trees stumps and roots completely where work includes any of the following num .
structure construction num .
pile construction num .
subdrainage trench excavation num .
removal of unsuitable material num .
cutting into slopes of original hillsides old or new fill numd disposal of materials dispose of objectionable materials resulting from clearing and grubbing activities unless num the contract includes a bid item for duff as specified in section numc or num you reduce combustible material to chips with a numinch maximum thickness and spread them in areas enclosed by interchange loops and ramps or between slope lines and rightofway lines .
bury the chips or distribute them uniformly by mixing with underlying soil to prevent combustion .
do not leave objectionable material in or under embankments including dikes .
accumulation of flammable material is not allowed .
num payment not used num reserved num num dust palliatives num general numa summary section num includes specifications for applying dust palliatives .
a dust palliative must be any of the following num .
water num .
dust suppressant num .
dust control binder numb definitions reserved numc submittals if a dust suppressant or dust control binder is to be used submit a dust treatment plan at least num days before starting job site activities .
the dust treatment plan must include num .
product name and type num .
manufacturers name num .
polymer emulsion type if a synthetic polymer emulsion is used including identification of num .
individual components greater than num percent by volume in blends of polymers with different compositions num .
additives greater than num percent by volume num .
sds num .
proposed methods for applying products num .
application rate per pass total application rate and residual application rate num .
required weather conditions for application including ambient and surface temperatures wind conditions and allowable period before expected precipitation num .
drying time or curing time required before traffic is allowed on the treated surface submit the manufacturers instructions for the material to be used .
submit a certificate of compliance for the dust suppressant dust control binders and fibers .
for a dust suppressant include with the certificate of compliance num .
test results verifying compliance with the quality characteristic requirements in section numd .
the results must be from a test conducted within num months before the date of the certificate of compliance .
num .
test results from a test conducted within num months before the date of the certificate of compliance verifying compliance with the following environmental requirements num .
maximum constituent concentration levels num .
organic and inorganic requirements for num .
vocs num .
semivocs num .
synthetic precipitation leaching procedure num .
aquatic toxicity numd quality assurance a dust suppressant or dust control binder must comply with us epa requirements and rwqcb requirements for soil stabilizers .
a dust suppressant must be tested by either an astm or amrlaashtoaccredited laboratory for compliance with the specified quality characteristic requirements .
a dust suppressant must be tested by an epaaccredited laboratory for environmental requirements .
liquid chemical treatments must be tested before dilution .
solid products must be mixed with water to a num percent concentration before testing .
the constituent concentration for each dust suppressant must not exceed the maximum levels shown in the following table section num dust palliatives num maximum constituent concentration levels constituent test method requirement maximum level ppm arsenic epa method num num barium num cadmium num chromium num copper num lead num mercury epa method num num selenium epa method num num zinc num phosphorus epa method num num cyanide epa method num num a dust suppressant must comply with the requirements shown in the following table organic and inorganic requirements quality characteristic test method requirement vocs epa method num set by the calepa air resources board and local air district semivocs epa method num us epa target compound list and contractrequired quantitation limits synthetic precipitation leaching procedure epa method num set by the rwqcb a dust suppressant must comply with the aquatic toxicity requirements shown in the following table aquatic toxicity requirements quality characteristic test method requirement aquatic toxicitya lcnum min ppm astm enum or epa method num numf and epa method num num aquatic toxicitya rating astm enum or epa method num numf and epa method num slightly toxic or better renewal toxicityb lcnum min ppm astm enum num renewal toxicityb rating astm enum slightly toxic or better ausing ceriodaphnia dubia water flea oncorhynchus mykiss rainbow trout pimephales promelas fathead minnow and americamysis bahia mysid shrimp busing ceriodaphnia dubia water flea num materials numa general a dust suppressant or a control binder must be either num miscible in water or num a material that is directly applied to the surface without mixing with water .
numb dust suppressants numbnum general a dust suppressant must be one of the following num .
petroleumbased organic product num .
nonpetroleumbased organic product num .
hygroscopic product num .
synthetic polymer emulsion section num dust palliatives num numbnum petroleumbased organic products a petroleumbased organic dust suppressant must be an asphalt emulsion petroleum resin base oil mineral oil or synthetic fluid .
an asphalt emulsion must be grade ssnumh .
a petroleum resin must comply with the requirements shown in the following table petroleum resin requirements quality characteristic test method requirement residue min astm dnum num ph astm dnum num sp gr at num c min astm dnum num kinematic visc at num c min saybolt furol secondsa astm dnum num flash point min c astm dnum num particle charge test astm dnum positive ause astm dnum to convert the mmnums value to saybolt furol seconds a base or mineral oil must comply with the requirements shown in the following table base and mineral oils requirements quality characteristic test method requirement base and mineral oil content min num sp gr at num c min astm dnum num brookfield absolute visc at num c max cp astm dnum num flash point min c astm dnum num a synthetic fluid must comply with num cfr num and the requirements shown in the following table synthetic fluids requirements quality characteristic test method requirement synthetic fluid content min num sp gr at num c min astm dnum num brookfield absolute visc at num c max cp astm dnum num flash point min c astm dnum num numbnum nonpetroleumbased organic products a nonpetroleumbased organic dust suppressant must be lignosulfonate plant oil or tall oil pitch rosin .
a lignosulfonate must comply with the requirements shown in the following table lignosulfonate requirements quality characteristic test method requirement lignin sulfonate content ready to use min astm dnum num residue total solids content min astm dnum or dnum num lignin sulfonate content of residue min num reducing sugars content of residue min astm dnum or dnum num ph astm dnum num sp gr min astm dnum num brookfield absolute visc at num c max cp astm dnum num a plant oil must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num dust palliatives num plant oil requirements quality characteristic test method requirement residue active solids content min astm dnum num sp gr min astm dnum num brookfield absolute visc num c cp astm dnum num flash point min c astm dnum num a tall oil pitch rosin must comply with the requirements shown in the following table tall oil pitch rosin requirements quality characteristic test method requirement rosin acid content min astm dnum num residue active solids content min astm dnum num ph astm dnum num sp gr min astm dnum num brookfield absolute visc at num c cp astm dnum num numbnum hygroscopic products a hygroscopic dust suppressant must be calcium chloride calcium chloride flake or magnesium chloride .
calcium chloride must comply with the requirements shown in the following table calcium chloridea requirements quality characteristic test method requirement calcium chloride content astm enum num total magnesium chloride max astm enum num total alkali chlorides as sodium chloride max astm enum num calcium hydroxide content max astm enum num ph with num percent solution astm dnum num sp gr astm dnum num aastm dnum or aashto mnum calcium chloride flake must comply with the requirements shown in the following table calcium chloride flakea requirements quality characteristic test method requirement calcium chloride content min astm enum num total magnesium as mgclnum max astm enum num total alkali chlorides as sodium chloride max astm enum num calcium hydroxide content max astm enum num ph with num percent solution astm dnum num gradation percent passing astm cnum numinch sieve num no .
num sieve num no .
num sieve num aastm dnum or aashto mnum magnesium chloride must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num dust palliatives num magnesium chloride requirements quality characteristic test method requirement magnesium chloride content astm dnum or astm dnuma num sulfate content as magnesium sulfate max astm dnuma num potassium content as potassium chloride max astm enum num sodium chloride content max astm enum num ph with num solution astm dnum num sp gr astm dnum num num ayou may use another appropriate atomic absorption spectrophotometry method such as that in standard methods for the examination of water and waste water by aphaawwawpcf .
numbnum synthetic polymer emulsions a synthetic polymer emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table synthetic polymer emulsion requirements quality characteristic test method requirement residue active solids content min astm dnum num ph astm dnum num sp gr at num c astm dnum num brookfield absolute visc max cp astm dnum num polymer film tensile strength dry psi astm dnum num retained coagulum on no .
num sieve max astm dnum num ash content max astm dnum num numc dust control binders a dust control binder must comply with the specifications for a tackifier in section nume except section num does not apply .
fibers must comply with section numd except section num does not apply .
num construction numa general monitor dust conditions and apply a dust palliative for dust control as described and as ordered .
reapply the dust palliative at any time to control dust .
apply a dust suppressant to num .
temporary haul roads num .
construction staging material storage and layout areas num .
compacted soil or ab roads or driveways num .
paved surfaces apply a dust control binder to num .
roughgraded soils num .
completed slopes num .
soil stockpiles unless another practice is already used do not use a dust suppressant or dust control binder within num feet of a wetland or body of water .
numb equipment apply dust suppressants that are miscible in water with either num a pressuretype water distributor truck equipped with a spray system or num a pressuretype asphalt distributor truck as specified in section num numb .
apply dust suppressant flakes to the surface using a spreader or spinner disk .
section num dust palliatives num apply dust control binders with either num a pressuretype water distributor truck equipped with a spray system or num hydraulic spray equipment as specified for applying hydromulch in section numd .
numc mixing and application rates use the mix proportions and application rate for the corresponding dust suppressant as shown in the following table dust suppressant application dust suppressant mix proportions application rate asphaltic emulsion grade ssnumh num parts water to num part emulsion num galsq yd petroleum resin emulsion num parts water to num part emulsion num galsq yd base and mineral oil apply undiluted num galsq yd lignosulfonate num part water to num part concentrate num galsq yd plant oil apply undiluted num galsq yd tall oil pitch rosin num parts water to num part emulsion for clayey soil and num parts water to num part emulsion for sandy soil num galsq yd calcium chloride solution hygroscopic apply undiluted num galsq yd calcium chloride flakes hygroscopic num lbsq yd magnesium chloride hygroscopic apply undiluted num galsq yd synthetic polymer emulsion num parts water to num part concentrate num galsq yd apply hygroscopic dust suppressants under the manufacturers instructions .
apply calcium chloride flakes to a moist surface .
allow surfaces treated with a dust suppressant to cure before opening them to traffic .
adequate cure occurs when moisture is evaporated sheen is gone and tracking is nonextant .
use the mix proportions and application rate for the corresponding dust control binder as shown in the following table dust control binder application dust control binder mix proportions application rate guar num to num lb per num gal of water num lbacre psyllium enough water to allow for uniform slurry flow num lbacre starch manufacturers recommended mix proportions with water num lbacre liquid acrylic copolymers and polymersa num parts water to num part polymer num galacre liquid methacrylate and acrylate polymers manufacturers recommended mix proportions with water num galacre copolymers of sodium acrylates and acrylamides manufacturers recommended mix proportions with water num lbacre polyacrylamide and copolymer of acrylamide num lb per num gal of water num lbacre hydrocolloid polymers manufacturers recommended mix proportions with water num lbacre amix and handle the polymeric compound in a manner that will not cause foaming .
you may add an antifoaming agent .
do not allow stormwater runoff from polyacrylamide treated soils unless water passes through num .
sediment basin if the total drainage area is greater than or equal to num acres .
num .
sediment trap or a series of check dams if the total drainage area is less than num acres .
maximize the number of check dams used and space them evenly in the drainage channel such that sediment settlement is maximized .
section num dust palliatives num you may add fibers to dust control binders at a rate of num lbacre .
you may reapply dust palliatives at a reduced application rate if authorized .
num payment not used num num earthwork num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for performing earthwork activities .
performing earthwork activities includes removal of unsuitable material or a buried manmade object if the removal is described .
complete work specified in section numcnum before starting earthwork activities .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance reserved num materials not used num construction numa general unless the material resulting from the excavation is hazardous construct embankments and dikes or backfill structures with it .
if the quantity of excavated material is not sufficient to construct embankments obtain the material under section num .
numb unsuitable material excavate and dispose of unsuitable material encountered below the natural ground surface in embankment areas or below the grading plane in excavation areas as ordered .
notify the engineer before removing the unsuitable material if num .
removal is not otherwise described num .
you request payment for removal as change order work backfill the space resulting from excavating unsuitable material with material suitable for the planned use .
place and compact suitable material under section num .
numc grade tolerance immediately before placing subsequent layers of material prepare the grading plane such that the grading plane num .
does not vary more than num foot above or below the grade established by the engineer where hma is to be placed .
num .
does not extend above the grade established by the engineer where concrete base or pavement is to be placed .
num .
beneath structural approach slabs or the thickened portion of sleeper slabs do no extend above the grade established by the engineer .
num .
at any point is within num foot above the grade established by the engineer if the material to be placed on the grading plane is paid by the cubic yard .
num .
at any point is within num foot above the grade established by the engineer if subbase or base material to be placed on the grading plane is paid by the ton .
numd buried manmade objects remove and dispose of a buried manmade object encountered in an excavation as part of the excavation work .
section num earthwork num notify the engineer before removing the buried manmade object if num .
removal of the object is not otherwise described num .
object could not have been determined by visual inspection num .
you request payment for removal of the object as change order work num payment not used num roadway excavation num general numa summary section num includes specifications for performing roadway excavation .
roadway excavation consists of all excavation involved in the grading and construction of the roadway except structure excavation and any excavation paid for as a separate bid item .
roadway excavation includes num .
excavating and stockpiling the selected material num .
removing the stockpiled material and placing it in its final position num .
removing surcharge material num .
performing the removal of a slide or slipout which is paid for as the type of roadway excavation involved numb definitions selected material specific material excavated from a described location on the job site .
selected material includes top soil .
numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance reserved num materials not used num construction numa general excavate to the described or authorized grade .
if you overexcavate backfill with an authorized material and compact it .
remove pavement within the limits of roadway excavation .
pavement removal must comply with section num and num .
compaction must comply with section num .
construct embankments under section num .
numb surplus material if a quantity of surplus material is shown the quantity is approximate .
ensure enough material is available to complete the embankments before placing the material at other locations on the job site or disposing of it .
obtain authorization before disposing of surplus material or using it for any of the following num .
widening embankments uniformly num .
flattening slopes num .
placing along the roadway or at other locations section num earthwork num if you can not use surplus material within the highway dispose of it .
if you dispose of any surplus material prematurely and later find a material shortage replace the surplus material with an authorized material .
if an ordered change increases the quantity of excavation or decreases the quantity of embankment such that surplus material must be disposed of disposing of this material is change order work .
numc deficiency material if the quantity of acceptable material from excavation is not enough to construct the embankments the quantity of material needed to complete the embankments must consist of local or imported borrow .
obtain local or imported borrow under section num .
if a bid item for imported borrow is not shown on the bid item list obtaining imported borrow is change order work .
numd selected material if selected material is not used for topsoil or any other specified layer place the selected material in the roadway prism as embankment or structure backfill .
if selected material is used as a specified layer spread and compact it under section num .
topsoil must comply with section num .
if practicable and unless processing of material is required haul selected material directly from the excavation to its final position in the roadway prism and compact it in place .
selected material must remain in place until it can be placed in its final position unless stockpiling of selected material is ordered .
if stockpiling of selected material is ordered excavate and stockpile the selected material until the stockpiled material is to be placed in its final position in the roadway prism .
this work is change order work .
topsoil placed along the tops of slopes as erosion control is not stockpiled material .
nume blasting the department does not allow excessive blasting .
remove material outside the planned cross section that is shattered or loosened due to blasting .
suspend blasting activities if any of the following conditions occurs num .
any sign of overshooting num .
endangerment to the public num .
destruction of property or natural features numf slides and slipouts excavate and remove material num .
outside the planned roadway or ditch slope that is unstable and constitutes a potential slide num .
from a slide that has come into the roadway or ditch num .
slipped out of new or existing embankments excavate to the designated lines or slopes either by benching or as ordered .
use removed material to construct embankments unless otherwise ordered .
before removal activities if removal of a slide or a slipout is not described you may request the removal to be change order work .
section num earthwork num if you complete a slope and are ordered to remove unstable or stable material and reslope the area the removal and resloping is change order work .
repair any damage to the completed work resulting from a slide or slipout as ordered .
repairing damage to the completed work due to a slide or slipout is paid for as the type of work involved unless otherwise ordered as change order work .
if a slide or slipout is caused by your activities or negligence remove the slide or slipout material and restore the slope .
numg slopes construct slopes to the lines and grades established by the engineer .
slope tolerances are measured perpendicular to the planned slope .
any point on the completed excavation slope must be within num foot of the planned slope unless the excavation is in rock in which case any point on the completed slope must be within num feet of the planned slope .
slopes or portions of slopes must not encroach on the roadbed .
round the tops of excavation slopes and ends of excavations .
any point on the completed embankment slope must be within num foot of the planned slope for slopes within num feet of the shoulder grade .
slopes below num feet must be within num foot of the planned slope .
if an embankment is constructed of large rock and the size of rocks make it impracticable to construct slopes within num foot the engineer may authorize you to construct slopes more than num feet below shoulder grade to within num feet of the planned slope .
for median and side slopes with a num horizontalvertical or flatter slope num .
completed slopes must be within num foot from the grade established by the engineer num .
flowlines must be graded to drain and must be within num foot from the grade established by the engineer if the slope is to be cultivated or straw is to be incorporated into the surface remove loose rocks larger than num inches in maximum dimension roots and other debris on the surface of the slope before cultivation or incorporation of straw .
maintain completed slopes .
repair any slope damage caused by erosion .
numh ditch excavation excavate ditches including channels for changing the course of streams .
avoid excavating below the grade for the bottom of the ditch or water channel .
if you excavate below grade backfill with suitable material and compact it .
num payment the payment quantity for roadway excavation is the volume of roadway excavation material including volume of material involved in num .
embankment construction unless a separate bid item for constructing embankments is shown on the bid item list num .
ditch or channel excavation if the bottom width of the ditch or channel is num feet or more num .
local borrow excavation the volume of material for roadway excavation is determined from the average end areas and the distances between them .
if changed conditions or nature of a particular operation make determining the quantities of roadway excavation based on average end areas impractical the payment quantity is the volume determined using a method best suited to obtain an accurate quantity .
section num earthwork num if the quantities of roadway excavation are determined from average end areas and centerline distances a correction for curvature is not applied to quantities within the roadway prism .
in determining the quantity of material outside the original roadway prism where the roadway centerline is used as a base a correction is made for curvature if the centerline radius is num feet or less .
the volume of material removed from a stockpile is determined from measurements of the stockpile before removal .
if the bottom of a ditch or channel is less than num feet wide the payment quantity for ditch excavation is the volume determined from average areas and the distances between them .
num structure excavation and backfill num general numa summary section num includes specifications for performing structure excavation and backfill .
structure excavation includes num .
excavating foundations for structures including trenches for culverts pipes rods deadmen cutoff walls and other facilities num .
placing structure backfill where compaction of the structure backfill is not required .
num .
control and removal of water num .
installation and removal of facilities required to complete the work unless specified or allowed to remain in place structure excavation type a includes excavation for footings where seal courses are shown .
structure excavation bridge includes structure excavation not shown on the bid item list or plans as any other type of structure excavation .
structure backfill bridge includes structure backfill not shown on the bid item list or plans as any other type of structure backfill .
structure excavation bridge or structure backfill bridge includes structure excavation or structure backfill for bridges not described by type .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general reserved numcnum cofferdams submit shop drawings for cofferdam construction .
include construction methods and calculations with the shop drawings .
shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
for cofferdams on or affecting railroad property allow num days for review .
numcnum soldier pile walls submit shop drawings for soldier pile wall construction .
shop drawings must include num .
construction sequence num .
traffic control num .
method of soldier pile installation num .
method of placing lagging num .
excavation lift limits num .
drilling and excavation equipment num .
calculations showing soil stability at all stages of construction section num earthwork num shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
allow num days for review .
numcnum ground anchor and soil nail walls submit shop drawings for earthwork for each ground anchor wall and soil nail wall to osd documents unit .
notify the engineer of the submittal .
include in the notification the date and a description of the contents of the submittal .
the shop drawings must include num .
wall construction schedule with construction sequence num .
measures to ensure wall and slope stability during construction num .
provisions for installing verification and proof test nails num .
methods of excavation for the staged lifts and types of excavation equipment num .
excavation lift height and maximum duration of exposure for each wall zone including supporting calculations and provisions to stabilize the exposed excavated face num .
details for measuring the movement of the excavated face and the wall during stability testing and construction num .
space requirements for installation equipment num .
dewatering plan to divert control and dispose of surface and groundwater during construction num .
provisions for discontinuous rows of soil nails shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
submit num copies of shop drawings for initial review .
allow num days for review .
submit from num to num copies of final shop drawings as requested by the engineer for final authorization .
numcnum test results submit test results of any stability testing performed for ground anchor walls and soil nail walls as an action submittal .
numcnum controlled lowstrength material if you propose using controlled lowstrength material submit a mix design .
include test data before excavating the trench where controlled lowstrength material is to be used .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum stability test for ground anchor and soil nail walls for soil nail walls wall zones are specified in the special provisions .
for ground anchor walls a wall zone is the entire wall .
if you use an excavation lift height greater than num feet or an exposure duration longer than num work shift perform stability testing .
perform the testing before roadway excavation .
perform at least num stability test within the limits of each wall zone .
excavate a neat face at most num feet in front of the final wall face alignment .
the excavated face must num .
have the height shown in the authorized shop drawings .
num .
be num feet long and parallel to the wall alignment with a constant height .
you may excavate ramps outside the numfoot section for construction access .
num .
be left open for the proposed exposure time shown in the authorized shop drawings .
num .
maintain its integrity without raveling sloughing or measurable displacement throughout the proposed exposure time .
section num earthwork num after authorization of the test results you may use the proposed excavation height within the tested wall zone for the observed exposure time .
if the engineer determines the exposed excavated face is not maintaining its integrity you must immediately stabilize the excavated face and perform additional stability testing .
stability testing does not apply to groundanchored soldier pile walls .
num materials numa general reserved numb cofferdam interior dimensions of cofferdams must provide enough space inside the wales for num form construction num pile driving and num pumping of water from outside the foundation forms .
no shoring is allowed in cofferdams that would induce stress shock or vibration in the permanent structure .
numc structure backfill structure backfill must be free of organic or other unsatisfactory material .
the impervious backfill material must be an authorized earthy material .
the sand equivalent requirement does not apply .
structure backfill compacted to a relative compaction of at least num percent and material placed behind retaining walls must have a sand equivalent value of at least num and comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table sieve size percentage passing num num no .
num num no .
num num except for material placed behind retaining walls structure backfill compacted to a relative compaction of at least num percent must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table sieve size percentage passing num num structure backfill for crib walls must comply with the requirements shown in the following tables wall height feet type of backfill material thickness of each layer of material before compaction feet num c d or e num num d or e num num e num section num earthwork num backfill gradation material type sieve size percentage passing sand equivalent min relative compaction min c num num num d num num num num no .
num num e num num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num material from structure excavation not suitable for use as structure backfill may be used to replace imported borrow or other excavated material .
numd pervious backfill material pervious backfill material must consist of one or any combination of the following materials num .
gravel num .
crushed gravel num .
crushed rock num .
natural sand num .
manufactured sand pervious backfill material must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table sieve size percentage passing num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num the gradation for sacked pervious backfill material behind wall drain outlets must comply with the gradation specified for numbynum inch primary aggregate in section numcnumb .
a weep hole and geocomposite drain alternative must comply with section num .
nume slurry cement backfill slurry cement backfill must be a fluid workable mixture of aggregate cement and water .
the aggregate must be one of the following num .
commercialquality concrete sand num .
excavated or imported material in any combination free of organic material and other deleterious substances and complying with the gradation requirements shown in the following table sieve size percentage passing num num num num num num num num no .
num num no .
num num the cement must comply with section numbnum except testing is not required .
the water must be free from oils salts and other impurities that adversely affect the backfill .
section num earthwork num proportion slurry cement backfill by weight or volume .
the backfill must contain at least num pounds of cement per cubic yard and enough water to produce a fluid workable mix that flows and can be pumped without segregation during placement .
mix materials thoroughly by machine .
use a pugmill rotary drum or other authorized mixer .
mix until cement and water are thoroughly dispersed .
you may use slurry cement backfill as structure backfill for pipe culverts .
numf culvert beddings numfnum general culvert beddings must be shaped bedding sand bedding or soil cement bedding .
if more than num type of bedding is allowed use the same bedding for the entire length of the culvert .
numfnum sand beddings sand bedding must consist of sand num .
free of clay or organic material num .
suitable for the purpose intended num .
complying with the gradation requirements shown in the following table sieve size percentage passing no .
num num no .
num num numfnum soil cement beddings material and mixing requirements for soil cement bedding must comply with the specifications for slurry cement backfill in section nume except num .
it must contain at least num pounds of cement per cubic yard num .
aggregate must not be commercialquality concrete sand numg controlled lowstrength material if authorized controlled lowstrength material may be used as structure backfill for pipe culverts unless the culvert has a diameter or span of more than num feet .
controlled lowstrength material must be a fluid workable mixture of aggregate cement and water .
cement must be one of the following num .
cement complying with astm cnum num .
blended hydraulic cement complying with either of the following num .
astm cnum num .
physical requirements in astm cnum when tested under astm dnum the controlled lowstrength material must have a numday compressive strength num .
from num to num psi for pipe culverts with num feet or less in height of cover num .
of at least num psi for pipe culverts with over num feet in height of cover water must be free of oil salts and other impurities that adversely affect the backfill .
aggregate must be one of the following num .
commercialquality concrete sand num .
excavated or imported material in any combination free of organic material and other deleterious substances and complying with the gradation requirements shown in the following table section num earthwork num sieve size percentage passing num num num num num num num num no .
num num no .
num num mix materials thoroughly by machine .
a pugmill rotary drum or other authorized mixer must be used .
mix until cement and water are thoroughly dispersed .
wherever controlled lowstrength material is placed within the travelled way or covered by paving or embankment materials the controlled lowstrength material must achieve a maximum indentation diameter of num inches when tested under astm dnum before covering and opening to traffic .
numh concrete backfill concrete backfill encasing steel soldier piles below the lagging must comply with section num and contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
numi lean concrete backfill lean concrete backfill must comply with the specifications for slurry cement backfill in section nume except the aggregate must be commercialquality concrete sand .
numj filter fabric filter fabric must be class a .
num construction numa general reserved numb structure excavation numbnum general remove any material that comes into an excavation from outside the described limits .
obtain the engineers acceptance of the completed structure excavation before placing any concrete or masonry .
when embankments must be constructed before culverts are placed construct embankments to the specified height and for a distance on each side of the culvert location num times the culvert diameter or height before excavating for and installing culverts .
where embankments are constructed on a steep slope or at a difficult location the engineer may modify embankment heights before culverts are installed .
change order work includes num .
if structure excavation is more than num foot from the depth shown and you request an adjustment for the increased depth num .
the engineer orders an adjustment for a decreased depth numbnum soldier pile walls excavate for and construct soldier pile walls in lifts from the top down .
excavate in a way that minimizes voids requiring backfill behind the lagging .
do not excavate more than num feet below any level of ground anchors that have not been stressed and grouted .
the engineer determines whether boulders or portions of boulders that interfere with lagging must be removed .
perform any additional earthwork ordered .
the additional earthwork is change order work .
complete placing lagging to the full height of the exposed excavation face by the end of the work shift .
section num earthwork num numbnum pier column excavation reserved numbnum cofferdams cofferdams for foundation construction must be num carried below the bottom of footings num braced and num made as watertight as practicable .
you may construct the cofferdam large enough to provide clearance to perform the work .
right or enlarge a cofferdam tilted or moved out of position during sinking to provide the required clearance and proper pier location .
in tidal waters or in streams that may flood vent cofferdam walls at low water elevation to ensure equal hydrostatic head inside and outside the cofferdam when placing and setting seals .
cross struts or bracing may extend through foundation concrete if authorized .
struts or bracing below low water may remain in place except in navigable streams or when specified to be removed .
remove struts or bracing above low water .
fill resulting spaces with the same type of concrete as the surrounding concrete .
remove cofferdams to at least num feet below the streambed after completing substructure construction .
do not disturb or mar the finished concrete or masonry .
numbnum water control and foundation treatment select the method to remove and control water at excavations where seal courses are not shown .
methods may include well point systems pumping sumps cofferdams or concrete seal courses .
if you construct a seal course comply with section numdnum except num .
seal course thickness requirement does not apply for a spread footing num .
curing requirements do not apply for a pile footing where concrete seal courses are shown use a cofferdam concrete seal course and dewatering pumps .
place seal course concrete under section numdnum .
if no piles are used and footing concrete culverts or other structures are placed on an excavated surface other than rock num .
perform excavation without disturbing foundation material .
dewater the excavation if groundwater is encountered and no seal course is used .
continue dewatering activities before and during subsequent excavation .
foundations must be free of water when footing concrete or pipes are placed .
continue dewatering activities as required to prevent damage to the work .
num .
if foundation material is disturbed by excavation activities damaged by water or removed for your convenience in dewatering restore the foundation to a condition at least equal to the undisturbed foundation .
to replace damaged or removed foundation material for culverts use class num ab that complies with section num .
compact the base as specified for structure backfill in section nume .
if the engineer determines the undisturbed original material of the excavation is unsuitable correct it as ordered .
this work is change order work .
if footing concrete or masonry is placed on rock fully uncover the rock and remove the surface to sound rock .
level or cut the rock to steps and then roughen it .
pressure grout or treat seams in rock as ordered .
this work is change order work .
if you encounter solid rock or other unyielding material when excavating for a culvert other than an arch culvert remove num to num feet of the material below the bottom of the culvert not to exceed a depth of num of the height of the embankment above the top of the culvert .
backfill the resulting space below the culvert using structure backfill under section nume .
excavating and backfilling below the planned elevation of the bottom of the culvert is change order work .
for footings on piles excavate to the bottom of footings before driving piles or drilling for piling .
if swell or subsidence results from pile driving excavate or backfill the footing area to the grade of the bottom of the section num earthwork num footing .
if the material under footings would mix with footing concrete or would not support the weight of wet concrete replace the material with suitable material install soffit forms or provide a platform using authorized means on which to cast the footing .
numcnumd reserved nume structure backfill numenum general place structure backfill in uniform layers .
bring backfill up uniformly on all sides of structures .
backfill layers must be at most num foot thick before compacting the thickness must be at most num feet when compaction is performed by ponding or jetting .
do not use compaction equipment or methods that may cause excessive displacement or damage structures .
do not place structure backfill until footings or other parts of the structure or facility are inspected by the engineer and authorized for backfilling .
do not place backfill against the back of abutments retaining walls or outside walls of cip concrete structures until the concrete has attained a compressive strength of at least num psi or the concrete has been in place for num days .
place backfill inside bridge wingwalls and abutments before railings on wingwalls are constructed .
compaction by ponding and jetting may be authorized under the following conditions num .
backfill material is selfdraining when compacted num .
foundation materials will not soften or be damaged by water num .
structures will not be damaged by hydrostatic pressure ponding and jetting of the upper num feet below finished grade is not allowed .
perform work without damaging the structure or embankment and such that water is not collected and confined .
supplement ponding and jetting with vibratory or other compaction equipment .
compact structure backfill to a relative compaction of at least num percent except you may compact structure backfill to a relative compaction of at least num percent at the following locations num .
overside drains num .
footings for slope protection slope paving and aprons num .
headwalls endwalls and culvert wingwalls num .
retaining walls except for portions under any surfacing num .
inlets in median areas or in traffic interchange loops num .
footings and pumping plants not beneath surfacing at locations where ordered place a compacted impervious backfill material for num .
outer numfoot portion of structure backfill adjacent to inlets and outlets for pipes and culverts num .
structure backfill placed within num feet of finished grade at abutments abutment wingwalls retaining walls and other portions of structures structure backfill placed at bridge supports in waterways and water channels not beneath any embankment pavement or slope protection num .
does not need to be compacted num .
must be placed to the level of original ground or finished grade shown any material you place outside the excavation pay limits material must comply with the material and compaction requirements of the adjacent structure backfill .
if imported borrow is shown on the bid item list you may use imported borrow as structure backfill if it complies with the specifications for structure backfill .
place material from structure excavation not used as structure backfill in roadway embankments under section num or disposed of it under section numb .
section num earthwork num numenum crib walls backfill num cells formed by crib members of a crib wall and num the space between a crib wall and structure excavation face .
structure backfill for crib walls must not sift or flow through the openings in the walls .
backfill crib walls simultaneously during wall erection .
place material in uniform layers before compacting .
compact material by hand tamping mechanical compaction or other authorized compaction methods .
numenum soldier pile walls compact structure backfill behind lagging of soldier pile walls by hand tamping mechanical compaction or other authorized compaction method ..
in fill areas behind the lagging key the structure backfill into the existing or excavated back slope .
place and compact the backfill behind the lagging at least num feet above the level of ground anchors before drilling for the anchors .
place and compact the remaining backfill behind the lagging after the anchors are grouted .
if filter fabric is shown behind the lagging num .
immediately before placing the filter fabric remove any loose or extraneous material and sharp objects from the surface to receive the filter fabric .
num .
handle and place the filter fabric under the manufacturers instructions .
stretch align and place the fabric without wrinkling .
num .
stitch the adjacent borders of filter fabric or overlap the adjacent borders by num to num inches .
if stitching the border use yarn of a num contrasting color and num a size and composition complying with fabric manufacturers instructions .
use from num to num stitches per inch of seam .
num .
repair any damaged filter fabric by num placing a piece of filter fabric large enough to cover the damaged area and num complying with the overlapping or stitching requirements .
numf slurry cement backfill place slurry cement backfill within num hour of mixing .
place it in a uniform manner that prevents num voids or segregation of the backfill and num floating or shifting of the culverts .
remove foreign material that falls into trenches .
do not backfill over or place material over slurry cement backfill until at least num hours after placement .
when concrete sand is used as aggregate and the inplace material is free draining you may start backfilling as soon as the surface water is gone .
if slurry cement backfill is used for structure backfill you may reduce the excavation width such that the clear distance between the outside of the pipe and the side of the excavation on each side of the pipe is at least num num inches for pipes num inches or less in diameter or span and num num foot for pipes over num inches in diameter or span .
place slurry cement backfill only for that portion of structure backfill num below the original ground or grading plane or num below the top of the embankment placed before excavating for the culvert pipe .
compact earth plugs at each end of the pipe before placing the backfill to completely contain slurry in the pipe trench .
numg pervious backfill material place pervious backfill material in layers along with and by the same methods specified for structure backfill .
pervious backfill material at the same location must have approximately the same gradation .
cover pervious backfill material at locations exposed to erosion with a numfoot layer of an authorized earthen material .
numh culvert bedding shape trench beds to fit the bottom of the culvert and to provide uniform support along the entire culvert length .
you may excavate the trench below the bottom of the culvert and construct shaped bedding by backfilling and compacting the backfill material .
shape beds using a template conforming to the outside shape of the culvert and guided by headers set parallel to the culvert grade .
headers may be left in place .
section num earthwork num place soil cement bedding as specified for slurry cement backfill in section numf except do not backfill over soil cement bedding until num hours after placement .
numi controlled lowstrength material if a controlled lowstrength material l is used for structure backfill you may reduce the excavation width such that the clear distance between the outside of the pipe culvert and the side of the excavation on each side of the pipe culvert is at least num .
num inches for pipe culverts with either of the following conditions num .
num feet or less in height of cover num num inches or less of diameter or span num .
num foot for pipe culverts with either of the following conditions num .
over num feet in height of cover num over num inches in diameter or span .
place controlled lowstrength material only for that portion of structure backfill num below the original ground or grading plane or num below the top of the embankment that is placed before excavating for the pipe .
compact earth plugs at each end of the pipe culvert before placing the backfill to completely contain slurry in the pipe culvert trench .
for trenches in existing pavement place controlled lowstrength material no higher than the bottom of the existing pavements permeable drainage layer .
where a drainage layer does not exist place the material no higher than num inch below the bottom of the existing asphalt concrete surfacing or no higher than the top of the base below the existing concrete pavement .
for rigid pipe culverts the minimum height of controlled lowstrength material relative to the pipe culvert invert must be num times the pipe culvert diameter or height .
for flexible pipe culverts the minimum height of controlled lowstrength material must be num times the pipe culvert diameter or height .
numj soldier pile walls where necessary to install lagging remove lean concrete backfill from drilled holes and in front of pile .. numk ground anchor and soil nail walls for ground anchor and soil nail walls excavate in lifts from the top down .
clean the excavated face of loose materials mud rebound and other materials that prevent or reduce the shotcrete from bonding to the excavated face and soil nails .
remove cobbles boulders portions of boulders and debris at the final wall alignment that protrude more than num inches from the excavated face .
if stability testing is not performed apply the shotcrete facing during the same work shift that the excavation is performed .
you may delay placing the shotcrete facing up to num hours if you demonstrate the integrity of the excavated face is maintained .
notify the engineer immediately if raveling or instability of the excavated face occurs or the wall face moves horizontally more than num percent of the excavated wall height .
immediately stabilize unstable areas by buttressing the excavated face with an earth berm or other authorized methods .
stop construction in unstable areas .
take authorized remedial measures to stablilize the areas .
replace any damaged soil nails and ground anchors .
if your excavation and installation methods result in a discontinuous wall along any soil nail row the ends of the structurally completed wall section must extend beyond the ends of the next lower excavation lift by a distance equal to twice the lift height .
maintain temporary slopes at the ends of each wall section to ensure slope stability .
do not excavate to the next underlying excavation lift until the following conditions have been met for the portion of the soil nail or ground anchor wall in the current excavation lift section num earthwork num num .
soil nails or ground anchors are installed and grouted .
num .
reinforced shotcrete facing is constructed .
num .
grout and shotcrete have cured for at least num hours .
num .
soil nail facing anchorages are attached or ground anchors are locked off .
do not excavate beyond the horizontal limits of the overlying completed wall section .
at the end of each excavation lift maintain temporary slopes flatter than num horizontal vertical to ensure slope stability .
num payment the department does not adjust the payment quantity of imported borrow placed as structure backfill if replacement material for the imported borrow is provided .
for structures other than culverts if the pay limits are not shown the payment quantities for structure excavation and structure backfill are computed as follows num .
horizontal limits are vertical planes num foot outside the neat lines of the footings or structures without footings .
num .
upper limit for structure excavation is the original ground surface .
where structure excavation is performed within a roadway excavation or a ditch excavation area the upper limit is the plane of the bottom and side slopes of the excavated area .
in new embankments the upper limit is the plane of the new embankment at the specified elevation .
num .
upper limit for structure backfill is the finished grading plane or the finished slope lines .
num .
lower limit is a plane at the bottom of the completed footings or structures or the lower outside surface of rods or deadmen .
except for culverts the department does not adjust the unit price of structure excavation for an increase in depth of up to num feet or an increase in width of up to num times the outside width of the footing .
for excavation to greater depths or widths the department does not adjust the unit price of structure excavation outside the limits unless before removal activities num the engineer authorizes the excavation outside the limits to be change order work or num you request the excavation outside the limits to be change order work .
when the pay limits of structure excavation are so increased the pay limits for structure backfill are similarly increased .
the department does not adjust the unit price of structure backfill .
if the depth of the structure excavation is reduced due to a reduction or elimination of the seal course the department does not decrease the payment quantity for structure excavation type a .
the payment quantity for structure backfill does not include num .
volume of pervious backfill material within the limits of the structure backfill num .
volume occupied by the new structure for culverts num .
depth of structure excavation is the vertical distance between original ground and the bottom of the culvert trench .
num .
increased depth due to unsuitable material or rock or other unyielding material below the planned grade as specified in section numh is not considered in determining the depth of structure excavation .
num rock excavation reserved num compaction num general section num includes specifications for compacting all earthwork except structure backfill .
num materials not used section num earthwork num num construction numa general relative compaction specifications apply to material whether in an excavation or an embankment .
the moisture content of material to be compacted to at least num percent must be such that the specified relative compaction is attained and the embankment is in a firm and stable condition .
do not compact material that contains excessive moisture until the material is dry enough .
numb relative compaction num percent compact earthwork to a relative compaction of at least num percent for at least a depth of num .
num foot below the grading plane for the width between the outer edges of shoulders num .
num feet below the finished grade for the width of the traveled way plus num feet on each side except for the outer num feet measured horizontally from the embankment side slope compact the full width and depth of the embankment within num feet of each bridge abutment to at least num percent relative compaction .
the numfoot limit is measured horizontally from the bridge abutment and either parallel or concentric with the roadway centerline .
compact earthwork to a relative compaction of at least num percent for embankments under retaining wall footings without pile foundations num .
for the full depth of the embankment num .
within the limits established by inclined planes sloping num horizontal vertical out and down from lines num foot outside the bottom edges of the footing numc relative compaction num percent compact earthwork to a relative compaction of at least num percent in embankment areas not required to be compacted to num percent .
numd foundation preparation you are responsible for preparing the foundation to receive material .
you may excavate and replace basement material to facilitate compaction .
before you replace the basement material if ordered compact a layer below the excavated material to a depth width and degree of compaction ordered .
the ordered work is change order work .
num payment if basement material is num placed in the embankment or used in other planned or authorized work and num replaced with planned excavated material or imported borrow the replaced material is paid for at the item bid price for the type of excavation or imported borrow involved .
num embankment construction num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing embankments .
constructing embankments includes num .
preparing areas to receive embankment material num .
placing and compacting embankment material including num .
suitable material within roadway areas where unsuitable material has been removed num .
material in holes pits and other depressions within the roadway area num .
constructing a temporary surcharge embankment above the grading plane num .
constructing dikes numb definitions reserved section num earthwork num numc submittals for geosynthetic reinforced embankment if you request the use of backfill with a gradation larger than the specified size submit test results for installation damagereduction factors for each type of geosynthetic reinforcement under fhwanhinum section num with your ltds calculations .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general embankment material must be excavated material from excavations or from local or imported borrow .
material for embankment areas where piles are to be placed or driven must not contain rocks broken concrete or other solid materials larger than num inches in greatest dimension .
do not place borrow or excavation material having a sand equivalent value less than num within num feet of finished grade .
numb geosynthetic reinforced embankment each geosynthetic reinforcement roll must be labeled with num .
manufacturers name num .
production identification num .
roll dimensions num .
lot number num .
date of manufacture the backfill for geosynthetic reinforced embankment must be free from num .
organic material num .
shale soft or poordurability particles num .
recycled materials such as glass shredded tires concrete rubble or other unsuitable materials num .
loose or extraneous material and sharp objects that may come in contact with the geosynthetic reinforcement the backfill must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table sieve size percent passing num num num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num the backfill must comply with the quality characteristics shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement plasticity index max california test num num ph california test num num if authorized you may backfill with a gradation larger than the specified size up to a num inch maximum .
num construction numa general compact embankment under section num .
section num earthwork num construct embankment slopes under section numg .
scarify water grade and roll the existing roadbed before placing new material if you construct an embankment on an existing roadway .
if you construct an embankment against a slope prepare original ground or embankment slopes by cutting into it at least num feet horizontally as you place the new embankment in layers .
compact the cut material along with the new embankment material .
for bridge footings constructed in an embankment construct the embankment to the grading plane elevation and extend the finished slope to the grading plane before num .
excavating for footings num .
driving piles or drilling holes for cip piles the grading plane of embankments beneath structure approach slabs and beneath the thickened portion of sleeper slabs must not project above the grade established by the engineer .
grade trenches holes depressions and pits outside of areas where embankments are to be constructed to provide a presentable and welldrained area .
numb subsidence if there is a bid item for embankment or imported borrow you may compact the ground surface on which an embankment is to be constructed before placing embankment material .
if the compaction results in an average subsidence exceeding num foot the engineer measures the ground surface after compaction .
allow time for the measurements before placing the embankment material .
the engineer determines the additional quantity of material for embankment work due to subsidence by the average end areas from the original measurement and the final measurements .
if a quantity is specified for either embankment or imported borrow for the anticipated effect of subsidence and you do not agree with this specified quantity you may submit a plan for measuring the subsidence .
the plan must include complete details of the measuring devices and their installation .
if your plan for measuring subsidence is authorized install and maintain the subsidencemeasuring devices .
the engineer takes readings as needed to determine the progress of subsidence .
help the engineer as ordered .
if the engineer finds a damaged device that device is not used for determining subsidence in the area the device represents .
the subsidence for that area is considered zero regardless of the subsidence measured at other areas .
subsidence is considered zero at num .
intersection of the side slope and end slope at structures with the ground line as established by the original cross sections num .
points on the cross sections num feet beyond the start and end of the area equipped with subsidence measuring devices unless the engineer agrees otherwise after final measurements are made remove the detachable elements of the subsidencemeasuring devices .
the additional payment quantity of material for embankment work due to subsidence is the volume determined by the average end areas from the original measurement and the final measurements including zero subsidence at specific areas .
numc placing and compacting do not construct embankments when material is frozen or a blanket of snow prevents proper compaction .
construct embankment in layers .
the loose thickness of each layer must not exceed num inches .
section num earthwork num break up clods or hard lumps of earth that are over num inches in greatest dimension before compacting material in the embankment unless material such as hardpan or cemented gravel can not be broken readily in which case num .
distribute the material throughout the embankment num .
place enough earth or other fine material around the larger material as you deposit it to fill the interstices and produce a dense compact embankment if embankment material contains rock the loose thickness of each layer of embankment material before compaction below a plane num feet below finished grade must comply with the following requirements num .
if embankment material contains over num percent by volume of rock larger than num inches in greatest dimension the loose thickness of each layer must not exceed the maximum size of rock in the material .
num .
if embankment material contains from num to num percent by volume of rock larger than num inches in greatest dimension the loose thickness of each layer must not exceed the maximum size of rock or num feet whichever is less .
num .
if embankment material contains less than num percent by volume of rock larger than num inches in greatest dimension the loose thickness of each layer must not exceed num inches in the area between the rocks larger than num inches .
reinforcement or metal attached to reinforced concrete rubble placed in embankments must not protrude above the grading plane .
trim reinforcement or metal to less than num inch from the face of the reinforced concrete rubble material before placing the material within num feet below the grading plane .
in a sidehill embankment where the width including bench cuts for bonding existing and new embankments is too narrow to accommodate mobile powercompacting equipment you may place the material by end dumping if authorized .
if end dumping is allowed for constructing an embankment against existing slopes or num the embankment width at a time plow or cut the slopes of the original ground or embankment before starting end dumping .
where embankments are constructed across low swampy ground that can not support the weight of hauling equipment you may construct the lower part of the embankment by dumping successive loads in a uniformly distributed layer that can support the equipment for placing subsequent layers .
construct embankments such that each layer has a cross fall of less than num percent .
at locations where it is impractical to use mobile powercompacting equipment compact the embankment layers by any method that attains the specified compaction .
numd settlement periods and surcharges if an embankment settlement period is specified construct the embankment to at least the grading plane and to the limits described for num .
distance of at least num feet measured parallel to the centerline of the roadway from each bridge abutment num .
entire length of a retaining wall and a width of at least num feet from the face of the wall if a surcharge is specified place the surcharge in uniform layers .
compact the surcharge by routing the grading equipment across the full width .
prevent the embankment and any surcharge from encroaching upon the traveled way or existing improvements .
the settlement period starts after the embankment and any specified surcharge construction is complete .
if ordered install settlement platforms .
the installation is change order work .
the surcharge must remain in place until the end of the specified settlement period or as ordered .
before the end of the settlement period do not section num earthwork num num .
excavate for abutments bent footings wingwalls or retaining wall footings num .
drive or drill holes for foundation piles remove any surcharge material .
remove surcharge material above the grading plane .
compact the embankment below the grading plane before placing the subsequent layers of subbase or base .
nume geosynthetic reinforced embankment place geosynthetic reinforcement within num inches of the design elevations .
place at least num inches of compacted backfill between the layers of reinforcement shown .
geosynthetic reinforcement must be num .
secured with staples pins or small piles of backfill num .
placed without wrinkles num .
aligned with the primary strength direction perpendicular to slope contours num .
spliced under the manufacturers instructions num .
butted edgetoedge for straight slope contours num .
butted edgetoedge at the slope face and fanned out or overlapped into the backfill for curved slope contours cover the geosynthetic reinforcement with backfill within the same work shift .
place at least num inches of backfill on the reinforcement before operating or driving equipment or vehicles over it except you may drive equipment or vehicles for spreading backfill directly on the reinforcement if you num .
comply with the manufacturers instructions num .
use rubbertire vehicles num .
minimize traffic repetitions num .
maintain a speed less than num mph num .
avoid sudden braking and sharp turning where guardrail posts will be placed at the top crest of a geosyntheticreinforced embankment and the geosynthetic reinforcement interferes with the placement of posts you may precut the affected layers of the reinforcement into crossshaped patterns .
the precutting dimensions must not exceed the post dimensions by more than num inches .
do not extend geosynthetic reinforcement into the pavement structure .
repair any damaged reinforcement by placing additional reinforcement to cover the damaged area as follows num .
for reinforcement placed parallel to slope contours overlap num aperture openings or num inches whichever is greater num .
for reinforcement placed perpendicular to slope contours splice the edges under the manufacturers instructions grade and compact the backfill to ensure the reinforcement remains taut .
compact the backfill to a relative compaction of at least num percent .
if handoperated equipment is used do not place more than num inches of backfill before compaction .
use handoperated equipment to compact areas within num feet of num .
slope contours num .
underground structures do not disk or plow in the reinforced area .
section num earthwork num num payment if ordered to cut into a slope more than num feet the excavated material in excess of num feet is paid for as roadway excavation .
if there is a bid item for embankment shown on the bid item list the payment quantity for embankment is the volume determined from the planned or authorized cross sections and the measured ground surface .
the department does not increase the embankment quantity if subsidence or consolidation occurs after you start placing the embankment material .
num borrow material num general numa summary section num includes specifications for obtaining local and imported borrow material for embankment construction .
the payment quantity for imported borrow does not include aggregate base placed to fill low areas .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance notify the engineer before opening any imported borrow material site so that the department may test the material .
num materials numa general borrow material must be num .
suitable for the purpose intended num .
free of unsuitable material including organic matter numb local borrow reserved numc imported borrow imported borrow must be free of manmade refuse such as num .
concrete num .
asphalt concrete num .
residue from grooving and grinding operations num .
metal num .
rubber num .
mixed debris num .
rubble num construction numa general clear grub and strip borrow sites if necessary .
excavate load and if necessary haul borrow material .
construct embankments under section num .
numb local borrow obtain local borrow such that no scar or unsightly appearance is generated .
section num earthwork num numc imported borrow before placing imported borrow in embankments ensure enough space is available in embankment locations for placing planned or designated excavated material from the job site .
num payment the payment quantity for imported borrow paid by theoretical volume basis is the volume determined from the planned or authorized cross section for embankments and the measured ground surface adjusted by subtracting the theoretical quantities of material from excavations .
the theoretical quantity of materials from excavations used in embankments is determined by summing the quantities for roadway excavation structure excavation and ditch excavation and then by multiplying the quantities by the grading factor .
the grading factor used for excavated materials for determining payment quantity for imported borrow is num .
if import borrow site is only being used for num project you may request that import borrow be measured and paid based on borrow site cross sections and the following num .
notify the engineer before opening any imported borrow material site so the department may take crosssection elevations and measurements of the ground surface after clearing grubbing and any stripping .
num .
the payment quantity for imported borrow paid by the cubic yard is the volume determined from the average areas and the distances between them .
num .
areas and distances used to determine the volume are those from the material site before and after the imported borrow is excavated .
num reserved num shoulder backing num general section num includes specifications for constructing shoulder backing adjacent to the edge of new pavement surfacing .
num materials shoulder backing must be clean and consist of one or any combination of the following materials num .
broken stone num .
crushed gravel num .
natural rough surfaced gravel num .
sand num .
rap num .
concrete num .
lcb num .
ctb shoulder backing must be graded within the percentage passing limits shown in the following table sieve size percentage passing num num num num num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num if num percent rap is used shoulder backing must be graded within the percentage passing limits shown in the following table section num earthwork num sieve size percentage passing num num num num no .
num num shoulder backing must comply with the sand equivalent requirements shown in the following table quality characteristics test method requirement sand equivalent single type of material except rap combination of all type of materials including rap combination of all type of materials excluding rap num rap min california test num num num num num if a combination of broken stone crushed gravel natural roughsurfaced gravel and sand is used shoulder backing must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement percentage crushed particles min a california test num num fractured face num num fractured faces num durability index california test num num aapplies to material retained on no .
num sieve only when tested under california test num using the rodding method the minimum unit weight of shoulder backing must be num lbcu ft except if shoulder backing consists of num percent rap this requirement does not apply .
num construction do not place shoulder backing containing rap within num feet measured horizontally from a culvert watercourse or bridge .
remove weeds grass and debris from the area to receive shoulder backing .
scarify the basement material to receive shoulder backing at least num foot deep and water immediately before placing the shoulder backing .
place and spread shoulder backing directly on the basement material .
after placing the shoulder backing water and compact it with a minimum of num passes with a steeltired roller weighing at least num tons .
wherever the total thickness of shoulder backing is more than num inches place the backing under sections num and num .
form smooth and uniform cross sections and slopes .
do not deposit shoulder backing on new pavement .
complete shoulder backing within num days after placement of adjacent new surfacing except complete shoulder backing within num days wherever edge treatment under section numcnum is placed .
before opening a lane adjacent to uncompleted shoulder backing place portable delineators and wnum low shoulder signs off of and adjacent to the new pavement surfacing .
section num earthwork num portable delineators and signs must comply with section num except the signs may be set on temporary portable supports or on barricades .
place portable delineators at the beginning and along the dropoff of the edge of pavement in the direction of travel at maximum intervals of num feet on tangents and num feet on curves .
place the wnum signs at the beginning and along the dropoff of the edge of pavement in the direction of travel at maximum intervals of num feet .
remove portable delineators and wnum signs when the shoulder backing is complete in that area .
num payment not used num subgrade enhancement geosynthetic num general section num includes specifications for placing subgrade enhancement geosynthetic between the subgrade and pavement structure .
subgrade enhancement geosynthetic includes subgrade enhancement geogrid and subgrade enhancement geotextile .
num materials subgrade enhancement geogrid must be biaxial geogrid .
a polyester geotextile must not be used for subgrade enhancement geotextile within num inches of recycled concrete .
num construction numa general before placing subgrade enhancement geosynthetic remove loose or extraneous material and sharp objects that may come in contact with the geosynthetic .
place the geosynthetic num .
under manufacturers instructions num .
longitudinally along the roadway alignment num .
without wrinkles overlap the adjacent edges of the rolls at least num feet .
overlap the ends of rolls at least num feet in the direction you spread the material covering the subgrade enhancement geosysnthetic .
you may fold or cut the geosysnthetic to conform to curves .
overlap any cut material at least num feet .
hold the overlap in place with staples pins or small piles of material placed on the subgrade enhancement material .
make any repairs by placing a new piece of material over the damaged area with at least num feet of overlap from the edges of the damaged area .
compact the ab with either a num smooth wheeled roller with no vibrations or num rubber tire roller do not num stockpile material on the geosynthetic or num place more geotextile than can be covered in num hours or num operate equipment or vehicles directly on it except you may operate vehicles and equipment on geogrid if at least one of the following conditions is met num .
vehicles and equipment are num .
equipped with rubber tires num operated under num mph num operated in a manner to avoid sudden braking and sharp turns num .
at least num feet of ab had been placed spread and compacted on the geogrid .
section num earthwork num numc subgrade enhancement geotextile do not num .
compact it with a sheepsfoot or other nonsmooth roller num turn vehicles on material placed directly over geotextile before operating equipment on areas where geotextile has been placed spread and compact num feet of material on the geotextile .
num payment the payment quantity for subgrade enhancement geogrid and subgrade enhancement geotextile is the area measured parallel to the surface not including the additional quantity used for overlaps .
num reserved num num landscape num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for performing landscaping work .
perform roadside clearing num .
as required to prepare the job site for construction work num .
until the start of the plant establishment work or contract acceptance whichever comes first check for plant deficiencies under section numanum before installing any irrigation system in an existing planting area to be maintained .
unless a supply line is shown through plant holes relocate any plant hole to clear a supply line .
do not install supply lines control and neutral conductors and electrical conduits in common trenches above each other .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals at least num days before applying any pesticide submit a copy of the pest control advisers recommendation .
at the end of each week submit a report of chemical spray operations form as an informational submittal documenting the application of all pesticides .
before mixing a pesticide submit a copy of the registered label for the pesticide as an informational submittal .
if you are unable to copy the label allow the engineer to read the label on the container .
numd quality assurance numdnum general obtain a recommendation for the use of all pesticides under the food agri code from a pest control adviser who is licensed as an agricultural pest control adviser in the state .
the recommendation must include the pesticides to be used rates of application methods of application and application areas .
the pesticide applicator must have an active and valid qualified applicator license or certificate from the department of pesticide regulation .
numdnum progress inspections the engineer performs a progress inspection num .
before cultivating work starts num .
during pressure testing of irrigation pipe on the supply side of control valves num .
during testing of low voltage conductors num .
during irrigation system functional tests num .
before planting work starts num .
after completion of planting work notify the engineer at least num business days before each inspection is required .
allow at least num business days for the engineers inspection .
do not proceed with the next construction activity until the inspection has been completed and any required corrective work has been performed and authorized .
num materials numa general reserved section num landscape num numb water unless there is a bid item for irrigation water service charges the department furnishes water if it is available from an existing departmentowned facility within the project limits or an irrigation system to be installed under the contract .
if water is not available from one of these sources make arrangements for supplying water .
water must be of a quality that promotes plant growth .
numc pesticides pesticides must comply with the regulations of the department of pesticide regulation .
insecticide must be imidacloprid .
rodenticides must be brodifacoum bromadiolone or diphacinone .
do not use oil or pelleted forms of pesticides for weed control .
for weed control use a pesticide with a photosensitive dye that produces a contrasting color when sprayed on the ground .
the color must disappear within num to num days after being applied .
the dye must not stain surfaces or injure plants or wildlife when applied at the manufacturers recommended application rate .
numdnumh reserved num construction numa general take precautions to prevent irrigation water from num .
wetting vehicles pedestrians and pavement num .
eroding soil num .
causing excess runoff if water use calculations are provided as supplemental project information water plants under the model water efficient landscape ordinance num ca code of regs num et seq .
and local water agency provisions .
water plants at night unless otherwise authorized .
dispose of removed pruned and damaged vegetative material .
you may reduce removed vegetative material to chips with a maximum thickness of num inch and spread it within the job site at locations determined by the engineer .
do not substitute chipped material for wood mulch or place it in areas to receive wood mulch .
numb pesticides notify the engineer of pesticide application times at least num hours before each application .
mix and apply pesticides under the regulations of the department of pesticide regulation and the instructions on the pesticide product label .
do not apply pesticides num .
on saturdays and holidays unless authorized num .
whenever weather and wind conditions are unsuitable for application num .
within the plant basin num .
on the foliage and woody parts of the plant any granular preemergent must be covered with mulch on the same work day .
do not apply granular preemergent in plant basins .
do not apply preemergents num .
to groundcover plants within num days after planting num .
within num inches of trees shrubs and seeded areas section num landscape num num .
before plants have been thoroughly watered numc roadside clearing numcnum general roadside clearing includes num .
removing existing plants described to be removed num .
controlling rodents insects and weeds control rodents by using rodenticides or traps .
numcnum remove existing plants removal of existing plants includes removing their stumps and roots num inches or larger in diameter to a minimum depth of num inches below finished grade .
backfill holes resulting from stump removal to the finished grade with material obtained from adjacent areas .
if a plant is to be planted within an existing groundcover area remove the existing groundcover from within an area num feet in diameter centered at each plant location .
numcnum weed control control weeds by the use of pesticides handpulling or mowing .
if pesticides are used to control weeds apply pesticides before the weeds reach the seed stage of growth or exceed num inches in length whichever occurs first .
do not use pesticides at cutting plant locations .
where cuttings are to be planted control weeds by handpulling within an area num feet in diameter centered at each plant location .
if weeds are to be controlled by handpulling handpull weeds before they reach the seed stage of growth or exceed num inches in length whichever occurs first .
where liner plug or seedling plants are to be planted num feet or more apart control weeds by the use of pesticides or handpulling within an area num feet in diameter centered at each plant location .
where liner plug or seedling plants are to be planted less than num feet apart control weeds by the use of pesticides within the entire area .
control weeds by mowing outside of mulched areas plant basins groundcover areas and within areas to be seeded .
mowing must extend to the edges of pavement dikes curbs sidewalks walls and fences .
if mowing is to be performed within areas to be seeded perform mowing as needed until the start of the seeding activity .
perform mowing before the weeds reach the seed stage of growth or exceed num inches in length whichever occurs first .
mow weeds to a height of num inches .
numcnum disposal of removed groundcover weeds and mowed material dispose of handpulled weeds the same day they are pulled .
dispose of removed groundcover within num days .
dispose of mowed material from the initial mowing .
disposal of material from subsequent mowing is not required .
numd cultivation cultivation must be by mechanical methods and performed until the soil is in a loose condition to a minimum depth of num inches .
soil clods must not be larger than num inches in maximum dimension after cultivation .
the areas to be cultivated must extend num inches beyond the outer limit of each planting area requiring cultivation .
after initial cultivation place soil amendment and fertilizer at specified rates .
recultivate to thoroughly mix native soil and amendments .
section num landscape num do not drive on cultivated areas after cultivation .
planting areas that have been cultivated and become compacted must be recultivated .
rocks and debris encountered during soil preparation in planting areas must be brought to the ground surface .
remove rocks and debris as ordered .
this work is change order work .
nume weed germination reserved numfnumk reserved num payment the payment quantity for landscape bid items paid for by the area is the area measured parallel to the ground surface .
the payment quantity for cultivation includes the area not cultivated within the cultivation area shown .
num irrigation num general numa general numanum summary section num includes general specifications for installing irrigation systems .
the irrigation systems shown are diagrammatic .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals numanuma general submit shop drawings for the electrical components of the irrigation system except electric service irrigation num days before installation .
the drawings must num .
include schematic wiring diagrams showing wire sizes and routes between electrical components num .
show conduit sizes num .
bear the written approval of the controller manufacturer or the manufacturers authorized agent num .
be accompanied by num .
colored wire and splice samples num .
manufacturers descriptive and technical literature numanumb manufacturers instructions submit the manufacturers installation instructions as an informational submittal at least num days before installing num .
couplings for conduits used for irrigation conduits num .
plastic pipe and fittings num .
solvent cement for plastic pipe and flexible hose num .
sprinklers num .
flow sensors num .
rain sensors num .
remote control valves num .
backflow preventers numanum quality assurance numanuma general reserved section num landscape num numanumb pressure testing numanumbi general perform pressure testing for leakage on irrigation supply lines num .
in the engineers presence num .
on business days from num a.m. to num p.m. unless authorized num .
before backfilling supply line trenches num .
with irrigation system gate valves open num .
with open ends of the supply line and fittings plugged or capped notify the engineer at least num hours before performing a pressure test .
perform pressure testing using method a or b to test supply lines installed by trenching and backfilling and supply lines that are completely visible after installation .
perform pressure testing using method a to test all other supply lines including those installed in the ground by methods other than trenching and backfilling .
test irrigation supply line in conduit by method a with the testing period modified to num hour and no allowable pressure drop .
numanumbii method a for method a pressure testing for leakage num .
calibrate the pressure gauge from num to num psi in num psi increments .
pressure gauge must be accurate to within a tolerance of num psi .
num .
fill the supply line with water and connect the line to a pressure gauge .
place the pipeline under a pressure of num psi .
remove the source of pressure and leave the line under the required pressure .
num .
test the supply line under the required pressure for a period of num hour .
the pressure gauge must remain in place until each test period is complete .
num .
leaks that develop in the tested portion of the system must be located and repair after each test period if a drop of more than num psi is indicated by the pressure gauge .
after the leaks have been repaired repeat the numhour pressure test until the drop in pressure is num psi or less .
for a system consisting of a new supply line connected to an existing line the new supply line must be isolated from the existing line and tested .
numanumbiii method b for method b pressure testing for leakage num .
turn on the water and maintain at full pressure from the water source for a period not less than num consecutive hours after all the air has been expelled from the line for the portion of the supply line on the upstream side of the control valve to be backfilled .
perform the same test for a period not less than num hour for the portion of the supply on the downstream side of the control valve to be backfilled .
num .
repair leaks that develop in the tested portion of the system .
after the leaks have been repaired repeat the pressure test until no leaks occur .
numanumc sprinkler coverage check after installation of the sprinklers check and adjust the entire sprinkler system for proper orientation and uniform coverage .
numanumd irrigation system functional tests the functional tests for each irrigation controller or group of controllers and associated irrigation system served by a single electric service point must consist of at least num complete cycle of operation .
the engineer determines the length of the cycle .
perform a functional test for each irrigation system num .
before planting the plants num .
after planting the plants num .
before the start of the plant establishment work section num landscape num numanume final irrigation system check perform the final check of the existing and new irrigation system num to num days before contract acceptance .
the engineer determines the length of the cycle .
remote control valves connected to existing and new irrigation controllers must be checked for automatic operation when the controllers are in automatic mode .
numb materials numbnum general concrete for replacing concrete facilities must be minor concrete .
hma for replacing asphalt concrete surfacing and facilities must comply with section num except you may use minor hma only if authorized .
numbnum garden valves each garden valve must num .
be the inverted nose type and of brass or bronze construction with a female thread inlet num .
have a replaceable seat washer a rising valve stem within a protective collar and a male thread hose outlet num .
have a loose key handle numbnum recycled water identification irrigation components used for recycled water must be manufactured or painted purple .
recycled water irrigation pipe and tubing must have a permanent label with the wording caution recycled water every num inches in num rows spaced approximately num degrees apart in the longitudinal direction of the pipe or tubing .
the recycled water warning sign must be a decal or a decal attached to a numinchthick aluminum plate or tag .
each warning sign decal must num .
show the phrase recycled water do not drink and the drinkingglass graphic symbol num .
be uv fade and weather resistant and manufactured from flexible vinyl with or without mylar num .
have a purple background black text and selfadhesive backing each warning tag must num .
show the phrase recycled water and the drinkingglass graphic symbol num .
be uv fade and weather resistant num .
be purple doublesided and manufactured from polyurethane num .
have an integral neck attachment and attachment hole capable of withstanding num lb of pullout resistance num .
have hotstamped black lettering posts and hardware for the warning signs must comply with section num .
concrete sprinkler protectors used with recycled water must be painted purple .
numbnum location markers location markers must be schedule num white pvc plastic pipe .
numbnum pull boxes pull boxes must comply with section num and be no .
num or larger .
pull boxes for low voltage conductors must not have side openings .
pull box covers used solely for irrigation electrical service must be marked irrigation .
section num landscape num numbnum unions unions must be brass or malleable iron capable of withstanding the maximum required working pressure .
numbnum valve boxes and covers valve boxes must be precast concrete .
covers must be num .
concrete steel or cast iron num .
marked water in castin letters not less than num inch high unless shown num .
num piece except num pieces are required if the weight of the valve box cover exceeds num lb the valve box covers must include a polyurethane label with the appropriate controller letter and station number .
numbnum wye strainers wye strainers except those used for drip valve assemblies must num .
have a cast iron or all bronze body num .
have a removable stainless steel strainer screen with nummesh woven wire num .
have a nummesh woven wire screen or perforated sheet with numinchdiameter holes when on a backflow preventer assembly num .
be capable of withstanding a working pressure of num psi num .
be equipped with a garden valve at the outlet numc construction numcnum general immediately shut off water to broken pressurized irrigation components .
repair irrigation systems within num hours after a malfunction or damage occurs .
connect underground metallic pipes valves or fittings made of dissimilar metals through a dielectric coupling or bushing .
you may install conduits conductors and supply lines by methods other than trenching provided that they are not damaged and are installed at the depths described .
numcnum trenching and backfilling perform trenching and backfilling under section num .
remove plants as specified for roadside clearing as necessary to trench .
if plants are to remain adjust the trench alignment to minimize damage .
do not remove a width of turf more than num inches .
do not remove a width of groundcover more than num feet .
you may rototill existing carpobrotus and delosperma .
backfill for the trenches must not contain plants longer than num inches .
make a minimum numinchdeep saw cut along neat lines around the perimeter of the pavement to be removed at locations determined by the engineer .
the trench must have uniform bearing throughout the entire length and must be free of jagged rubble or sharp objects .
ensure conduit supply line and joints are not moved or damaged by backfill activity .
for a project with multiple water service points excavate and backfill the trenches num service point at a time .
trenches for irrigation supply lines and conduits num inches and larger must be num times the pipe or conduit diameter deep and num times the pipe or conduit diameter wide .
trenches for irrigation supply lines and conduits num inches or less in diameter must be a minimum of num inches below finished grade measured from the top of the installed pipe .
trenches must be at least num feet from curbs dikes and paved shoulders .
section num landscape num rocks and debris encountered during trenching activity must be brought to the ground surface .
the removal of rocks and debris is change order work .
if trenching requires the removal of plants in areas with num .
turf replace turf with sod under section numcnume .
num .
groundcover replace groundcover plants from flats and plant at num inches on center under section numc .
no replacement of carpobrotus and delosperma is required if removed by rototilling .
where existing surfacing is removed replace the structural section to match the materials removed .
replacement concrete must be of uniform smoothness color and texture equal to the adjacent concrete surface .
install supply line and conduit at the bottom of trenches and backfill with sand to a depth of num inches over the top of the supply lines and conduits .
except for the part of the trench backfilled with surfacing or pavement the remainder of the trench must be backfilled with material that is excavated from the trench .
rock broken concrete asphalt concrete and other particles larger than num inches in greatest dimension must not be used .
numcnum pull boxes install pull boxes under section num at the following locations num .
at all conductor splices except splices made in valve boxes num .
within num feet of irrigation controllers num .
at ends of electrical conduits num .
at other locations shown numcnum valve boxes and covers in walkways and paved areas install the top of the valve box flush with the surrounding finished grade .
numcnum recycled water warning signs install recycled water warning signs on irrigation facilities that use recycled water .
install sign decals directly to clean smooth surfaces .
clean the surface with alcohol or an equivalent cleaner before applying the decal .
install a numbynuminch warning sign decal to each num .
backflow preventer assembly num .
irrigation controller enclosure cabinet door install a numbynuminch warning tag to each remote control valve and valve box cover .
install a numbynuminch sign decal to each sprinkler riser .
under local regulations install a numbynuminch warning sign decal on an aluminum plate and attach to gates fences and walls located in the vicinity of a recycled water irrigation system .
on gates and fences install signs with s hooks and c clips or numgauge galvanized steel wire .
on concrete walls or other rough surfaces install signs with a siliconbased adhesive .
in open areas install signs on metal posts under section num .
numcnum garden valves furnish num keys before contract acceptance .
numd payment not used num backflow preventer assemblies numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for installing backflow preventer assemblies .
section num landscape num numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals reserved numanum quality assurance each backflow preventer assembly must be certified by a backflow preventer tester .
the tester must have an active and valid certification from the water purveyor having jurisdiction .
if the local water purveyor does not have a certification program the tester must be certified by awwa or a nearby county with a certification program .
notify the engineer at least num business days before certifying the backflow preventer assembly .
certify each backflow preventer assembly annually and within num days of contract acceptance .
numb materials numbnum general each backflow preventer assembly must include num .
backflow preventer including gate valve wye strainer brass or malleable iron unions fittings and supports num .
blanket num .
enclosure num .
concrete pad concrete for the pad must be minor concrete except the cementitious material content of the concrete must be at least num lbcu yd .
hand mixing of the concrete is allowed .
numbnum backflow preventers each backflow preventer must num .
be reducedpressure principle type .
num .
comply with the specifications of the water purveyor that has jurisdiction .
num .
be factory assembled with num .
num check valves .
num .
num pressure differential relief valve .
num .
num test cocks .
num .
num shutoff valves manufactured from iron or bronze .
shutoff valves must be one of the following num .
resilientwedge gate valves .
num .
resilientseated and fullyported ball valves .
num .
resilientseated butterfly valves .
backflow preventer components must be capable of withstanding a working pressure of num psi .
numbnum backflow preventer blankets each backflow preventer blanket must num .
be polyester fabric coated with vinyl or polymeric resin num .
be resistant to uv light water mildew and fire num .
have an rvalue from rnum to rnum blankets must have a securing mechanism that includes zippers hookpile tape grommets snaps buttons or any combination of these .
wherever the backflow preventer is not in an enclosure the securing mechanism must be capable of accepting a padlock .
numbnum backflow preventer enclosures each backflow preventer enclosure must section num landscape num num .
be type num stainless steel num .
have expanded metal side end and top panels fabricated from numgauge minimumthickness sheet with openings of approximately num by num inches num .
have expanded metal panels attached to the numinchthick frame by a series of welds not less than num inch in length and spaced not more than num inches on center along the edges of the enclosure num .
have lock guards with a minimum thickness of num gauge num .
have hexagonal nuts and locktype washers num .
have padlockclasp or latchandlock mechanism numc construction finish exposed top surface of concrete pad with a medium broom finish applied parallel to the long dimension of the pad .
install the holddowns for the backflow preventer assembly enclosure when the concrete is still plastic .
numd payment not used num cam coupler assemblies numa general section num includes specifications for installing cam coupler assemblies .
numb materials each cam coupler assembly must consist of a cam coupler dust cap loose key check valve pipes fittings concrete thrust block and valve box with woven wire cloth and gravel .
cam couplers and keys must be manufactured of brass or bronze and be able to withstand a working pressure of num psi .
numc construction install cam coupler assemblies in valve boxes .
furnish num loose keys before contract acceptance .
numd payment not used num control and neutral conductors numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for installing or extending num vac control and neutral conductors between irrigation controllers and valve solenoids .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals reserved numanum quality assurance perform field tests on control and neutral conductors .
field tests must comply with the specifications in section num .
where the conductors are installed by trenching and backfilling perform the field tests after a minimum of num inches of backfill material has been placed and compacted over the conductors .
numb materials control and neutral conductors must comply with the provisions for conductors and cables in section num .
electrical conduit and fittings must comply with section num .
section num landscape num conductors must include a control conductor for each valve and a common neutral .
conductor insulation color except for the stripes must be continuous throughout .
the color of the conductors must be consistent from the controller to each valve .
neutral conductors must be white .
do not use white for control conductors .
do not use conductors with green insulation except as allowed by the nec .
conductors must be num .
of the size recommended by the manufacturer of the controllers to be installed num .
rated for num v or num v for armorclad num .
rated for direct burial num .
underground feeder cable type uf and twu num .
solid uncoated copper for armorclad num .
not less than num percent of the awg diameter required no .
num and smaller conductors must be insulated with a minimum of num mils of pvc or a minimum of num mils of polyethylene .
no .
num and larger conductors must be insulated with a minimum of num mils of pvc .
no .
num and smaller armorclad conductors must be insulated with a minimum of num mils of polyethylene .
no .
num and larger armorclad conductors must be insulated with num to num mils of pvc .
armorclad conductors must include num .
stainless steel tape armor type num helically wrapped with a num percent minimum overlap .
the tape must be num inch wide and at least num inch thick .
num .
uvresistant pvc outer conductor jacket complying with icea snum nema standard wcnum and ul listing num .
the jacket nominal thickness must be from num to num mils .
numc construction numcnum general reserved numcnum conductors in open trenches do not install control and neutral conductors above each other in an open trench .
wrap conductors together with electrical tape at num foot intervals .
where conductors are installed in the same trench as the supply line install at the same depth as the line .
at other locations install conductors not less than num inches below finished grade .
where conductors are not in a supply line trench install conductors at least num feet from curbs dikes and paved shoulders .
numcnum conductors in conduits install conductors in electrical conduit if conductors are to be num .
surface mounted num .
installed in or on structures num .
installed under paved areas num .
installed in irrigation conduits num .
placed in concrete numcnum splicing splice low voltage control and neutral conductors under section num except do not use method b .
tape used for splice insulation must be pvc tape .
leave at least num feet of slack for each conductor at each num .
pull box num .
valve box for each conductor that is connected to other facilities within the box or spliced within the box section num landscape num do not splice conductors in irrigation controller cabinets .
permanent splice connections must be made with freshly cut and skinned conductors .
do not use temporary splices made for testing valve circuits as permanent splices .
numcnum marking mark control and neutral conductors in pull boxes valve boxes at irrigation control terminals and at splices .
mark conductor terminations and splices with adhesive cloth wraparound markers .
seal markers with clear heatshrinkable sleeves .
mark nonspliced conductors with clipon cshaped white extruded pvc sleeves .
sleeves must have black indented legends of uniform depth with transparent overlays over the legends and chevron cuts for the alignment of num or more sleeves .
identify markers for the control conductors with the appropriate irrigation controller and station number .
numd payment not used num flow sensors numa general section num includes specifications for installing flow sensors .
numb materials each flow sensor must be an inline type with a nonmagnetic spinning impeller as the only moving part .
the electronics housing must num .
be schedule num pvc or cast num bronze num .
include glassfilled polyphenylene sulfide num .
be easily removable from the meter body and include num ethylenepropylene orings the impeller must be tungsten carbide .
the electronics must be rated to withstand prolonged water immersion conditions and include two num inchlong singleconductor num awg leads .
the insulation must be direct burial uf type colored red for the positive lead and black for the negative lead .
the flow sensor must be capable of withstanding num .
num to numpsi operating pressure depending on sensor size shown num .
liquid temperatures up to num degrees f num .
flows from num to num ftsec numc construction not used numd payment not used num irrigation controllers numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for installing irrigation controllers .
section num landscape num numanum definitions base station designated computer that collects data from a series of satellite controllers through a centralized server .
centralized server designated server that collects data from all base stations .
network communication identified means through which satellite controllers base stations and a centralized server communicate to one another such as fiber optics spread spectrum and phone lines .
remote access device wireless device such as an fcccompliant radio remote webenabled smart phone or wireless computer or tablet used to communicate with satellite controllers from a remote location .
remote irrigation control system centralized watermanagement system that consists of num .
base station num .
centralized server or webbased application num .
satellite controllers num .
remote access device satellite controller irrigation controller that communicates directly to a base station or centralized server .
smart controller irrigation controller that estimates or measures depletion of available plant soil moisture to operate an irrigation system replenishing water as needed while minimizing excess water use .
webbased application encrypted managing software that is coded in a browsersupported language and is executable via a common internet web browser such as internet explorer firefox and safari .
numanum submittals submit a complete manufacturers maintenance and operations manual for each type of installed controller as an informational submittal .
after the work is complete submit num copies of the asbuilt shop drawings including any wire modifications for each controller installed .
for each controller laminate and place in an envelope num copy of num .
asbuilt schematic wiring diagram including wiring modifications num .
numbynuminch asbuilt irrigation plan the laminate must be clear matfinished plastic that is at least num mils thick .
the envelope must be heavyduty plastic .
attach the envelope to the inside of the controller enclosure or cabinet door .
if the door is not large enough to secure the envelope submit the envelope and its contents .
numanum quality assurance provide training by a qualified person on the use and adjustment of the installed irrigation controllers at least num days before contract acceptance .
modifications to electrical components must be done by the manufacturer before shipment to the job site .
the installation date and expiration date of the manufacturers guarantee for the controllers must be permanently marked on the inside face of the controller .
numb materials numbnum general conventional acpowered irrigation controllers must operate on num vac num hz and supply from num to num vac num hz for operating electrical remote control valves .
section num landscape num concrete for the pad and foundation must be minor concrete except the cementitious material content of the concrete must be at least num lbcu yd .
hand mixing of the concrete is allowed .
numbnum irrigation controllers numbnuma general the irrigation controllers must num .
be a smart controller from a single manufacturer .
num .
be fully automatic and capable of operating a complete numday or longer irrigation program .
num .
have a switch or button on the face of the irrigation control panel showing that the irrigation controller can be turned on or off and provide for automatic or manual operation .
manual operation must allow cycle start at the desired station and allow for the minimum activation of a single station or have the option to operate multiple stations in sequential or simultaneous operation modes .
num .
have nonvolatile memory .
num .
have a watering time display on the face of the control panel .
num .
have a panel and circuit board connected to the low voltage control and neutral conductors by means of a plug and receptacle connectors located within the cabinet enclosure .
num .
have a variable or incremental timing adjustment ranging from num to num minutes per station .
num .
be capable of operating at least num program schedules .
num .
be capable of having at least num start times per program schedule .
num .
have an output that can energize a pump start circuit or a remote control master valve .
num .
be protected by fuses and circuit breakers .
num .
display a program and station affected by a sensory alert without changing other watering schedules not affected by the alert .
num .
be capable of global manual and automatic seasonal adjustments to all valves in any given program .
num .
automatically change watering schedule based on evapotranspiration data provided by a local weather station or have an internal programmed default of historical evapotranspiration data for a given region .
num .
support a flow sensor and a rain sensor or access to a weather station and have automatic shutoff capability .
num .
be capable of communicating with the remote access device .
if the irrigation controller is installed in an enclosure cabinet the cabinet must be stainless steel and must comply with section numbnum .
irrigation controllers not installed in enclosure cabinets must be weatherproof constructed of fiberglass or metal and have a door lock with num keys provided .
remote irrigation systems must comply with the specifications for irrigation controllers and be accessible only through a secured and encrypted server that is password and firewallprotected by the department or through a firewallsecured remote server that is independent from any department servers .
the department will set up and manage the network communication .
numbnumb battery powered irrigation controllers reserved numbnumc solar powered irrigation controllers reserved numbnumd twowire irrigation controllers reserved numbnum irrigation controller enclosure cabinets the irrigation controller enclosure cabinet must comply with section num and num .
be minimum numgauge type num stainless steel .
num .
include a mounting panel .
fabricate mounting panels using any of the following materials num .
numinch exterior ac grade veneer plywood .
paint panels with num application of an exterior latex based wood primer and num applications of an exterior vinyl acrylic enamel white in color .
paint section num landscape num panels on all sides and edges before installation of the panels in the cabinets and the equipment on the panels .
num .
numinchthick aluminum sheets .
num .
numgauge coldrolled steel sheets .
num .
numinch stainless steel metal sheets .
num .
provide cross ventilation roof ventilation or a combination of both .
ventilation must not compromise the weather resistance properties of the cabinet and must be fabricated by the cabinet manufacturer .
num .
include protection against lightning damage .
num .
have an area inside the cabinet doors for storage of the asbuilt schematic wiring diagram and irrigation plans .
num .
have padlock clasp or latch and lock mechanism .
numbnum rain sensors rain sensor units must be a solidstate automatic shutoff type and compatible with the irrigation controller .
the rain sensor unit must automatically interrupt the master remote control valves if approximately num inch of rain has fallen .
the irrigation controller must automatically be enabled again when the accumulated rainfall evaporates from the rain sensor unit collection cup .
rain sensor units must be one of the following num .
rated from num to num vac num .
wireless and fcc compliant numc construction finish the exposed top surface of concrete pad with a medium broom finish applied parallel to the long dimension .
install electrical components for automatic irrigation systems under section num .
install irrigation controllers under the manufacturers instructions .
if num or more irrigation controllers operate the same remote master control valve install an isolation relay under the controller manufacturers instructions .
where direct burial conductors are to be connected to the terminal strip connect the conductors with the openendcrimpon wire terminals .
exposed wire must not extend beyond the crimp of the terminal and the wires must be parallel on the terminal strip .
install rain sensor units for irrigation controllers on the irrigation controller enclosure cabinets .
provide protection against lightning damage .
numd payment payment for numvolt or higher electrical service is not included in the payment for any type of irrigation controller .
num irrigation conduit numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for installing irrigation conduit .
before performing work on irrigation systems locate existing irrigation conduits shown to be incorporated into the new work .
before removing or disturbing existing pavement markers that show the location of the existing irrigation conduit mark the location of the existing conduit on the pavement .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals reserved section num landscape num numanum quality assurance demonstrate that the irrigation conduits are free from obstructions after placement of base and surfacing .
before and after extending the irrigation supply line in an irrigation conduit pressure test the supply line under section numanumb .
after conductors are installed in an irrigation conduit test the conductors under section numanum .
assign a technical representative to direct and control the directional bore activities .
the representative must be present during directional bore activities .
unless otherwise authorized perform directional bore activities in the presence of the engineer .
numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum abs composite pipe conduit abs composite pipe and couplings must comply with astm dnum .
couplings must be solvent cement type .
numbnum corrugated hdpe pipe conduit corrugated hdpe pipe must comply with astm fnum and astm fnum or be type s complying with aashto mnum and aashto mnum .
couplings and fittings must be as recommended by the pipe manufacturer .
numbnum corrugated steel pipe conduit corrugated pipe conduit must comply with section num .
the nominal thickness of metal sheets for pipe must be num inch for corrugated steel pipe and num inch for corrugated aluminum pipe .
coupling bands and hardware must comply with section num .
numbnum pvc pipe conduit pvc pipe conduit must be schedule num complying with astm dnum .
fittings must be schedule num .
numbnum welded steel pipe conduit welded steel pipe must comply with astm anum .
pipe must be black and have either welded or threaded joints .
the wall thickness for the various sizes of welded steel pipe must have the thickness shown in the following table nominal pipe size inches minimum wall thickness inch num num num num num num num num num num num num numc construction numcnum general if existing irrigation conduits are to be incorporated into new work excavate exploratory holes for locating existing conduits at the locations indicated by existing markers or as directed .
excavate and backfill exploratory holes to a maximum size of num feet in width num feet in depth and num feet on each side of the marker or directed location parallel to the roadway .
if the conduit is not found and if ordered increase the size of the exploratory holes beyond the dimensions specified .
the additional excavation and backfill is change order work .
section num landscape num if extending an existing conduit remove the existing conductors from the conduit .
use a coupling band if the new conduit matches the existing conduit diameter otherwise overlap the conduit at least num inches .
after extending the existing conduits install conductors that match the color and size of the existing conductors without splices .
splice conductors in adjacent pull boxes .
if installing a control and neutral conductor and electrical conduit through the irrigation conduit install a no .
num pull box at each end .
remove any debris found in the conduit before performing other work .
removing debris located more than num feet from the ends of the conduits is change order work .
extend conduit num feet beyond all paving .
cap the ends of unused conduit .
type a pavement markers and adhesive must comply with section num .
numcnum welded steel pipe conduit numcnuma general install welded steel pipe by directional boring or jack and drill .
install top of conduits from num .
num to num inches below the finished surface in sidewalk areas num .
num to num inches below the finished grade in other paved areas numcnumb directional boring notify the engineer at least num business days before starting directional bore activities .
the diameter of the boring tool for directional boring must be only as large as necessary to install the conduit .
mineral slurry or wetting solution may be used to lubricate the boring tool and to stabilize the soil surrounding the boring path .
the mineral slurry or wetting solution must be water based .
the directional bore equipment must have directional control of the boring tool and have an electronic boring tool location detection system .
during operation the directional bore equipment must be able to determine the location of the tool both horizontally and vertically .
numcnumc jack and drill notify the engineer at least num business days before starting jack and drill activities .
jacking or drilling pits must be no closer than num feet from the pavement edge whenever possible .
if authorized small holes may be cut in the pavement to locate or remove obstructions .
do not use excessive water that will soften the subgrade or undermine the pavement .
numcnum schedule num pvc pipe conduit where schedule num pvc pipe conduit num inches or less in outside diameter is installed under surfacing you may install by directional boring under section numcnumb .
for conduit num inches or less in diameter the top of the conduit must be a minimum of num inches below surfacing .
extend schedule num pvc pipe conduit num inches beyond surfacing .
cap ends of conduit until used .
numd payment not used section num landscape num num irrigation supply line numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for installing irrigation supply line .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit a certificate of compliance for polyethylene pipe and plastic pipe supply line .
numanum quality assurance solvent cement must comply with local air quality management district provisions .
numb materials numbnum general concrete for thrust blocks must be produced from commercialquality aggregates .
the concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
numbnum copper pipe supply line copper pipe must be type k rigid pipe complying with astm bnum .
fittings must be wrought copper or cast bronze either soldered or threaded .
solder must be num percent tin and num percent antimony .
numbnum galvanized steel pipe supply line galvanized steel pipe supply line and couplings must be standard weight complying with astm anum except that the zinc coating must not be less than num percent of the specified quantity .
except for couplings the fittings must be galvanized malleable iron banded and threaded and comply with ansi bnum class num .
joint compound must be nonhardening and noncorrosive .
do not use pipe thread sealant tape .
numbnum drip irrigation tubing drip irrigation tubing must be virgin polyethylene plastic complying with astm dnum .
the drip irrigation tubing must be distribution tubing with preinstalled inline emitters .
if preinstalled inline drip irrigation tubing is not shown you may install emitters that match the distribution specifications shown .
the emitters must be barbed or threadedtype outlet devices with dual silicone diaphragms .
when tested under astm dnum the wall thickness of polyethylene tubing must have the thickness shown in the following table nominal pipe size inch minimum wall thickness inch maximum wall thickness inch num num num num num num num num num the polyethylene tubing fittings must be leakfree compression type and have female sockets with an internal barb to provide a positive pipetofitting connection that will not separate at the designed pressure .
numbnum plastic pipe supply line plastic pipe supply line must be pvc pipe that is nsf approved .
schedule num plastic pipe supply line must comply with astm dnum .
section num landscape num class num plastic pipe supply line must comply with astm dnum .
pvc gasketed bell joints must comply with astm dnum astm dnum astm dnum and astm fnum .
for solventcemented type joints the primer and solvent cement must be made by the same manufacturer .
the primer color must contrast with the color of the pipe and fittings .
solventcemented fittings for schedule num plastic pipe supply line must be injection molded pvc schedule num and comply with astm dnum .
solventcemented fittings for class num plastic pipe supply line must be injection molded pvc schedule num and comply with astm dnum and astm dnum .
fittings for a supply line placed in an irrigation conduit must be schedule num .
fittings for a plastic pipe supply line larger than num inches must be ductile iron complying with section num numcnumb .
if uvresistant plastic pipe supply line is required the pipe must be homogeneous a uniform color and manufactured of num .
at least num percent vinyl chloride resin with uv stabilizers num .
nonpvc resin modifiers and coloring ingredients num .
coloring ingredients with uv stabilizers numc construction numcnum general cut pipe straight and true .
after cutting ream out the ends to the full inside diameter of the pipe .
prevent foreign material from entering the irrigation system during installation .
immediately before assembling clean all pipes valves and fittings .
flush lines before attaching sprinklers emitters and other terminal fittings .
reuse water from waterline flushing for landscape irrigation if practicable .
pipe supply lines installed between the water meter and backflow preventer assembly must be installed at least num inches below finished grade measured to the top of the pipe .
where a connection is made to existing supply lines belled and gasketed fittings or compression fittings may be used .
install a thrust block at each change in direction on the main supply line terminus run and at other locations shown .
where supply lines cross paved ditches more than num feet deep at their flow line install galvanized steel pipe for the entire span of the ditch .
numcnum galvanized steel pipe supply line coat male pipe threads on galvanized steel under the manufacturers instructions .
numcnum drip irrigation tubing install drip irrigation tubing on grade and under manufacturers instructions .
if preinstalled inline drip irrigation tubing is not shown install emitters under manufacturers instructions .
install a flush valve and an airrelief valve if recommended by the drip valve assembly manufacturer .
numcnum plastic pipe supply line for pvc pipe num inches in diameter or smaller cut the pipe with pvc cutters .
for solventcemented type joints apply primer and solventcement separately under the manufacturers instructions .
wrap the male portion of each threaded plastic pipe fitting with at least num layers of pipe thread sealant tape .
section num landscape num install plastic pipe supply line mains with solventcemented type joints not less than num inches below finished grade measured to the top of the pipe .
install plastic pipe supply line laterals with solventcemented type joints not less than num inches below finished grade measured to the top of the pipe .
numd payment the payment quantity for any type of supply line pipe or drip irrigation tubing is the length measured along the slope .
num sprinkler assemblies numa general section num includes specifications for installing sprinkler assemblies .
numb materials numbnum general where shown you must install a flow shutoff device under the manufacturers instructions unless equipment with a preinstalled flow shutoff device is used .
risers for sprinkler assemblies must be uv resistant schedule num pvc num or pvc num pipe and comply with astm dnum .
flexible hose for sprinkler assemblies must be leakfree nonrigid and comply with astm dnum cell type num .
the hose must comply with astm dnum and have the thickness shown in the following table nominal hose diameter inch minimum wall thickness inch num num num num num num solvent cement and fittings for flexible hose must comply with section numbnum .
numbnum popup sprinkler assemblies each popup sprinkler assembly must include a body nozzle swing joint pressure compensation device check valve sprinkler protector and fittings .
numbnum riser sprinkler assemblies each riser sprinkler assembly must include a riser or flexible hose threaded nipple swing joint check valve and nozzle .
each riser must be uv resistant schedule num pvc num or pvc num pipe and comply with astm dnum .
numbnum tree well sprinkler assemblies each tree well sprinkler assembly must include a body riser swing joint perforated drainpipe and drain grate .
the perforated drainpipe must be commercialgrade rigid pvc pipe with holes spaced not more than num inches on center on num side of the pipe .
the drain grate must be a commerciallyavailable numpiece injectionmolded grate manufactured from structural foam polyolefins with uv light inhibitors .
drain grate must be black .
gravel for filling the drainpipe must be graded such that num percent passes the numinch sieve and num percent is retained on the numinch sieve .
gravel must be clean washed dry and free from clay or organic material .
numc construction install popup and riser sprinkler assembly section num landscape num num .
from num to num feet from curbs dikes and sidewalks num .
at least num feet from paved shoulders num .
at least num feet from fences and walls if sprinkler assembly can not be installed within these limits the location will be determined by the engineer .
set sprinkler assembly riser on slopes perpendicular to the plane of the slope .
numd payment not used num valves numa general section num includes specifications for installing valves .
numb materials numbnum general not used numbnum ball valves each ball valve must be a numpiece brass or bronze body with a minimum nonshock working pressure of num psi .
the seats and oring seals must be ptfe .
numbnum check valves each check valve must num .
be schedule num pvc and factory set to num psi for adjustable spring check valve num .
be class num pvc for swing check valves on nonpressurized plastic irrigation supply line numbnum drip valve assemblies each drip valve assembly must include num .
remote control valve num .
wye filter with num .
filter housing that num .
can withstand a working pressure of num psi num .
is manufactured of reinforced polypropylene plastic num .
reusable stainless steel filter cartridge with a num mesh size filtration num .
ball valve complying with section numbnum num .
schedule num pvc pipes and fittings num .
pressure regulator numbnum garden valve assemblies each garden valve assembly must have num .
garden valve num .
location marker numbnum gate valves each gate valve must be num .
flanged or threaded type num .
iron or bronze body num .
bronze trimmed with one of the following num .
female thread rising stem num .
nonrising stem num .
able to withstand a working pressure of num psi section num landscape num gate valves smaller than num inches must have a cross handle .
gate valves num inches or larger must be flanged type with a square nut .
gate valves attached to the outlets of a wye strainer must have ptfe seating rings on the discharge side of the gate valves .
valve wedges must be driven obliquely by cam action into the seating rings .
numbnum pressure regulating valves each pressure regulating valve must be num .
flanged or threaded type num .
brass bronze cast iron or plastic body num .
spring diaphragm type num .
pilot controlled pressure regulating valve must have no internal filter screens .
numbnum pressure relief valves each pressure relief valve must have num .
brass or bronze body num .
stainless steel springs num .
bronze nickel chrome seats num .
composition seat discs num .
female bottom inlets num .
female side outlets numbnum quick coupling valves each quick coupling valve must be numinch double slotted with a selfclosing cap numinch brass key and numinch brass hose swivel .
except for the cap quick coupling valve must be brass or bronze construction .
numbnum remote control valves numbnuma general each remote control valve must num .
be normally closed type .
num .
be glassfilled nylon brass or bronze .
num .
be completely serviceable from the top without removing the valve body from the system .
num .
be equipped with a device that regulates and adjusts the flow of water and be provided with a manual shutoff .
the manual shutoff for valves larger than num inch must be operated by a cross handle .
num .
have solenoids compatible with the irrigation controller .
num .
have a manual bleed device .
num .
be capable of withstanding a pressure of num psi .
num .
have replaceable compression discs or diaphragms .
num .
have threaded fittings for inlets and outlets .
num .
have dc latching solenoids if used with solar or battery controllers .
solenoids must operate on num v. num .
be bottom angled or straight inlet configuration .
numbnumb remote control valves with flow sensor reserved numbnumc remote control valves with pressure regulator each remote control valve with pressure regulator must be factory assembled as num unit .
numc construction numcnum general all valves must be installed in a valve box with a cover except num .
check valves section num landscape num num .
garden valves num .
pressure regulating valves installed on backflow preventers numcnum control valves install control valves num .
from num to num feet from curbs dikes and sidewalks num .
at least num feet from paved shoulders num .
at least num feet from fences walls or both if a control valve can not be installed within these limits the location will be determined by the engineer .
numcnum check valves install springaction check valves as necessary to prevent low head drainage .
numcnum garden valve assemblies install a location marker from num to num inches from the back of each garden valve assembly .
numcnum gate valves furnish num long shank keys before contract acceptance .
numcnum pressure regulating valves install pressure regulating valves with threaded connections and a union on the inlet side of the valves .
numcnum quick coupling valves furnish num loose quick coupling brass keys and brass hose swivels before contract acceptance .
numd payment not used num wye strainer assemblies numa general section num includes specifications for installing wye strainer assemblies numb materials each wye strainer assembly must include num .
wye strainer num .
valve box and cover numc construction install wye strainer assembly on the upstream side of the remote control valves .
install garden valve such that the discharge sprays out of the valve box when the system is flushed .
numd payment not used num reserved num supply line on structures numa general numanum general numanuma summary section numa includes general specifications for installing water supply lines through bridges and on the exterior of concrete structures .
numanumb definitions reserved section num landscape num numanumc submittals submit a work plan for the temporary casing support at the abutments as an informational submittal .
numanumd quality assurance numanumdi general before installing seismic expansion assemblies or expansion assemblies the engineer must authorize the extension setting .
numanumdii regulatory requirements piping materials must bear the label stamp or other markings of the specified standards .
numanumdiii quality control test water supply lines before num .
backfilling num .
starting work on box girder cell decks num .
otherwise covering the water supply lines furnish pipe anchorages to resist thrust forces occurring during testing .
test the water supply lines as num unit .
the limits of the unit must be num feet beyond the casing at each end of the bridge .
cap each end of the water supply lines before testing .
caps must be rated for the test pressure .
test water supply lines under section numanumb except that the testing period must be num hours with no pressure drop .
place water supply lines num inches and larger under a pressure of at least num psi during testing .
air relief valves must not be subjected to pressure testing .
if water supply lines fail testing retest the lines after repair .
numanum materials numanuma general protect stored piping from moisture and dirt .
elevate piping above grade .
support piping to prevent sagging and bending .
protect flanges fittings and assemblies from moisture and dirt .
numanumb air release valve assemblies each air release valve assembly must include an air release valve ball valve tank vent nipples and pipe saddle .
air release valves must have a cast iron body with stainless steel trim and float numinch npt inlet numinch npt outlet and numinch orifice .
ball valves must have a numpiece bronze body with chrome plated or brass ball and numinch fullsize port and be rated for at least num psi .
tank vents must have a numinch npt inlet and downwardfacing double openings with screened covers .
nipples must be schedule num galvanized steel pipe .
pipe saddle must be rated for at least num psi and be compatible with the water supply line .
pipe saddle for water supply lines smaller than num inches must be a single strap pipe saddle .
pipe saddle for water supply lines num inches and larger must be a double strap pipe saddle .
you may use a tee fitting for galvanized steel water supply lines .
numanumc casings casings must be welded steel pipe casing and comply with section num .
section num landscape num numanumd pipe wrap tape pipe wrap tape must be pressure sensitive tape made from pvc or polyethylene .
pipe wrap tape must be at least num mils thick and not wider than num inches .
numanume pipe hangers pipe hangers must comply with section numc .
the pipe hanger must be rated for the water supply line .
if casings are shown include the weight of the casing .
numanumf epoxy adhesives epoxy used for anchoring concrete pipe supports must comply with section numd .
numanumg concrete pipe supports concrete pipe supports must comply with section numd .
numanumh pipe clamps and anchors metal clamps must be commercialquality steel and comply with section num .
anchors must comply with the specifications for concrete anchorage devices in section numc .
numanumi pull boxes each pull box and cover must comply with section numbnum .
numanum construction numanuma general support water supply lines as described .
where water supply lines penetrate bridge superstructure concrete either form or install pipe sleeves at least num pipe sizes larger than the pipe .
numanumb preparation clean the interior of the pipe before installation .
cap or plug openings as pipe is installed to prevent the entrance of foreign material .
leave caps or plugs in place until the adjacent pipe section is installed .
numanumc installation numanumci general reserved numanumcii casings install each casing under section num .
seal casing end with num inches of polyurethane foam at dirt stop or pipe end seal .
numanumciii wrapping water supply line wrap damaged supply line coatings with pipe wrap tape .
wrap field joints and fittings that are in contact with the earth .
wrapping must be clean .
prime the area as recommended by the tape manufacturer .
tightly wrap the tape with num uniform overlap free from wrinkles and voids and provide not less than a num mil thickness .
the tape must conform to the joint or fitting contours .
extend the tape at least num inches over adjacent pipe .
numanumciv pipe clamps and anchors install water supply lines on the exterior surfaces of bridges or other concrete structures with metal clamps and anchors .
drill holes for anchors to the manufacturers recommended depth .
drilling tools must be authorized .
do not drill holes closer than num inches from the edge of a concrete structure .
relocate holes if reinforcing steel is encountered .
fill abandoned holes with mortar .
mortar must comply with section numf .
section num landscape num where water supply lines are mounted vertically for more than num feet install clamps and anchors within num inches of the elbows .
where water supply lines are mounted vertically for more than num feet install additional clamps and anchors at numfoot maximum centers .
numanumd sequences of operation if the bridge superstructure is to be prestressed do not place mortar around casings in abutments and hinges until bridge superstructure prestressing has been completed .
numanum payment the payment quantity for a supply line on structures is the length measured from end to end along the centerline .
the department does not pay for failed tests .
numb supply line on structures less than num inches numbnum general numbnuma summary section numb includes specifications for installing water supply lines smaller than num inches on structures .
numbnumb definitions reserved numbnumc submittals product data for materials includes catalog cuts performance data and installation instructions .
submit product data for num .
water supply line num .
expansion assemblies num .
casing insulators num .
pipe end seals num .
pipe anchorages num .
air release valve assemblies num .
casings num .
pipe hangers num .
epoxy adhesives num .
concrete pipe supports numbnumd quality assurance reserved numbnum materials numbnuma general reserved numbnumb water supply line water supply line must comply with section num .
numbnumc expansion assemblies each expansion assembly must consist of a hose with ends insulated flange connections and elbows .
each expansion assembly must have the same nominal inside diameter as the water supply line .
working pressure must be at least num psi .
hose must be medium or heavy weight crush and kink resistant and rated for at least num psi .
cover must be flexible oilresistant rubber or synthetic and reinforced with at least numply synthetic yarn or steel wire .
the inner tube must comply with fda and usda standards for potable water .
hose ends must be section num landscape num stainless steel flanged connections with stainless steel crimped bands or swaged end connectors .
do not use barbed ends with band clamps .
elbows must be numdegree standardweight galvanized steel fittings .
numbnumd casing insulators each casing insulator must be num .
numpiece highdensity injectionmolded polyethylene and must have a nonconductive inner liner with cadmiumplated nuts and bolts .
num .
factoryconstructed to ensure the water supply line is centered in the casing .
the insulator must not allow any contact between the pipe and casing and have at least num runners seated on the bottom of the casing .
num .
sized for the casing and water supply line shown .
numbnume pipe anchorages each pipe anchorage must consist of an ibeam ubolts anchors and double nuts .
use concrete anchorage devices for anchors on existing bridges .
use lanchor bolts for anchors on new bridges .
fabricate the ibeam from numinch steel plate .
steel plate ubolts lanchors and nuts must comply with section num .
concrete anchorage devices must comply with section numc .
numbnumf pipe end seals each pipe end seal must consist of a pipe end seal stainless steel bands and polyurethane foam .
pipe end seal must be factoryconstructed from seamless neoprene and sized for the casing and water supply line shown .
neoprene must be at least num inch thick .
stainless steel bands must be crimped .
polyurethane foam must be expanding foam spray that is water resistant and moisture cured .
numbnum construction locate pipe anchorage halfway between expansion assemblies .
pipe end seal must be pulled onto the casing during pipe installation .
do not use wraparound type end seals .
numbnum payment not used numc supply line on structures num inches and larger numcnum general numcnuma summary section numc includes specifications for installing numinch and larger water supply lines on structures .
numcnumb definitions reserved numcnumc submittals product data for materials includes catalog cuts performance data and installation instructions .
submit product data for num .
water supply line num .
expansion assemblies num .
flange insulating gaskets num .
casing insulators num .
seismic expansion assemblies num .
lateral restraint assemblies num .
air release valve assemblies section num landscape num num .
casings num .
pipe hangers num .
epoxy adhesives num .
concrete pipe supports submit the maximum range and preset dimension for each expansion assembly or seismic expansion assembly as an informational submittal .
submit at least num sets of product data to osd documents unit .
each set must be bound together and include an index stating equipment names manufacturers and model numbers .
two sets will be returned .
notify the engineer of the submittal .
include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
numcnumd quality assurance reserved numcnum materials numcnuma general reserved numcnumb water supply line water supply lines must consist of ductile iron pipe and fittings .
pipe must comply with ansiawwa cnumanum class num .
fittings must comply with ansiawwa cnumanum and be rated for a working pressure of num psi .
ductile iron pipe connections to expansion assemblies must be a flanged joint complying with ansiawwa cnumanum .
flange gaskets must be rated for a working pressure of num psi .
fasteners must comply with section num except that stainless steel fasteners must not be used .
all other ductile iron pipe and fitting joints must be pushon restrained type complying with ansiawwa cnumanum .
pushon restrained type joints may use proprietary dimensions and restrained joint locking systems .
ductile iron pipe and fittings must have an asphaltic coating complying with ansiawwa cnumanum and a cement mortar lining complying with ansiawwa cnumanum .
numcnumc expansion assemblies each expansion assembly must be a sleeve type expansion joint .
the expansion assembly must have num .
ductile iron body complying with ansiawwa cnumanum num .
flanged ends complying with ansiawwa cnumanum num .
fusionbonded epoxy internal lining complying with ansiawwa cnum with a minimum thickness of num mils num .
internal expansionsleeve limitingstop collars and be pressure balanced num .
working pressure of at least num psi for sizes num inches and smaller and num psi for sizes larger than num inches num .
nsf num certification the expansion assembly must be factory set at num the extension capacity .
numcnumd flange insulating gaskets each flange insulating gasket must consist of a dielectric flange gasket insulating washers and sleeves and commercialquality steel bolts and nuts .
dielectric flange gasket must have a dielectric strength of at least num vpm .
numcnume casing insulators each casing insulator must be num .
numpiece numinch numgauge epoxycoated or galvanized steel band .
the band must be four numinchwide glassreinforced polyester or polyethylene runners with cadmiumplated nuts and bolts .
num .
coated with at least nummils of heatfused pvc to provide a nonconductive inner liner .
section num landscape num num .
factory constructed to ensure that the water supply line is centered in the casing .
insulators must not allow any pipe to casing contact and have at least num runners seated on the bottom of the casing .
num .
sized for the casing and water supply line shown .
numcnumf dirt stops dirt stops must consist of a redwood cover with polyurethane foam .
redwood cover must be construction heart grade redwood complying with section numbnum .
construct cover to fit snugly around the water supply line .
the cover must be num inches taller and num inches wider than the casing .
polyurethane foam must be expanding foam spray that is water resistant and moisture cured .
numcnumg seismic expansion assemblies each seismic expansion assembly must be a sleevetype expansion joint with integral ball joints at each end .
each seismic expansion assembly must have num .
ability to withstand at least a num degree angular deflection at each end and a maximum movement in all num planes at the same time num .
ductile iron body complying with ansiawwa cnumanum num .
flanged ends complying with ansiawwa cnumanum num .
fusionbonded epoxy internal lining complying with ansiawwa cnum with a minimum thickness of num mils num .
internal expansionsleeve limitingstop collars and be pressure balanced num .
ball joints contained in flanged retainers with seal gaskets num .
working pressure of at least num psi for sizes num inches and smaller and num psi for sizes larger than num inches num .
nsf num certification the seismic expansion assembly must be factory set at num the extension capacity .
numcnumh lateral restraint assemblies each lateral restraint assembly must be num .
constructed from commercialquality steel components complying with section num num .
adjustable num .
able to resist a horizontal force of num percent of the contributory dead load numcnum construction each ductile iron pipe must be connected and fully extended pulled out after joint assembly before the adjacent pipe section is added .
install flange insulating gaskets on the outside flange of seismic expansion assemblies and expansion assemblies .
numcnum payment not used num temporary irrigation systems reserved num reserved num planting num general numa general numanum summary section num includes general specifications for performing planting work .
section num landscape num numanum definitions average plant density number of living plants per square yard determined from a count of sample areas selected by the engineer representing num to num percent of the total planted area .
numanum submittals numanuma general submit nursery invoices showing sizes quantities and botanical names of plants including genus species and variety .
include lot numbers for plants grown from the same seed lot or cutting source .
if a root stimulant is required submit a copy of the root stimulant manufacturers product sheet and instructions for the application of the root stimulant .
if cuttings are to be taken from outside the rightofway submit proof of permits and payment of associated fees .
notify the engineer of the location at least num days before taking cuttings .
numanumb vendor statements at least num days before planting the plants submit a statement from the vendor that the order for the plants required including sample plants used for inspection has been received and accepted by the vendor .
the statement from the vendor must include the plant names sizes quantities and anticipated delivery date .
numanumc certificates of compliance submit a certificate of compliance for sod and soil amendment .
numanum quality assurance plants must comply with federal and state laws requiring inspection for diseases and infestations .
inspection certificates required by law must accompany each shipment of plants .
the engineer inspects the roots of containergrown sample plants by removing earth from the root ball of not less than num plants nor more than num percent of the total number of plants of each species or variety .
if containergrown plants are purchased from several sources the engineer inspects the roots of not less than num of each sample plant species or variety from each source .
the root ball of container grown plants must not show evidence of having been restricted or being underdevelvoped or deformed .
if the engineer finds noncompliant plants the entire lot represented by the noncompliant sample plants is rejected .
cuttings with mature or brown stems and cuttings that have been trimmed will be rejected .
numb materials numbnum general notify the engineer at least num days before the plants are shipped to the job site .
numbnum plants numbnuma general plants must be true to the type or name shown .
plants must be individually tagged or tagged in groups identifying the plants by species or variety .
tagging is not required for cuttings .
plants must be healthy wellformed free from insect pests and disease and grown in nurseries inspected by the department of food and agriculture .
plants must not be rootbound .
the plants must be the size and type shownin the following table section num landscape num plant group designation description container size cu in a no .
num container num b no .
num container num c balled and burlapped e bulb f in flats h cutting i pot k numinch box num m linera o acorn p plugsa b s seedlingc u no .
num container num ado not use containers made of biodegradable material .
bgrown in individual container cells .
cbare root .
trucks used for transporting plants must be equipped with covers to protect plants from windburn and sunburn .
handle and pack plants using authorized methods appropriate for the species or variety .
numbnumb cuttings numbnumbi general take cuttings at random from healthy vigorous plants .
make cuts with sharp clean tools .
do not take more than num percent of an individual plant and not more than num percent of the plants in an area .
keep cuttings covered and wet until planted .
do not allow cuttings to dry or wither .
plant cuttings within num days of being cut .
numbnumbii carpobrotus and delosperma cuttings you may take cuttings for new carpobrotus and delosperma groundcover from the existing highway planting areas but these areas may not provide enough material to complete the work .
contact the local districts encroachment permit office to obtain a permit to harvest cuttings identify acceptable cutting harvest areas and determine acceptable quantities to take .
take tip cuttings from healthy vigorous carpobrotus and delosperma plants that are free of pests and disease .
carpobrotus cuttings must be num inches or more in length and not have roots .
delosperma cuttings must be num inches or more in length and not have roots .
numbnumbiii willow cuttings take willow cuttings from areas shown or designated by the engineer .
willow cuttings must be num .
reasonably straight num .
from num to num inches in length num .
from num to num inch in diameter at the base of the cutting cut the top of each willow cutting square above a leaf bud .
cut the base below a leaf bud at approximately a num degree angle .
trim off leaves and branches flush with the stem of the cutting .
numbnumbiv cottonwood cuttings cottonwood cuttings must comply with the specifications for willow cuttings in section numbnumbiii .
section num landscape num numbnumbvnumbnumbviii reserved numbnumc sod sod must num .
be grown to comply with the food agri code num .
be free from weeds and undesirable types of grasses and clovers num .
be fieldgrown on soil containing less than num percent silt and clay num .
have less than numinchthick thatch num .
be from num to num months old num .
be machine cut to a uniform soil thickness of num num inch not including top growth and thatch protect sod with tarps or other protective covers during delivery .
do not allow sod to dry out during delivery or before placement .
numbnum soil amendments soil amendment must comply with the provisions in the food agri code .
soil amendment must be one or a combination of the following num .
sphagnum peat moss num .
nitrolized fir bark num .
vermiculite num .
perlite numbnum fertilizers numbnuma general deliver fertilizer in labeled containers showing weight chemical analysis and manufacturers name .
fertilizer must comply with the provisions of the food agri code .
numbnumb slowrelease fertilizers slowrelease fertilizer must be a pelleted or granular form with a nutrient release over an num to nummonth period and be within the chemical analysis ranges shown in the following table ingredient range nitrogen n percent num phosphoric acid p percent num water soluble potash k percent num numbnumc packet fertilizers packet fertilizer must be a biodegradable packet with a nutrient release over a nummonth period .
each packet must have a weight of num num grams and must comply with the chemical analysis requirements shown in the following table ingredient requirement nitrogen n percent num phosphoric acid p percent num water soluble potash k percent num numbnumd organic fertilizers organic fertilizer must be pelleted or granular with a cumulative nitrogen release rate at num degrees f of no more than num percent for the first num days and num percent at num days .
organic fertilizer must be within the chemical analysis ranges shown in the following table section num landscape num ingredient range nitrogen n percent num phosphoric acid p percent num water soluble potash k percent num numbnum root stimulants root stimulant must be a commercialquality product .
numbnum plaster sand backfill material for the palm tree planting holes must be num percent commercialquality washed plaster sand .
numbnum root barrier root barrier must be an injectionmolded or extruded modular panel made of highdensity polypropylene or polyethylene plastic .
each panel must num .
be at least num inch num .
have at least num molded rootdeflecting vertical ribs from num to num inch wide and num to num inches apart num .
have a locking strip or an integral malefemale sliding lock designed to resist slippage between panels num .
be at least num feet wide and num feet deep numbnum root protectors each root protector must be num .
fabricated from numinch hexagonal pattern numgauge mesh wire num .
closed bottom design with a height and diameter that provides a minimum of num inches of clearance between the root ball and the sides and bottom of the wire cylinder the wire edge at the top of the cylinder must be the manufactured finished edge uncut and free of sharp points .
numbnum foliage protectors each foliage protector must be num .
fabricated from numinch hexagonal pattern numgauge mesh wire num .
approximately num feet high and num feet in diameter the wire edge at the top of the cylinder must be the manufactured finished edge .
other wire edges that are cut must be free of sharp points .
support stakes must be one of the following num .
numinch reinforcing steel bar a minimum of num feet long with an orange or red plastic safety cap that fits snugly onto the top of the reinforcing steel bar .
num .
numinch nominal diameter or numbynuminch nominal size wood stakes a minimum of num feet long .
wood stakes must be straight .
the jute mesh cover must comply with section numonum .
the material required to hold the jute mesh cover in place must be numinchdiameter manila hemp twine .
numbnum wood plant stakes each plant stake must be nominal num by num inches or nominal num inches in diameter and long enough to keep the plant in an upright position .
plant stakes for vines must be nominal num by num inch num inches long .
section num landscape num numbnum plant ties plant ties must be extruded vinylbased tape num inch wide and at least num mils thick .
numc construction numcnum general apply a root stimulant under the manufacturers instructions to the plants specified in the special provisions .
before transporting the plants to the planting area thoroughly wet the root ball .
numcnum pruning prune plants under ansi a num part num pruning published by the tree care industry association .
do not use tree seal compounds to cover pruning cuts .
numcnum watering water existing plants to be maintained transplanted trees and new plants as needed to keep the plants in a healthy growing condition .
numcnum replacement plants plants that show signs of failure to grow at any time or which are so injured or damaged as to render them unsuitable for the purpose intended must be removed replaced and replanted .
replace unsuitable plants within num weeks after the engineer marks or indicates that the plants must be replaced .
replacement planting must comply with the original planting specifications sizes and spacing described for the plants being replaced .
replacement planting for transplanted trees must comply with the work plan and be planted in the same planting hole .
replacement ground cover plants must be the same species specified for the ground cover being replaced .
other replacement plants must be the same species as the plants being replaced .
place orders for replacement plants with the vendor at a time such that the replacement plants are not in a rootbound condition .
the department does not pay for replacement plants or the planting of replacement plants .
numcnum maintain plants maintain plants from the time of planting until contract acceptance .
numd payment not used num planting work numa general section num includes specifications for planting plants .
numb materials not used numc construction numcnum general do not start planting until authorized .
if an irrigation system is required do not start planting in an area until the functional test has been completed and authorized for the irrigation system serving that area .
numcnum preparing planting areas the engineer may designate a location other than that shown in which case the engineer marks the location by a stake flag or other marker .
section num landscape num conduct work such that the existing flow line in drainage ditches is maintained .
material displaced by your activity that interferes with drainage must be removed .
where a minimum distance to a drainage ditch is shown locate the plant such that the outer edge of its basin wall is at least the minimum distance shown for each plant involved .
excavate each planting hole by manual or machine method .
the bottom of each planting hole must be flat .
do not use water to excavate the hole .
unless a larger planting hole is described the planting hole must be large enough to receive the root ball or the total length and width of roots backfill amendments and fertilizer .
where rock or other hard material prohibits the hole from being excavated a new hole must be excavated and the abandoned hole backfilled .
numcnum planting plants numcnuma general do not plant plants in soil that is too wet too dry not properly amended as described or in an unsatisfactory condition for planting .
do not distribute more plants than can be planted and watered on that day .
water plants immediately after planting .
apply water until the backfill soil around and below the roots or ball of earth around the roots of each plant is thoroughly saturated .
if watering with a hose use a nozzle water disbursement device or pressure reducing device .
do not allow the full force of the water from the open end of the hose to fall within the basin around any plant .
groundcover plants in areas with an irrigation system must be watered by sprinklers .
several consecutive watering cycles may be necessary to thoroughly saturate the soil .
if root barriers are shown install them between trees and concrete sidewalk or curb .
install panels flush with finished grade and join with locking strips or integral malefemale sliding locks .
install barriers with root deflectors facing inward .
if a tree grate is shown install the root barrier panels num inch above finish grade .
adjust planting locations such that each tree or shrub is at least num feet away from any sprinkler .
where a tree shrub or vine is to be planted within a groundcover area or cutting planting area plant it before planting groundcover or cuttings .
where shrubs and groundcovers are shown to be planted in groups the outer rows directly adjacent to the nearest roadway or highway fence must be parallel to the nearest roadway or highway fence .
stagger shrubs and groundcovers in adjacent rows .
adjust the alignment of the plants within the outer rows .
the engineer determines the size and location of sample areas used to calculate average plant density .
core holes in concrete masonry block wall where needed for vine planting .
where a vine is to be planted against a wall or fence plant it as close as possible to the wall or fence .
if a vine planted adjacent to a wall is to be staked stake and tie the vine at the time of planting .
a vine planted adjacent to a fence must be tied to the fence immediately after planting .
protect each tree trunk from injury .
do not num .
drag a tree num .
use chains to move a tree num .
lay tree on the ground numcnumb trees shrubs and vines after preparing holes thoroughly mix soil amendment and granular fertilizer at the rate shown with native soil to be used as backfill material .
remove containers from plants in a way that the ball of earth surrounding the roots is not broken .
do not cut plant containers before delivery of the plants to the planting area .
plant and water plants immediately after removal from their containers .
section num landscape num place packet fertilizer in the backfill within num to num inches of the ground surface and approximately num inch from the root ball .
if more than num packet is required per plant distribute the packets evenly around the root ball .
apply any root stimulant under the manufacturers instructions .
ensure roots are not restricted or distorted .
distribute backfill uniformly throughout the entire depth of the plant hole without clods or lumps .
after the planting holes have been backfilled jet water into the backfill with a pipe or tube inserted into the bottom of the hole until the backfill material is saturated for the full depth .
if the backfill material settles below this level add additional backfill to the required level .
if a plant settles deeper than shown replant it at the required level .
remove nursery stakes after planting .
install num plant stakes for each plant to be staked immediately after planting .
ensure the root ball is not damaged .
tie the plant to the stakes with num plant ties num tie to each stake .
each tie must form a figure num by crossing the tie between the plant and the stake .
install ties at the lowest position that will support the plant in an upright position .
ties must provide trunk flexibility but not allow the trunk to rub against the stakes .
wrap each end of the tie num turns around the stake and securely tie .
construct a watering basin around each plant .
install foliage protectors within num days after planting .
install the foliage protector as follows num .
cut the bottom of the wire cylinder to match the slope of the ground .
do not leave sharp points of wire after cutting .
sharp points must be bent over or blunted .
num .
install num support stakes for foliage protectors vertically and embed in the soil on opposite sides of the plant crosswise to the direction of the prevailing wind .
num .
weave the support stakes through the wire cylinder mesh at numinch maximum centers or fasten the wire cylinder to the support stakes at a maximum num inches on center .
num .
ensure that the wire cylinder is snug against the support stakes but loose enough to be raised for pesticide application or to perform weeding within the plant basin .
num .
install jute mesh cover over the foliage protector and secure with twine .
numcnumc groundcover plants each groundcover planting area irrigated by a single control valve must be completely planted and watered before planting other groundcover planting areas .
plant groundcover plants in moist soil and in neat straight rows parallel to the nearest roadway .
stagger plants in adjacent rows .
apply fertilizer to groundcover plants and water into the soil immediately after planting .
numcnumd cuttings liners plugs and seedling plants numcnumdi general apply fertilizer to cuttings liners plugs and seedling plants and water immediately after planting .
ensure the soil is moist to a minimum depth of num inches before planting cuttings .
apply any root stimulant under the manufacturers instructions .
numcnumdii willow cuttings excavate planting holes for willow cuttings perpendicular to the ground line by using a steel bar auger posthole digger or similar tool .
holes must be large enough to receive the cuttings and a fertilizer packet .
plant the willow cuttings without damaging the bark .
section num landscape num if rock or other hard material prohibits the excavation of the planting holes excavate new holes and backfill the unused holes .
plant willow cuttings during the period specified in the special provisions .
apply root stimulant under the manufacturers instructions .
plant the base of the cutting from num to num inches deep with num to num bud scars exposed above the ground .
if more than num bud scars are exposed trim off the excess willow cutting length .
place num fertilizer packet in the backfill of each cutting from num to num inches below the ground surface and approximately num inch from the cutting .
backfill the plant holes with excavated material after planting .
distribute the excavated material evenly within the hole without clods lumps or air pockets .
compact the backfill such that the cutting can not be easily removed from the soil .
do not damage the cuttings bark .
dispose of trimmings and unused cuttings .
numcnumdiii cottonwood cuttings reserved numcnumdiv carpobrotus and delosperma cuttings plant carpobrotus cuttings to a depth such that at least num nodes are covered with soil .
the basal end of delosperma cuttings must be at least num inches below the surface of the soil and the basal end of carpobrotus cuttings must be at least num inches below the surface of the soil .
apply root stimulant to delosperma cuttings before planting .
do not plant carpobrotus or delosperma cuttings in soil that does not contain sufficient moisture at an average depth of num inches below the surface .
numcnumdv liner plants plant liner plants during the period specified in the special provisions .
if a foliage protector is required install under section numcnumb .
numcnumdvi plug plants plant plug plants during the period specified in the special provisions .
numcnumdvii seedling plants plant seedling plants during the period specified in the special provisions .
numcnume sod after all other planting is performed grade sod areas to drain and to a smooth and uniform surface .
fine grade and roll sod areas before placing sod .
areas adjacent to sidewalks edging and other paved borders and surfaced areas must be num inch below the finished surface elevation of the facilities after fine grading rolling and settlement of the soil .
place sod such that the end of each adjacent strip is staggered a minimum of num feet .
place the edge and end of sod firmly against adjacent sod and against sidewalks edging and other paved borders and surfaced areas .
lightly roll the entire sodded area to eliminate air pockets and ensure close contact with the soil after placement of the sod .
water the sodded areas such that the soil is moist to a minimum depth of num inches after rolling .
do not allow the sod to dry out .
if irregular or uneven areas appear in the sodded areas restore to a smooth and even appearance .
trim sod to a uniform edge at sidewalks edging and other paved borders and surfaced areas .
trimming must be repeated whenever the edge of sod extends num inch or more beyond the edge of the edging sidewalks and other paved borders and surfaced areas .
remove trimmed sod .
section num landscape num mow sod when it has reached a height of num inches .
mow sod to a height of num inches .
numd payment the payment quantity for soil amendment is the volume measured in the vehicle at the point of delivery .
the payment quantity for slowrelease fertilizer organic fertilizer or iron sulfate lb is the weight determined from the marked weight or sack count .
the payment quantity for plants is measured by either the product of the average plant density and the total planted area or by a count of the living plants in place .
num reserved num plant establishment work num general numa summary section num includes specifications for performing plant establishment work .
plant establishment consists of caring for the plants including num .
controlling plant growth num .
fertilizing num .
controlling rodents insects and weeds num .
replacing damaged plants num .
watering num .
operating irrigation system num .
repairing new irrigation system working days on which no work is required are credited as plant establishment working days regardless of whether or not you perform plant establishment work .
if any component of the electric automatic irrigation system is operated manually the day will not be credited as a plant establishment working day unless the manual operation is authorized .
working days on which you fail to adequately perform plant establishment work are not credited as plant establishment working days .
numb definitions type num plant establishment plant establishment period with the number of working days specified for plant establishment starting after all work has been completed except for plant establishment work and other bid items specified to be performed until contract acceptance .
type num plant establishment plant establishment period with the number of working days specified for plant establishment starting after all planting work has been completed except for plant establishment work and other bid items specified to be performed until contract acceptance .
the department will not accept the contract unless the plant establishment work has been satisfactorily performed for at least the number of working days specified for plant establishment .
if maintenance and protection relief is granted for a portion of the work type num plant establishment period for that portion is the time between completion of all planting work except for plant establishment work and the granting of maintenance and protection relief .
the department will not grant relief unless the plant establishment work in the completed portion of the work has been satisfactorily performed for at least the number of working days specified for the plant establishment period .
numc submittals numcnum general submit seasonal watering schedules for use during the plant establishment period within num days after the start of the plant establishment period .
remote irrigation control system watering schedule must use the remote irrigation control system software program .
section num landscape num submit updated watering schedules within num business days after any changes have been made to the authorized schedules .
submit a revised watering schedule for each irrigation controller at least num days before completion of the plant establishment period .
numcnum notification the engineer notifies you when the plant establishment period starts and furnishes statements regarding the number of working days credited to the plant establishment period after the notification .
notify the engineer at least num business days before applying each application of fertilizer .
numd quality assurance provide training by a qualified person on the use and adjustment of the installed irrigation controllers no more than num days before completion of the plant establishment period .
perform a final inspection of the plant establishment work in the presence of the engineer num to num days before contract acceptance .
num materials numa general reserved numb fertilizers fertilizer must comply with section numbnum .
num construction numa general dispose of surplus earth accumulated in roadside clearing and planting areas .
remove the tops of foliage protectors if plants become restricted .
remove foliage protectors including support stakes within num days before the completion of the plant establishment period .
keep plant basin walls well formed .
clean new wye strainers and existing wye strainers that are a part of the new irrigation system annually until the completion of the plant establishment period .
the last cleaning must be done within num days before the completion of the plant establishment period .
remove clean and reinstall new filters and existing filters that are a part of the new irrigation system annually until the completion of the plant establishment period .
the last cleaning must be done within num days before the completion of the plant establishment period .
numb plant growth control trim and mow turf areas as specified for sod in section numcnume .
dispose of trimmed and mowed material .
if irregular or uneven areas appear within turf areas restore to a smooth and even appearance .
reseed turf seed areas .
prune plants planted as part of the contract as authorized .
remove plant growth that extends within num feet of sidewalks curbs dikes shoulders walls or fences .
remove new and existing ground cover from within the plant basins including basin walls turf areas and planting areas within edging .
vines adjacent to walls and fences must be kept staked and tied .
train vines on fences and walls or through cored holes in walls .
section num landscape num numc fertilizing apply fertilizer to the plants as described and water into the soil after each application .
apply fertilizer with a mechanical spreader whenever possible .
numd weed control control weeds under section numcnum .
nume plant staking replace plant stakes that are inadequate to support plants with larger stakes .
remove plant stakes when the engineer determines they are no longer needed .
numf replacement plants replacement plants must comply with section numcnum .
replacement of plants up to and including the numth plant establishment working day must be with a plant of the same size as originally specified .
plants of a larger container size than those originally specified for replacement plants may be used during the first num working days of the plant establishment period .
plants replaced after the numth plant establishment working day must be the size shown in the following table plant size original plant size replacement potlinerplugseedling no .
num container no .
num container no .
num container no .
num container no .
num container other replacement plants must be the same size as originally specified .
replacement ground cover plants must have the spacing shown in the following table original spacing inches on center spacing of replacement ground cover plants inches number of completed plant establishment working days num num numend of plant establishment period num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numg watering operate the electric automatic irrigation systems in the automatic mode unless otherwise authorized .
water plants utilizing the remote irrigation control system software program unless authorized .
implement the watering schedule at least num days before completion of the plant establishment period .
num payment not used num landscape elements num general numa general section num includes general specifications for constructing and installing landscape elements .
earthwork must comply with section num .
section num landscape num numb materials not used numc construction not used numd payment not used num edging numa general section num includes specifications for constructing landscape edging .
numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum header board edging lumber for header board edging must be one of the following types num .
construction grade cedar num .
pressuretreated douglas fir num .
construction heart grade redwood complying with section numbnum lumber must be num .
rough cut from sound timber .
num .
straight .
sweep must not exceed num inch in num feet .
num .
free from loose or unsound knots .
knots must be sound tight well spaced and not to exceed num inches in size on any face .
num .
free of shakes in excess of num the thickness of the lumber .
num .
free of splits longer than the thickness of the lumber .
num .
free of other defects that would render the lumber unfit structurally for the purpose intended .
numbnum metal edging metal edging must be commercial quality made of aluminum or steel and have an lshaped design .
edging must be at least num inches in height .
the thickness must be as recommended by the manufacturer for the use intended .
edging anchors must be from the same manufacturer as the metal edging .
numbnum hdpe edging hdpe edging must be commercial quality and a minimum of num inches in height .
the thickness must be as recommended by the manufacturer for commercial installation for the use intended .
edging anchors must be from the same manufacturer as the hdpe edging .
numbnum concrete edging concrete for edging must be minor concrete .
numbnumbnum reserved numc construction numcnum general where edging is used to delineate the limits of inert ground cover or mulch areas install edging before installing inert ground cover or mulch areas .
saw cut surfaces where num asphalt concrete or concrete surfacing must be removed to allow the installation of edging and num no joint exists between the surfacing to be removed and the surfacing to section num landscape num remain in place .
the surfacing must be cut in a straight line to a minimum depth of num inches with a power driven saw before the surfacing is removed .
spike or stake spacing must comply with the manufacturers instructions for use and job site conditions .
numcnum header board edging each stake must be driven flush with the top edge of the header board edging and the stake top must be beveled away from the header board at a num degree angle .
attach stake to header board with at least two numpenny hotdipped galvanized nails per stake .
numcnum metal and hdpe edging spike or stake spacing for metal and hdpe edging must comply with the manufacturers instructions for use and job site conditions .
numcnum concrete edging construct and finish minor concrete edging under section num .
numcnumcnum reserved numd payment the payment quantity for edging is the length measured parallel to the ground surface .
num inert ground covers and mulches numa general numanum general numanuma summary section numa includes general specifications for placing inert ground covers and mulches .
numanumb definitions reserved numanumc submittals for filter fabric submit num .
product data including the manufacturers product sheet and installation instructions num .
certificate of compliance at least num business days before delivery of the material to the job site numanumd quality assurance reserved numanum materials soil sterilant must be an oxadiazon granular preemergent .
filter fabric must be class a .
staples for filter fabric must comply with section numr .
numanum construction numanuma general before performing inert ground cover and mulch work remove plants and weeds to ground level .
numanumb earthwork maintain the planned flow lines slope gradients and contours of the job site .
grade subgrade to a smooth and uniform surface and compact to at least num percent relative compaction .
numanumc treatment of soil after compaction apply soil sterilant at the maximum label rate .
do not apply soil sterilant more than num inches beyond the inert ground cover or mulch limits .
the soil sterilant application and inert ground cover or mulch placement must be completed within the same work day .
section num landscape num numanumd filter fabric immediately before placing filter fabric the surfaces to receive filter fabric must be free of loose or extraneous material and sharp objects that may damage the filter fabric during installation .
align fabric and place in a wrinklefree manner .
overlap adjacent rolls of the fabric from num to num inches .
spread each overlapping roll in the same direction .
fasten fabric with staples flush with the adjacent fabric to prevent movement of fabric by placement of inert ground cover or mulch .
repair or replace fabric damaged during placement of inert ground cover or mulch with sufficient fabric to comply with overlap specifications .
numanum payment not used numb rock blanket numbnum general numbnuma summary section numb includes specifications for placing rock blanket .
numbnumb definitions reserved numbnumc submittals submit a num sq yd sample including rock of various sizes .
numbnumd quality assurance reserved numbnum materials numbnuma general do not use filter fabric .
numbnumb concrete concrete must be minor concrete .
numbnumc rock rock must be clean smooth obtained from a single source and must comply with the following gradation requirements gradation requirements screen size inches percentage passing num num num num num num numbnumd mortar mortar must comply with section numf .
numbnum construction do not use filter fabric .
rock must be placed while concrete is still plastic .
remove concrete adhering to the exposed surfaces of the rock .
loose rocks or rocks with a gap greater than num inch must be reset by an authorized method .
the rock gap is measured from the edge of the rock to the surrounding concrete bedding .
section num landscape num numbnum payment the payment quantity for rock blanket is the area measured parallel to the surface of the rock blanket .
numc gravel mulch numcnum general numcnuma summary section numc includes specifications for placing gravel mulch .
numcnumb definitions reserved numcnumc submittals submit a num lb sample of the gravel mulch .
numcnumd quality assurance reserved numcnum materials gravel mulch must be num .
uniform gray color num .
from only num source num .
crushed rock that complies with the gradation requirements shown in the following table gradation requirements sieve size percentage passing num inch num num inch num num inch num no .
num num numcnum construction place gravel and compact it by rolling .
the finished gravel mulch surface must be smooth uniform and maintain the original flow lines slope gradients and contours of the job site .
numcnum payment the payment quantity for gravel mulch is the area measured parallel to the surface of the gravel mulch .
numd decomposed granite numdnum general numdnuma summary section numd includes specifications for placing decomposed granite .
numdnumb definitions reserved numdnumc submittals five business days before delivery of the materials to the job site submit num .
solidifying emulsion product data including the manufacturers product sheets and installation instructions num .
certificate of compliance for solidifying emulsion num .
num lb sample of the decomposed granite section num landscape num numdnumd quality assurance a test plot must be num .
constructed at an authorized location num .
at least num by num feet num .
constructed using the materials equipment and methods to be used in the work num .
authorized before starting decomposed granite work notify the engineer at least num days before constructing the test plot .
the engineer uses the authorized test plot to determine acceptability of the work .
if ordered prepare additional test plots .
preparing additional test plots is change order work .
the engineer may order you to remove any test plot not incorporated into the work .
numdnum materials numdnuma general decomposed granite must be num .
uniform gray or tan color num .
from only num source num .
crushed granite rock that complies with the gradation requirements shown in the following table gradation requirements sieve size percentage passing num inch num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num note gradation is based on aashto t num and t num .
numdnumb solidifying emulsion solidifying emulsion must be either a waterbased polymer or nontoxic organic powdered binder specifically manufactured to harden decomposed granite .
the solidifying emulsion must not change the decomposed granite color .
numdnum construction do not place decomposed granite during rainy conditions .
mix solidifying emulsion thoroughly and uniformly throughout the decomposed granite and under the manufacturers instructions .
mix the material in the field using portable mixing equipment or have it delivered in mixer trucks from a local readymixed plant .
place decomposed granite uniformly in layers no more than num inches thick .
compact each layer of decomposed granite to a relative compaction of not less than num percent .
start compaction at least num hours but no more than num hours after placement .
for fieldmixed material apply a solidifying emulsion after compaction as recommended by the manufacturer .
prevent runoff or overspray of solidifying emulsion onto adjacent paved or planting areas .
the finished decomposed granite surface must be smooth uniform and compacted to a relative compaction of not less than num percent .
the finished surface must maintain the original flow lines slope gradients and contours of the job site .
section num landscape num numdnum payment not used nume wood mulch numenum general numenuma summary section nume includes specifications for placing wood mulch .
numenumb definitions reserved numenumc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for the mulch .
submit a num cubic foot mulch sample with the mulch source shown on the bag .
obtain authorization before the delivery of mulch to the job site .
numenumd quality assurance reserved numenum materials numenuma general mulch must not contain more than num percent of deleterious materials such as rocks glass plastics metals clods weeds weed seeds coarse objects sticks larger than the specified particle size salts paint petroleum products pesticides or chemical residues harmful to plant or animal life .
do not use soil sterilant or filter fabric .
numenumb tree bark mulch tree bark mulch must be derived from cedar douglas fir or redwood species .
tree bark mulch must be ground such that at least num percent of the material by volume is less than num inches in any direction and no more than num percent by volume is less than num inch in any direction .
numenumc wood chip mulch wood chip mulch must num .
be derived from clean wood num .
not contain leaves or small twigs num .
contain at least num percent wood chips by volume with an average thickness of num to num inch in any direction and num to num inches in length numenumd shredded bark mulch shredded bark mulch must num .
be derived from trees num .
be a blend of loose long thin wood or bark pieces num .
contain at least num percent wood strands by volume with an average thickness of num to num inches in any direction and num to num inches in length numenume tree trimming mulch tree trimming mulch must num .
be derived from chipped trees and may contain leaves and small twigs num .
contain at least num percent material by volume less than num inches and no more than num percent by volume less than num inch section num landscape num numenumfnumenumj reserved numenum construction do not use soil sterilant or filter fabric .
mulch must be spread or placed after the plants have been planted .
mulch placed in plant basins must not come in contact with the plant crown and stem .
spread mulch uniformly from the outside edge of the proposed plant basin to the adjacent edges of shoulders paving retaining walls dikes edging curbs sidewalks walls fences and existing plantings .
if the proposed plant is num feet or more from the adjacent edges of any of these elements spread the mulch num feet beyond the outside edge of the proposed plant basin .
do not place mulch within num feet of num .
flow line of earthen drainage ditches num .
edge of paved ditches num .
drainage flow lines numenum payment the payment quantity for wood mulch is the volume measured in the vehicle at the point of delivery .
numfnumj reserved num reserved reserved num site furnishings numa general section num includes specifications for installing site furnishings .
numb materials not used numc construction not used numd payment not used numenumz reserved num reserved num reserved num existing landscape num general numa general section num includes general specifications for performing work on existing planting and irrigation facilities .
numb materials not used numc construction transplant any plant to be transplanted and protect any irrigation component to be relocated before performing any other construction activity in the area .
numd payment not used section num landscape num num existing irrigation facilities numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for performing work on existing irrigation facilities .
work performed on existing irrigation facilities must comply with section num .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit a list of irrigation system deficiencies within num days of checking the existing facilities .
numanum quality assurance after irrigation facilities have been relocated demonstrate in the presence of the engineer that the relocated facilities function properly .
certify each existing backflow preventer under section numanum .
numb materials valve box covers must be the same size as the covers they replace .
control and neutral conductors must be the same size and color as the control and neutral conductors they replace .
numc construction numcnum general notify the engineer at least num business days before shutting off the water supply to any portion of the existing irrigation system and immediately after restoring the water supply to any portion of the existing irrigation system .
if an irrigation facility to be relocated is determined unsuitable replace the irrigation facility under section num .
the replacement of the unsuitable facility is change order work .
numcnum check and test existing irrigation facilities before performing irrigation system work check existing irrigation facilities to remain in place or to be relocated .
the engineer determines the test watering cycle lengths .
check for deficiencies including missing parts damaged components and improper operation .
correct deficiencies as ordered .
the correction of deficiencies is change order work .
numcnum operate existing irrigation facilities if the contract includes a bid item for operate existing irrigation facilities after performing work under section numcnum operate existing irrigation facilities through contract acceptance .
operate existing irrigation facilities except for water meters underground supply lines control and neutral conductors and electrical conduits .
check for proper operation at least once every num days .
adjust repair or replace existing irrigation facilities within num days of finding any deficiency .
operate irrigation systems using the automatic irrigation controller until contract acceptance .
you may operate irrigation controllers manually during plant replacement fertilization weed germination and repair work .
program the irrigation controllers for seasonal requirements .
numcnum remove irrigation facilities irrigation facilities to be removed that are more than num inches below the finished grade may be abandoned in place unless salvaging is specified or shown section num landscape num immediately after disconnecting an existing irrigation facility to be removed or abandoned from an existing facility to remain the remaining facility must be capped or plugged or connected to a new or existing irrigation facility .
numcnum replace valve box covers existing valve box covers shown to be replaced must remain in place until the new covers are ready to be installed .
numcnum relocate backflow preventer assemblies install backflow preventer assemblies under section numc .
numcnum relocate water meters relocate water meters .
numcnum relocate irrigation controllers install irrigation controllers under section numc .
numcnum salvage irrigation facilities salvage irrigation facilities under section numc .
numd payment not used num existing planting numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for performing work on existing planted areas .
transplant palm trees between march num and october num .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit a work plan for num .
transplanting trees .
the work plan must include methods for lifting transporting storing planting guying and maintaining each tree to be transplanted .
include the root ball size method of root ball containment and a maintenance program for each tree .
num .
maintaining existing planted areas .
the work plan must include controlling the weeds fertilizing mowing and trimming of turf areas watering and controlling rodents and pests .
submit a copy of the manufacturers product sheet for root stimulant including application instructions .
numanum quality assurance inspect for deficiencies of existing planted areas in the presence of the engineer .
complete the inspection within num days of the start of job site activities .
deficiencies requiring corrective action include num .
weeds num .
dead diseased or unhealthy plants num .
plant stakes and tree ties that are missing num .
inadequate plant basins and basin mulch num .
other deficiencies needing corrective action to promote healthy plant life num .
rodents and pests numb materials not used section num landscape num numc construction numcnum general correct deficiencies of the existing planted areas if ordered within num days of the order .
correction of deficiencies is change order work .
numcnum prune existing plants if a bid item for prune existing plants is not shown on the bid item list prune existing plants if ordered .
pruning existing plants is change order work .
numcnum transplant trees prune each tree to be transplanted immediately before lifting .
prune a palm tree by removing dead fronds and frond stubs from the trunk .
remove green fronds up to num rows of fronds away from the center of growth .
tie the remaining num rows of fronds in an upright position with light hemp or manila rope .
remove fronds and frond stubs at the trunk in a way that will not injure the trunk .
remove fronds and frond stubs for phoenix dactylifera approximately num inches from the trunk .
prepare each hole in the new location before lifting the tree to be transplanted .
lift each tree to be transplanted as described in the work plan .
handle and plant each tree to be transplanted under section numcnum .
until a tree is replanted cover exposed root ball with wet burlap or canvas and cover the crown with num percent shade cloth .
replant each tree on the same day it is lifted if possible .
if the transplant location is not ready to receive the tree store and maintain the tree to be transplanted until the transplant location is authorized .
store the tree in an upright position .
replace each damaged transplanted tree under section numcnum with the number of trees specified in the special provisions .
the replacement trees must be planted in individual plant holes at the location determined by the engineer within the area of the tree being replaced .
plant replacement trees under section numc .
numcnum maintain existing planted areas section numcnum applies if a bid item for maintain existing planted areas is shown on the bid item list .
after deficiencies are corrected perform work to maintain existing planted areas in a neat and presentable condition and to promote healthy plant growth through contract acceptance .
existing plant basins must be kept wellformed and free of sediment .
if the existing plant basins need repairs and the basins contain mulch replace the mulch after the repairs are done .
control weeds within the existing planted area and num .
from the existing planted area limit to the adjacent edges of paving and fences if less than or equal to num feet num .
from the existing planted area limit to num feet beyond the outer limit of the existing planted area if the adjacent edge of paving or fence is more than num feet away num .
within a numfoot radius from each existing tree and shrub if a bid item for maintain existing planted areas is not shown on the bid item list maintain existing planted areas if ordered .
maintain existing planted areas is change order work .
numd payment not used num reserved num num erosion control num general num general section num includes specifications for applying permanent erosion control measures .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num erosion control work num general numa summary section num includes specifications for applying permanent erosion control measures to the soil surface .
moveinmoveout for erosion control includes num moving onto the project when the engineer determines an area is ready to receive erosion control materials num setting up all required personnel and equipment and num moving out all personnel and equipment when work in that area is complete .
numb definitions percent total viability the sum of the percent germination percent hard seed and percent dormant seed .
trm turf reinforcement mat .
numc submittals numcnum general submit a certificate of compliance for straw fiber recp and fasteners before application .
if weedfree straw is used the certificate of compliance must include the certificate of quarantine compliance .
submit records for hydraulically applied erosion control materials that indicate num compliance with the specified application rates num areas treated and quantity of materials applied and num application date and time .
numcnum compost submit the compost producers compost technical data sheet including test results and seal of testing assurance certificate before application .
numcnum seed at least num days before seed application submit proof that the order for seed required for the contract has been placed and accepted by the seed vendor .
include the seeds botanical names quantity ordered and the anticipated date of delivery .
submit a copy of the analysis report for each seed species before application .
submit seed labels .
seed labels must show num .
seed variety including botanical name and common name num .
lot number or other lot identification num .
origin num .
net weight num .
percent pure live seed num .
percent total viability num .
percent by weight inert matter section num erosion control num num .
percent by weight other crop seed num .
percent by weight weed seed num .
name of restricted noxious weed seed by number per pound of seed num .
name and address of the supplier or grower responsible for the analysis numcnum tackifier submit a certificate of compliance for tackifier and bonded fiber matrix at least num business days before application .
certificates of compliance must include num .
sds num .
product label num .
list of applicable nonvisible pollutant indicators for soil amendment and stabilization materials as shown in the table titled pollutant testing guidance table in the departments construction site monitoring program guidance manual .
for the manual go to the departments division of construction website num .
report of acute and chronic toxicity tests on aquatic organisms complying with epa methods num .
list of ingredients including chemical formulation num .
properties of polyacrylamide in tackifier including num .
percent purity by weight num .
percent active content num .
average molecular weight num .
charge density numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum compost compost producers must be permitted by the department of resources recycling and recovery local enforcement agencies and any other state and local agencies that regulate solid waste plants .
if exempt from state permitting provisions the composting plant must certify it complies with the guidelines and procedures for production of compost under num ca code of regs num .
compost producers must be participants in the united states composting councils seal of testing assurance program .
numdnum seed seed must be tested for purity and germination by a seed laboratory certified by the association of official seed analysts or by a seed technologist certified by the society of commercial seed technologists .
tests must be performed within num months before application .
the engineer takes a sample of approximately num ounce or num cup of seed for each seed lot greater than num pounds .
provide the engineer with a glassinelined bag and custody seal tag for each seed lot sample .
num materials numa general water must be of a quality that promotes germination of seeds and growth of plants .
numb duff duff must consist of vegetation removed and collected from clearing and grubbing activities .
vegetation may include trees shrubs ground cover grasses bark leaves and roots with attached soil .
process vegetation into duff by tub grinding or chipping it into pieces not exceeding num inches in any dimension .
stockpile duff until work area to receive duff is complete .
duff stockpiles must not exceed num feet in height .
numc topsoil numcnum general section num erosion control num obtain topsoil from sources within or outside the job site as shown .
numcnum local topsoil local topsoil must comply with the specifications for selected material in section num and consist of the excavated topsoil including organic material and leaf litter from the designated areas at the depth shown .
numcnum imported topsoil imported topsoil must num .
consist of fertile friable soil of loamy character that contains organic matter in quantities natural to the region and be capable of sustaining healthy plant life num .
be free from deleterious substances such as litter refuse toxic waste stones larger than num inch in size coarse sand heavy or stiff clay brush sticks grasses roots noxious weed seed weeds and other substances detrimental to plant animal and human health numd fiber fiber must be wood fiber cellulose fiber alternate fiber or a combination of these fibers .
wood fiber must be a longstrand wholewood fiber thermo mechanically processed from clean whole wood chips .
cellulose fiber must be made from natural or recycled pulp fiber such as wood chips sawdust newsprint chipboard corrugated cardboard or a combination of these materials .
alternate fiber must be a long strand whole natural fiber made from clean straw cotton corn or other natural feed stock .
fiber must num .
disperse into a uniform slurry when mixed with water .
num .
contain numinch fiber strands for at least num percent by total volume .
num .
have at least num percent retained when passed through a no .
num sieve .
num .
have an initial moisture content of no more than num percent of its dry weight when tested under california test num .
the moisture content must be marked on the packaging .
num .
have a water holding capacity by weight of at least num percent when tested under astm dnum .
num .
be nontoxic to plants and animal life .
num .
be free of synthetic or plastic materials lead paint printing ink varnish petroleum products seed germination inhibitors and chlorine bleach .
num .
contain less than num ppm of boron .
num .
be colored to contrast with the area where it is to be applied .
the coloring agent must be biodegradable nontoxic and free from copper mercury and arsenic and must not stain concrete or painted surfaces .
nume tackifier tackifier must be num free from growth or germination inhibiting factors num nonflammable num nontoxic to aquatic organisms and num functional for a minimum of num days .
tackifier must be one of the following num .
plant based natural highmolecularweight polysaccharide .
plantbased tackifier must be a high viscosity hydrocolloid that is miscible in water and labeled as either guar psyllium or starch as follows num .
guar gum based tackifier must be derived from the ground endosperm of the guar plant cyanmopsis tetragonolobus .
it must be treated with dispersing agents for easy mixing .
it must be able to be diluted at the rate of num to num pounds per num gallons of water .
num .
psyllium based tackifier must be manufactured from the finely ground mucilloid coating of plantago ovata or plantago ispaghula seeds and able to dry and form a firm but rewettable membrane .
num .
starch based tackifier must be a nonionic watersoluble granular material derived from corn potato or other plantbased source .
section num erosion control num num .
prepackaged liquid or dry powder polymeric emulsion blend .
prepackaged tackifier must be an anionic formulation with a residual monomer content not exceeding num percent by weight .
the tackifier must contain and be labeled with one of the following as the primary active ingredients num .
acrylic copolymers and polymers .
num .
polymers of methacrylates and acrylates .
num .
copolymers of sodium acrylates and acrylamides .
num .
polyacrylamide and copolymer of acrylamide .
num .
hydrocolloid polymers .
numf seed seed must not contain num .
prohibited noxious weed seed num .
more than num percent total weed seed by weight seed with a germination rate lower than the minimum rate shown may be used if authorized .
deliver seed to the job site in unopened separate containers with the seed tag attached .
measure individual seed species and mix in the presence of the engineer .
numg fertilizer fertilizer must comply with the material specifications for fertilizer in section numbnum .
numh straw straw must be stalks from wheat rice or barley furnished in airdry condition with a consistency compatible for application with commercial strawblowing equipment .
wheat and barley straw must be derived from irrigated crops .
straw must be free of plastic glass metal rocks and refuse or other deleterious material .
straw must have not have been used for stable bedding .
numi reserved numj bonded fiber matrix bonded fiber matrix must be a hydraulicallyapplied material composed of fiber and tackifier and may also include seed and fertilizer as shown .
fiber for bonded fiber matrix must be num percent wood fiber and comply with the specifications for fiber under section numd except that at least num percent is retained when passed through a no .
num sieve .
tackifier for bonded fiber matrix must num .
be bonded to the fiber or prepackaged with the fiber by the manufacturer num .
contain a minimum of num percent of the combined weight of the dry fiber activating agents and additives num .
be an organic high viscosity colloidal polysaccharide with activating agents or a blended hydrocolloidbased binder numk compost compost must be derived from one or a combination of the following types of materials num .
green material consisting of chipped shredded or ground vegetation or clean processed recycled wood products num .
biosolids num .
manure num .
mixed food waste compost must not be derived from mixed municipal solid waste and must not contain paint petroleum products pesticides or other chemical residues harmful to plant or animal life .
section num erosion control num process compost materials under num ca code of regs num .
metal concentrations in compost must not exceed the maximum listed under num ca code of regs num .
compost must comply with the requirements shown in the following table compost quality characteristic test methoda requirement ph tmecc numa num soluble salts dsm tmecc numa num moisture content wet weight tmecc numa num organic matter content dry weight tmecc numa num maturity relative to positive control tmecc numa num or above stability mg conumcg om per day tmecc numb num or below particle size for fine compostb dry weight pass numinch sieve min pass numinch sieve min tmecc numb num num particle size for medium compostb dry weight pass numinch sieve min pass numinch sieve max tmecc numb num num particle size for coarse compostb dry weight pass numinch sieve min pass numinch sieve max tmecc numb num num pathogen salmonella most probable number per num grams dry weight basis tmecc numb num pathogen fecal coliform most probable number per gram dry weight basis tmecc numb num physical contaminants dry weight plastic glass and metal tmecc numc combined total num physical contaminants dry weight sharps tmecc numc none detected atmecc refers to test methods for the examination of composting and compost published by the united states department of agriculture and the united states compost council uscc .
bmaximum particle length must be num inches .
numlnumn reserved numo rolled erosion control products numonum general recp must be a longterm degradable openweave textile manufactured or fabricated into rolls designed to reduce soil erosion and assist in the growth establishment and protection of vegetation .
recp must conform to the classification system established by the ectc .
deliver recp in suitable wrapping to protect against moisture and extended ultraviolet exposure occurring before placement .
numonum jute mesh jute mesh must be ectc type numb made of unbleached and undyed woven jute .
jute mesh must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num erosion control num jute mesh quality characteristic test method requirement strands per foot min in each direction num roll width min inches num usle cfactor for a num hv unvegetated slope num shear stress max psf astm dnum num tensile strength min psf astm dnum num functional longevity months num average open area num num weight of fabric min ozsq yd astm dnum num numonum netting netting must be ectc type num and made of num percent coconut fiber woven into a matrix .
netting must comply with the requirements shown in the following table netting quality characteristic test method requirement type a type b type c thickness min inch astm dnum num roll width min inches num usle cfactor for a num hv unvegetated slope num shear stress max psf astm dnum num num num tensile strength min psf astm dnum num functional longevity months num average open area num num num num num num weight of fabric min ozsq yd astm dnum num num num numonum erosion control blankets erosion control blanket must be ectc type numd and made of processed natural fibers that are mechanically structurally or chemically bound together to form a continuous matrix that is surrounded by num natural nets .
erosion control blanket must comply with the requirements shown in the following table erosion control blanket quality characteristic test method requirement type a type b type c roll width min inches num matrix strawcoconut woven coir coconut fiber wood excelsior num inches or longer num num num usle cfactor for a num hv unvegetated slope num shear stress max psf astm dnum num tensile strength min psf astm dnum num functional longevity months num numonum turf reinforcement mats section num erosion control num turf reinforcement mat must be ectc type num and nondegradable openweave textile made of synthetic fibers filaments nets wire mesh or other elements processed into a permanent numdimensional matrix .
turf reinforcement mat must comply with the requirements shown in the following table turf reinforcement mat quality characteristic test method requirement type a type b type c roll width min inches num thickness min inches astm dnum num usle cfactor for a num hv unvegetated slope num shear stress max psf astm dnum num num num tensile strength min psf astm dnum num num num functional longevity months num uv stability at num hrs astm dnum num nump fiber rolls fiber roll must be a premanufactured roll filled with rice or wheat straw wood excelsior or coconut fiber .
fiber roll must be covered with biodegradable jute sisal or coir fiber netting secured tightly at each end and must be one of the following num .
num to num inches in diameter and at least num lbft num .
num to num inches in diameter and at least num lbft fiber roll must have a minimum functional longevity of num year .
numq compost socks compost sock must be a mesh tube num inches in diameter filled with compost and must have a functional longevity of num year .
the mesh tube must be composed of a natural biodegradable product such as cotton jute sisal burlap or coir .
the mesh tube must be clean evenly woven and free of encrusted concrete or other contaminating materials cuts tears broken or missing yarns and thin open or weak places .
compost for compost sock must comply with section numk except the particle size must be for coarse compost .
numr fasteners wood stakes must be untreated fir redwood cedar or pine and cut from sound timber .
the ends must be pointed for driving into the ground .
notched stakes must be at least num by num by num inches in size .
stakes without notches must be at least num by num by num inches .
metal stakes must be at least num inch in diameter and have tops bent at numdegree angles or capped with an orange or red plastic safety cap that fits snugly onto the metal stake .
steel staples must be a minimum of numgauge numinch ushaped staples with a numinch crown .
provide heavier gauge and greater length if required by the job site conditions .
you may use an alternative attachment device such as a num percent biodegradable fastener to install recp instead of staples .
rope to fasten fiber rolls and compost socks must be num inch in diameter and biodegradable such as sisal or manila .
numsnumv reserved num construction numa general the engineer designates the extent of erosion control areas by directing the placement of stakes or other suitable markers in increments of num acre or less .
furnish tools labor materials and transportation required to mark areas receiving erosion control treatments .
section num erosion control num before applying erosion control materials verify that finished grades comply with the specifications for grade compaction and finish in section num .
remove and dispose of trash debris and weeds in areas to receive erosion control materials .
remove and dispose of loose rocks larger than num inches in maximum dimension unless otherwise authorized .
protect the traveled way sidewalks lined drainage channels and existing vegetation from overspray of hydraulicallyapplied material .
apply erosion control materials within num hours after the final preparation of the erosion control areas .
do not apply hydraulically applied materials if num .
precipitation occurs num .
water is standing on or moving across the soil surface num .
soil is frozen num .
air temperature is below num degrees f during the tackifier curing period unless allowed by the tackifier manufacturer and authorized numb duff upon completion of the earthwork in an area spread duff to a uniform thickness .
do not apply duff within num feet of the pavement edge .
trackwalk duff with tracked equipment run perpendicular to slope contours .
water may be used to assist this process but must not cause erosion .
numc topsoil place topsoil after all other earthwork in an area is complete .
spread topsoil to a uniform thickness .
trackwalk topsoil with tracked equipment run perpendicular to slope contours .
water may be used to assist the process but must not cause erosion .
numd hydromulch and hydroseed apply hydromulch with hydraulic spray equipment that mixes fiber tackifier fertilizer and other erosion control materials specified .
if applying hydroseed add seed to hydromulch .
seed may be dry applied to small areas not accessible by hydroseeding equipment if authorized .
add water to hydromulch and hydroseed materials as recommended by the manufacturer and mix sufficiently to ensure an even application .
a dispersing agent may be added to the mixture if authorized .
equipment must have a builtin continuous agitation and discharge system capable of producing a homogeneous mixture and a uniform application rate .
the tank must have a minimum capacity of num gallons .
you may use a smaller tank if authorized .
apply materials in locations rates and number of applications shown and as follows num .
start application within num minutes after adding seed to the tank .
num .
apply in successive passes as necessary to achieve the specified application rate .
num .
apply all hydromulch or hydroseed materials shown for a single area within num hours .
if hydromulch or hydroseed materials are applied to areas covered by recp apply hydromulch and hydroseed materials to the rolled product as follows num .
verify the recp is in uniform contact with the slope surface .
num .
spray materials into the recp perpendicular to the slope and integrate well .
num .
do not displace or damage the recp .
after the final application do not allow pedestrians or equipment on the treated areas .
section num erosion control num nume dry seed apply dry seed and fertilizer at the rates shown after job site preparation .
scarify areas to a minimum depth of num inch .
apply and incorporate materials into the soil to a maximum depth of num inch by dragging or raking .
numf drill seed drillseeding equipment must be a rangeland drill seeder with a ring roller attached .
the seeder must be equipped with a fluffy seed box with agitators to prevent bridging and clogging .
the seed box must have metal row dividers and individual box adjustments to meter the seed flow .
apply drill seed as follows num .
drill seed in rows no greater than num inches apart and to a depth of num inch .
num .
make a minimum of num passes in different directions with seeding equipment to reduce any uniform row appearance .
num .
do not apply seed within num feet of the pavement edge .
numg straw apply straw by spreading it uniformly without clumping or piling at the rates shown based on slope measurements .
once straw work is started in an area apply all materials for that area in the same work shift .
numh bonded fiber matrix apply bonded fiber matrix materials in the locations rates and number of applications shown and as follows num .
apply in successive passes as necessary to achieve the specified application rate .
num .
form a continuous uniform mat with no gaps between the mat and the soil surface as follows num .
apply in num or more directions if necessary .
num .
apply in layers as necessary to avoid slumping and aid drying .
numi compost apply compost to a uniform thickness in the locations shown .
if compost and seed are applied simultaneously mix and apply together with equipment suitable for the application such as a pneumatic blower truck .
numj incorporate materials incorporate topsoil duff compost and mulch to the depth shown until well mixed .
materials may be mixed together before incorporation if authorized .
do not incorporate materials within num feet of the pavement edge .
incorporate straw with a roller made of approximately numinch steel plate equipped with straight studs placed approximately num inches apart and staggered .
studs must not be less than num inches long nor more than num inches wide and must be rounded to prevent the straw withdrawing from the soil .
the roller weight must be sufficient to incorporate the straw into the soil to a depth that will not support combustion and result in a uniform surface .
compact the area to a relative compaction between num and num percent except as otherwise specified in section num .
numknumn reserved numo rolled erosion control products before placing recp ensure the subgrade has been graded smooth and has no depressed voids .
the subgrade must be free from obstructions such as tree roots projecting stones or foreign matter greater than num inch in diameter .
fasten recp to the surface with staples and anchor as shown .
do not drive vehicles on recp .
section num erosion control num nump fiber rolls before installing fiber roll remove obstructions from the ground including rocks clods and debris greater than num inch in diameter .
install fiber roll approximately parallel to the slope contour .
for any numfoot section of fiber roll prevent the fiber roll from varying more than num percent from level .
install fiber roll on slopes at the following spacing unless shown otherwise num .
num feet apart for slopes steeper than num horizontalvertical num .
num feet apart for slopes from num to num horizontalvertical num .
num feet apart for slopes from num to num horizontalvertical num .
num feet apart for slopes flatter than num horizontalvertical type num fiber roll installation consists of placing and fastening as follows num .
place in a furrow that is from num to num inches deep .
num .
fasten with wood stakes every num feet along the length of the fiber roll .
num .
fasten the ends of the fiber roll by placing a stake num inches from the end of the roll .
num .
drive the stakes into the soil so the top of the stake is less than num inches above the top of the fiber roll .
type num fiber roll installation consists of placing and fastening as follows num .
fasten with notched wood stakes and rope .
num .
drive stakes into the soil until the notch is even with the top of the fiber roll .
num .
lace the rope between stakes and over the fiber roll .
knot the rope at each stake .
num .
tighten the fiber roll to the surface of the slope by driving the stakes further into the soil .
if soil conditions do not allow driving stakes into the soil drill pilot holes to facilitate driving of the stakes .
maintain fiber roll in a way that provides sediment holding capacity and reduces runoff velocities as follows num .
remove sediment from behind the fiber roll if sediment is num of fiber roll height above ground .
num .
repair or adjust the fiber roll if rills or other evidence of concentrated runoff occur beneath the fiber roll .
num .
repair or replace the fiber roll if they become split torn or unraveled .
num .
add stakes if the fiber roll slumps or sags .
num .
replace broken or split wood stakes .
num .
remove sediment deposits trash and debris from fiber roll as needed .
if removed sediment is deposited within project limits it must be stabilized and not exposed to erosion by wind or water .
numq compost socks before installing compost sock remove obstructions from the ground including rocks clods and debris greater than num inch in diameter .
install and maintain compost sock under the specifications for fiber rolls in section nump and the following requirements num .
place mesh tube secure the end and fill uniformly with compost .
secure the remaining end .
num .
fasten compost sock to soil surface under the procedures for type num and type num installation of fiber roll .
num .
remove sock rope and stakes if ordered .
cut sock and empty contents in place .
this work is change order work .
numrnumt reserved num payment the payment quantity for bid items paid for by area is the area measured parallel to the ground surface except overlaps .
section num erosion control num the payment quantity for bid items paid for by length is the length measured parallel to the ground surface except overlaps .
a movein followed by a moveout counts as num measurement unit .
the department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the moveinmoveout quantity .
local topsoil is paid for as roadway excavation .
the payment quantity for imported topsoil paid for by volume is the volume measured in the vehicle at the point of delivery .
num reserved num num finishing roadway num general section num includes specifications for finishing the roadway .
perform finishing activities after completing all other construction activities .
num materials not used num construction trim and shape graded areas without surfacing to smooth and uniform cross sections and slopes num .
between edge of shoulder and hinge point of slopes num .
at medians for a graded roadbed without surfacing or pavement trim and shape the entire roadbed to uniform cross sections and slopes .
trim slopes of gutters without lining or surfacing to the required grade and cross section .
do not stockpile material on finished pavement or allow material to drift across pavement .
clean finished pavement of dirt and foreign material .
clear debris and obstructions from ditches and channels constructed under the contract .
clean out sewers culverts and other drainage facilities and appurtenant structures constructed under the contract .
remove debris and excess material adjacent to culverts headwalls and endwalls bridge ends poles posts trees or other objects and leave in a neat and orderly condition .
remove from slopes any exposed material that might become loose such as rocks and roots .
remove loose rock larger than num inches in maximum dimension from num .
between the edge of shoulder and hinge point of slopes num .
medians num .
finished roadbed dispose of material resulting from finishing activities .
if authorized soil and rock resulting from finishing activities may be used along the roadway .
num payment not used num division iv subbases and bases num general num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing subbases and bases .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num reserved num num stabilized soils num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for stabilizing soils .
numb definitions stabilizing agent material added to improve strength and durability of the basement material .
numc submittals numcnum general at least num days before starting soil stabilization activities submit the name of the laboratory you will use for qc tests .
the laboratory must be qualified under the departments independent assurance program .
before performing qc sampling and testing submit the time and location the sampling and testing will occur .
submit qc testing results within num hours of receiving the results .
submit a certificate of compliance with the stabilizing agent samples that includes a statement certifying the stabilizing agent furnished is the same as on the authorized material source list for the stabilizing agent specified .
submit a weighmaster certificate for stabilizing agent remaining on hand after completion of the work .
numcnum samples from num to num days before use submit one num lb sample of each stabilizing agent proposed and from each source .
submit stabilizing agents in airtight containers .
mark the sample date on the container .
include the sds .
numd quality assurance numdnum general if requested perform qc testing in the presence of the engineer .
if required construct test strips with materials tools equipment and methods you will use in the work .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb preparing basement material after preparing an area for soil stabilization verify the surface grades .
numdnumc mixing except for clods larger than num inch randomly test the adequacy of the mixing with a phenolphthalein ph indicator solution .
numdnumd compaction construct test pads for compaction tests by scraping away material to the depth ordered .
if a compaction test fails corrective action must include the layers of material already placed above the test pad elevation .
numdnum department acceptance stabilized soil acceptance is based on num .
visual inspection num .
compliance with the requirements shown in the following table section num stabilized soils num stabilized soil requirements for acceptance quality characteristic test method requirement relative compaction min california test num and num see section for the specified stabilization agenta stabilization agent application rate calibrated tray or equal final application rate ordered by the engineer num a for lime stabilized soil see section nume .
num materials numa general reserved numb water notify the engineer if a water source other than potable water is used and perform testing for chlorides and sulfates .
if potable water is not used water for stabilized soil must be clean and contain no more than num parts per million of chlorides as cl determined under california test num and no more than num parts per million of sulfates as sonum determined under california test num .
numc curing seal curing seal must be asphaltic emulsion grade ssnum ssnumh cssnum or cssnumh .
numd stabilizing agent lime sources must be on the authorized material list for approved producers of lime for use in soil stabilization .
num construction numa general do not mix different types of stabilizing agent or from more than one source .
deliver stabilizing agent in full loads unless it is the last load needed for a work shift .
numb preparing basement material for native soil and embankment other than imported borrow remove rocks or solids larger than num of the layer thickness .
regardless of the layer thickness remove rocks and solids greater than num inches .
removing soil clods is not required .
notify the engineer if you encounter rocks or solids greater than num of the layer thickness .
removing rocks and solids is change order work .
grade the basement material to be stabilized to within num foot of the lines and grades shown .
numc applying stabilizing agent the application rate is ordered as pounds of stabilizing agent per square yard of basement material to be stabilized .
do not vary from the engineers ordered application rate by more than num percent .
numd mixing stabilizing agent and basement material must be uniformly mixed at least twice to within num foot of the depth shown at any point .
if you exceed the mixing depth shown by more than num percent add stabilizing agent in proportion to the exceeded depth .
remix until the mixture is uniform with no streaks or pockets of stabilizing agent .
nume compaction compact using a sheepsfoot or segmented wheel roller immediately followed by steel drum or pneumatic tired rollers .
wherever the thickness shown is num foot or less compact in num layer .
wherever the thickness shown is more than num foot compact in num or more layers of approximately equal thickness .
the maximum compacted thickness of any num layer must not exceed num foot unless you first construct a test strip to section num stabilized soils num demonstrate your equipment and methods provide uniform distribution of stabilizing agent and achieve the specified compaction .
the test strip must contain at least num cu yd of material and no more material than num days production .
construct test strips with materials tools equipment and methods you will use in the work .
use other compaction methods in areas inaccessible to rollers .
numf finish grading wherever the finished surface of stabilized soil is above the allowable tolerance trim and remove the excess material .
do not leave loose material on the finished surface .
if finish rolling can not be completed within num hours of trimming defer trimming .
finish rolling of trimmed surfaces must be performed with at least num complete coverage with steel drum or pneumatictired rollers .
do not proceed with construction activities for subsequent layers of material until the engineer verifies the final grades of the stabilized soil .
numg curing numgnum general cure by one of the following methods num .
water cure num .
curing seal num .
moist material blanket numgnum water cure water may be used to cure the finished surface before you place a moist material blanket or apply curing seal .
keep the surface above the optimum moisture content of the stabilized soil .
use this method for no more than num days after which you must apply a curing seal or place a moist material blanket .
numgnum curing seal curing seal equipment must have a gauge indicating the volume of curing seal in the storage tank .
apply curing seal to the finished surface of stabilized soil under section num when the stabilized soil is at optimum moisture content and num .
when the ambient temperature is above num degrees f and rising .
num .
at a rate from num to num gallon per square yard .
the exact rate is determined by the engineer .
repair damaged curing seal the same day the damage occurs .
numgnum moist material blanket moist material blanket may be either a temporary or permanent layer of material of sufficient thickness to prevent drying of the stabilized soil .
you may use moist material blanket if the stabilized soil can bear the weight of construction equipment .
maintain the moist material blanket above the optimum moisture content as appropriate until the next structural layer is placed .
num payment the payment quantity for stabilized soil is measured from the horizontal planned surface of the stabilized soil .
the payment quantity for lime or cement cement stabilized soil does not include the quantity of stabilizing agent num .
wasted or disposed of in a manner not specified .
num .
remaining on hand after completion of the work .
if you use a partial load of stabilizing agent the quantity remaining is determined by scale weights of the truck and the remaining stabilizing agent .
num .
added stabilizing agent when the mixing depth exceeds the depth shown by more than num percent .
section num stabilized soils num num lime stabilized soil num general numa summary section num includes specifications for stabilizing soil by mixing basement material with lime and water .
numb definitions mellowing period time between the initial and final mixing to promote initial chemical reactions between lime water and basement material .
numc submittals submit lime samples under astm cnum .
include the chemical and physical analyses with the submittal .
at least num days before applying lime in slurry form submit the slurrys lime content for authorization .
numd quality assurance numdnum general place unique sequentially numbered lock seals on each load and affix them to trailer blowdown valves that are locked open .
the bill of lading for each lime delivery must have that specific lock seal number legibly and visibly imprinted .
numdnuma preparing basement material for every num cu yd of basement material to be lime stabilized num .
test the relative compaction under california test num num .
test the moisture content under california test num numdnumb applying lime the engineer determines the final application rate for each lime product proposed from the samples submitted based on california test num .
wherever the basement material to be stabilized changes the engineer changes the application rate .
the engineer provides the optimum moisture content determined under california test num for each application rate .
whenever lime in slurry form is used report the quantity of slurry placed by measuring the volume of slurry in the holding tank once per num sq ft stabilized or twice per day whichever is greater .
the engineer verifies the application rate of lime used in dry form with a calibrated tray or equal once per num sq ft of stabilized soil or twice per day whichever is greater .
numdnumc test result disputes work with the engineer to avoid potential conflicts and resolve disputes regarding test result discrepancies .
if you dispute the test result notify the engineer within num days of receiving the test result .
if you or the engineer dispute each others test results submit written quality control test results and copies of paperwork including worksheets used to determine the disputed test results .
an independent third party must perform referee testing .
before the independent third party participates in a dispute resolution the independent third party must be accredited under the departments independent assurance program .
the independent third party must be independent of the project .
by mutual agreement the independent third party is chosen from num .
a department laboratory num .
a department laboratory in a district or region not in the district or region the project is located num .
the transportation laboratory num .
a laboratory not currently employed by you or your lime producer if split quality control or acceptance samples are not available the independent third party uses any available material representing the disputed material for evaluation .
if the dispute resolution independent third party determines the departments test results are correct the department deducts the independent third party testing costs from payments and pays the independent section num stabilized soils num third party .
if the independent third party determines your test results are correct the department pays the independent third party testing costs without a deduction .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb mixing during mixing operations measure and record the ground temperature at full mixing depth .
take a composite sample from num random locations after initial mixing .
the moisture content of the composite sample tested under california test num must be a minimum of num percent greater than optimum .
determine the moisture versus density relationship of the composite sample material under california test num except part num section e paragraph num is modified as follows after adjustment of the moisture content compact each of the remaining test specimens in the mold then record the water adjustment tamper reading and the corresponding adjusted wet density from the chart on table num using the column corresponding to the actual wet weight of the test specimen compacted .
note each of these wet weights on line i .
after mixing and before compacting determine maximum density under california test num from composite samples of mixed material samples from num random locations and at each distinct change in material .
test the gradation for compliance with section numd .
test the moisture content of the mixed material under california test num .
moisture content during the mellowing period determined under california test num must be at least num percent higher than the optimum moisture content .
numdnumc compaction test relative compaction on a wet weight basis .
after initial compaction determine the inplace density under california test num and moisture content under california test num at the same locations .
perform one test per num cu yd of lime stabilized soil .
test in numfoot depth intervals .
num materials lime must comply with astm cnum and the requirements shown in the following table lime quality quality characteristic test method requirement available calcium and magnesium oxide min astm cnum or astm cnum and cnum high calcium quicklime cao num dolomitic quicklime cao num and cao mgo num loss on ignition max astm cnum num total loss num carbon dioxide num free moisture slaking rate astm cnum num c rise in num minutes a num lb sample of lime drysieved in a mechanical sieve shaker for num minutes num seconds must comply with the percentage passing for the sieve size shown in the following table lime gradation sieve size percentage passing num inch num section num stabilized soils num slurry must num .
be free of contaminants num .
contain at least the minimum dry solids num .
have uniform consistency prepare lime slurry at the job site .
num construction numa general before applying lime measure the ground surface temperature .
apply lime at ground temperatures above num degrees f. do not apply lime if you expect the ground temperature to drop below num degrees f before you complete mixing and compacting .
during mixing maintain the inplace moisture of the basement material to be stabilized at a minimum of num percent above the optimum moisture determined under california test num as modified in section num numdnumb .
during compaction and finish grading add water to the surface to prevent drying until the next layer of mixed material is placed or until you apply curing treatment .
scarify the surface of lime stabilized soil at least num inches between each layer .
do not scarify the finished surface of the lime stabilized soil .
from the application of lime to num days after the application of curing treatment only equipment and vehicles essential to the lime stabilization work are allowed on the lime stabilized soil .
numb preparing basement material compact the basement material to at least num percent relative compaction .
numc applying lime apply lime in dry form .
you may apply lime in slurry form if authorized .
apply lime uniformly over the area to be stabilized using a vane spreader .
lime slurry must be in suspension during application .
apply lime slurry uniformly making successive passes over a measured section of the roadway until the specified lime content is reached .
apply the residue from lime slurry over the length of the roadway being processed .
numd mixing mix lime on the same day it is applied .
after the initial mixing allow a mellowing period for at least num hours before final mixing .
you may add water and mix during the mellowing period .
complete all the mixing work within num days of the initial application of lime .
before compaction the mixed material except rock must be within the percentage passing limits for the sieve sizes shown in the following table mixed material gradation sieve size percentage passing num num no .
num num nume compaction do not use vibratory rollers .
start compacting immediately after final mixing .
compact the lime stabilized soil to at least num percent relative compaction .
section num stabilized soils num numf finish grading the finished surface of the stabilized soil must not vary more than num foot above or below the grade established by the engineer unless the stabilized soil is to be covered by material paid for by the cubic yard in which case the finished surface must not vary above the grade established by the engineer .
maintain the moisture content of the lime stabilized soil at a minimum of num percent above optimum moisture content through the entire finish grading operation .
wherever lime stabilized soil is below the allowable tolerance you may use trimmed material to fill low areas only if final grading and final compaction occurs within num hours of beginning initial compaction .
before placing trimmed material scarify the surface of the area to be filled at least num inches deep .
numg curing choose the method of curing and apply the chosen curing method within num hours of completing the sheepsfoot or segmented wheel compaction and within the same day of any trimming and finish grading .
num payment the department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in lime quantity .
num reserved num num aggregate subbases num general numa summary section num includes specifications for placing aggregate subbase .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control reserved numdnum department acceptance the department accepts as based on aggregate gradation rvalue requirements and sand equivalent requirements specified in section num .
the department accepts as based on percent relative compaction specified in section nume tested under california test num .
for class num as if the aggregate gradation test results the sand equivalent test results or both comply with contract compliance requirements but not operating range requirements you may continue placing as for the remainder of the work day .
do not place additional as until you demonstrate to the engineer the as to be placed complies with the operating range requirements .
for class num as if the aggregate gradation test results sand equivalent test results or both do not comply with contract compliance requirements remove the as or request a payment deduction .
if your request is authorized numcu yd is deducted for each noncompliant test result .
each aggregate gradation and a sand equivalent test represents no more than num cu yd of as or num days production whichever is smaller .
num materials numa general aggregate for class num num num and num as must be clean and consist of any combination of the following num .
broken stone num .
crushed gravel num .
natural rough surfaced gravel num .
sand num .
reclaimed processed asphalt concrete pcc lcb or ctb if class num is specified the location for obtaining the material and gradation requirements are in the special provisions .
numb class num class num and class num aggregate subbases aggregate gradation must be within the percentage passing limits for the sieve sizes shown in the following table section num aggregate subbases num aggregate gradation sieve size percentage passing class num class num class num operating range contract compliance operating range contract compliance operating range contract compliance num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num the aggregate quality characteristics must comply with the requirements for the classes shown in the following table aggregate quality characteristics quality characteristic requirement class num class num class num operating range contract compliance operating range contract compliance operating range contract compliance sand equivalent min num num num num num num resistance rvalue min num num num numc class num aggregate subbase reserved numd class num aggregate subbase reserved num construction numa general apply water to the as as needed for compaction .
numb subgrade immediately before spreading the as the subgrade must comply with the specified compaction and elevation tolerance for the material involved and be free from loose or extraneous material .
you may fill areas of the subgrade lower than the grade established by the engineer with as .
before placing biaxial geogrid remove sharp objects that may come in contact with the material .
numc placing geosynthetics materials section numc applies if geosynthetic materials are shown .
geosynthetic materials include filter fabric and biaxial geogrid .
if filter fabric is shown place it on the subgrade .
place biaxial geogrid if shown num .
under manufacturers instructions num .
longitudinally along the roadway alignment num .
without wrinkles overlap adjacent edges of geosynthetic material at least num feet .
overlap the ends of the rolls at least num feet in the direction as is spread .
you may fold or cut geosynthetic material to conform to curves .
if material is cut overlap it at least num feet .
you may hold the material in place with mechanical ties staples pins or small piles of as .
section num aggregate subbases num do not place stockpiles on geosynthetic material or place more material than can be covered in num hours .
do not operate equipment or vehicles directly on filter fabric .
do not operate equipment or vehicles directly on geogrid unless one of the following conditions is met num .
vehicles and equipment are num .
equipped with rubber tires num .
operated under num mph num .
operated to avoid sudden braking and sharp turns num .
at least num ft of as has been placed spread and compacted on the material repair or replace any damaged geosynthetic material by placing a new piece of material over the damaged area with at least num feet of overlap .
numd spreading deliver uniform mixtures of as to the roadbed .
deposit as in layers or windrows .
spread and shape the as to such thickness that after watering and compacting the completed as is within the tolerances specified in section nume .
when as is spread and compacted the moisture content must be uniform and sufficient to obtain the required compaction .
avoid material segregation .
as must be free from pockets of coarse or fine material .
where the subgrade is cohesionless sand and if authorized you may dump as in piles and spread it ahead in sufficient quantities to stabilize the subgrade .
where the subbase thickness shown is num foot or less you may spread and compact the as in one layer .
where the shown thickness is more than num foot spread and compact in num or more layers approximately equal in thickness .
the compacted thickness of any one layer must not exceed num foot .
at locations inaccessible to spreading equipment spread and compact as by any means that will produce the specified results .
nume compacting compact each as layer to at least num percent relative compaction .
where biaxial geogrid is shown compact as with either num a smoothwheeled roller or num a rubbertired roller .
do not use vibratory devices during compaction .
the finished surface of as not covered or covered by material paid for by weight must not vary more than num foot above or below the grade established by the engineer .
the finished surface of as covered by material paid for by volume must not project above the grade established by the engineer at any point .
correct areas of as that do not comply with the thickness shown if an equivalent thickness of overlying base will not compensate or request a payment deduction .
if your request is authorized the engineer calculates the deduction by multiplying num .
deficient thickness less allowable tolerance num .
planned width num .
longitudinal distance of the deficient thickness num .
numcu yd num payment the payment quantity of aggregate subbase is determined by the dimensions shown .
the payment quantity does not include the volume of aggregate subbase used to fill low areas of the subgrade .
num num aggregate bases num general numa summary section num includes specifications for placing aggregate base .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control reserved numdnum department acceptance the department accepts ab based on aggregate gradation rvalue requirements and sand equivalent requirements specified in section num .
the department accepts ab based on percent relative compaction specified in section nume tested under california test num .
aggregate samples must not be treated with lime cement or chemicals before testing for durability index .
aggregate from untreated reclaimed processed ac pcc lcb or ctb is not considered treated .
if the aggregate gradation test results sand equivalent test results or both comply with the contract compliance requirements but not the operating range requirements you may continue placing ab for the remainder of the work day .
do not place additional ab until you demonstrate to the engineer the ab to be placed complies with the operating range requirements .
if the aggregate gradation test results sand equivalent test results or both do not comply with contract compliance requirements remove the ab or request a payment deduction .
if your request is authorized numcu yd is deducted .
if ab is paid by weight the engineer converts tons to cubic yards for the purpose of reducing payment for noncompliant ab left in place .
each aggregate gradation and a sand equivalent test represents no more than num cu yd of ab or num days production whichever is smaller .
num materials numa general aggregate must be clean and consist of any combination of the following num .
broken stone num .
crushed gravel num .
natural roughsurfaced gravel num .
sand num .
processed reclaimed asphalt concrete pcc lcb or ctb use either numinch or numinch maximum aggregate gradation unless otherwise specified .
do not change your selected aggregate gradation without authorization .
numb class num aggregate base aggregate gradation must be within the percentage passing limits for the sieve sizes shown in the following table section num aggregate bases num aggregate gradation sieve size percentage passing num inch maximum num inch maximum operating range contract compliance operating range contract compliance num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num the aggregate quality characteristics must comply with the requirements shown in the following table aggregate quality characteristics quality characteristic requirement operating range contract compliance resistance rvalue min num sand equivalent min num num durability index min num numc class num aggregate base aggregate gradation must be within the percentage passing limits for the sieve sizes shown in the following table aggregate gradation sieve size percentage passing num inch maximum num inch maximum operating range contract compliance operating range contract compliance num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num the aggregate quality characteristics must comply with the requirements shown in the following table aggregate quality characteristic quality characteristic requirement operating range contract compliance resistance rvalue min num sand equivalent min num num num construction numa general apply water to the ab as needed for compaction .
numb subgrade immediately before spreading ab the subgrade must comply with the specified compaction and elevation tolerance for the material involved and be free from loose or extraneous material .
section num aggregate bases num you may use ab to fill areas of the subgrade that are lower than the grade established by the engineer .
numc placing geosynthetic materials section numc applies if geosynthetic materials are shown .
geosynthetic materials include filter fabric and biaxial geogrid .
if filter fabric is shown place it on the subgrade .
before placing geosynthetic materials remove sharp objects that may come in contact with the material .
place the material num .
under manufacturers instructions num .
longitudinally along the roadway alignment num .
without wrinkles overlap adjacent edges of geosynthetic material at least num feet .
overlap the ends of the rolls at least num feet in the direction ab is spread .
you may fold or cut geosynthetic material to conform to curves .
if material is cut overlap it at least num feet .
you may hold material in place with mechanical ties staples pins or small piles of ab .
do not place stockpiles on geosynthetic material or place more material than can be covered in num hours .
do not operate equipment or vehicles directly on filter fabric .
do not operate equipment or vehicles directly on geogrid unless one of the following conditions is met num .
vehicles and equipment are num .
equipped with rubber tires num .
operated under num mph num .
operated to avoid sudden braking and sharp turns num .
at least num ft of ab has been placed spread and compacted on the material repair or replace any damaged geosynthetic material by placing a new piece of material over the damaged area with at least num feet of overlap .
numd spreading deliver uniform mixtures of ab to the roadbed .
deposit ab in layers or windrows .
spread and shape the ab to such thickness that after watering and compacting the completed ab is within the tolerances specified in section nume .
when ab is spread and compacted the moisture content must be uniform and sufficient to obtain the required compaction .
avoid material segregation .
ab must be free from pockets of coarse or fine material .
if the subgrade is cohesionless sand you may dump ab in piles and spread it ahead in sufficient quantities to stabilize the subgrade if authorized .
if the ab thickness shown is num foot or less spread and compact the ab in at leastnum layer .
if the thickness shown is more than num foot spread and compact the ab in at least num approximately equal layers in thickness .
the compacted thickness of any one layer must not exceed num foot .
at locations inaccessible to spreading equipment spread and compact ab by any means that will attain the specified requirements .
nume compacting compact each ab layer to at least num percent relative compaction .
if biaxial geogrid is shown compact ab with either num a smoothwheeled roller or num a rubbertired roller .
do not use vibratory devices during compaction .
the finished ab surface must not vary more than num foot from the grade established by the engineer .
section num aggregate bases num correct areas of ab that do not comply with the described thickness or request a payment deduction if ab is paid for by volume .
if your request is authorized the engineer calculates the deduction by multiplying num .
deficient thickness less allowable tolerance num .
planned width num .
longitudinal distance of the deficient thickness num .
numcu yd or the item bid price adjusted for cubic yards whichever is higher num payment if aggregate base is paid for by volume the payment quantity is determined from the dimensions shown .
the payment quantity does not include the volume of aggregate base used to fill low areas of the subgrade .
if the basement material is imported borrow aggregate base placed to fill low areas is not measured or paid for as imported borrow .
if aggregate base is paid for by weight the engineer deducts the weight of the water at the time of weighing in excess of the optimum moisture content plus num percent from the weight of the aggregate base .
the engineer determines the optimum moisture content under california test num .
num num cement treated bases num general numa summary section num includes specifications for placing cement treated base .
numb definitions coarse aggregate aggregate retained on a no .
num sieve .
fine aggregate aggregate passing a no .
num sieve .
numc submittals submit evidence of the cost of cement used for an ordered increase or decrease .
numd quality assurance numdnum general after the ctb has been spread on the subgrade and before initial compaction the cement content of the completed mixture of ctb must not vary from the specified cement content by more than num percent of the weight of the dry aggregate when tested under california test num .
for class a ctb compaction is tested under california test num or num .
the relative compaction of ctb must be at least num percent .
each layer of ctb may be tested for compaction or all layers may be tested together at the option the engineer .
if all layers are tested together you are not relieved of the responsibility to achieve the required compaction in each layer placed .
numdnum aggregate when tested under california test num aggregate for class b ctb must have num an rvalue of at least num before mixing with cement and num an rvalue of at least num when aggregate is mixed with an amount of cement that does not exceed num percent by weight of the dry aggregate .
before sand equivalent testing aggregate samples must not be treated with lime cement or chemicals .
if the aggregate gradation test results the sand equivalent test results or both comply with contract compliance requirements but not operating range requirements you may continue placing ctb for the remainder of the work day .
do not place additional ctb until you demonstrate to the engineer the ctb to be placed complies with the operating range requirements .
if the aggregate gradation test results sand equivalent test results or both do not comply with contract compliance requirements remove the ctb or request a payment deduction .
if your request is authorized numcu yd is deducted .
if ctb is paid for by weight the engineer converts tons to cubic yards for the purpose of reducing payment for noncompliant ctb left in place .
an aggregate gradation and a sand equivalent test represents up to num num cu yd or num num days production if less than num cu yd .
numdnum roadmixed cement treated base moisture content just before initial compaction the moisture content of the completed mixture must be at least the optimum moisture content less num percent .
the moisture content is determined under california test num and optimum moisture content is determined under california test num .
numdnum plantmixed cement treated base moisture content at the point of delivery to the work the moisture content of the completed mixture must be at least the optimum moisture content less num percent .
the moisture content is determined under california test num and optimum moisture content under california test num .
num materials cement must be type ll portland cement .
asphaltic emulsion curing seal must be grade ssnum or cssnum .
aggregate must be clean and free from deleterious substances .
section num cement treated bases num aggregate must be within the percentage passing limits for the sieve sizes shown in the following table aggregate gradationa sieve size percentage passing class a class b operating range contract compliance operating range contract compliance num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num num acalifornia test num is modified by california test num if the difference in specific gravity between the coarse and fine portions of the aggregate or between the blends of different aggregates is num or more .
the aggregate quality characteristics must comply with the requirements shown in the following table aggregate quality characteristics quality characteristic requirement california test operating range contract compliance sand equivalent min num num num compressive strength min psia num num afor class a ctb only num construction numa general reserved numb subgrade immediately before spreading ctb the subgrade must comply with the specified compaction and elevation tolerance for the material involved and be free from loose or extraneous material .
numc depositing aggregate and mixing roadmixed cement treated base numcnum general reserved numcnum depositing aggregate for roadmixed ctb deposit enough untreated aggregate on the roadbed to comply with the depth shown the depth specifications in section nume and the grade tolerance specifications in section num numf .
do not mix the aggregate to be treated with roadbed material that is not to be treated .
if num or more nominal sizes of coarse and fine aggregate are deposited on the grade accurately and uniformly meter each nominal size as it is deposited .
before adding cement mix the deposited aggregate as many times as necessary to produce a uniform mixture that complies with the specified gradation .
for mixing done from windrows shape the windrow to a uniform cross section with a sizing device .
do not use a motor grader unless equipped with a sizing device .
aggregate mixed with cement and water before delivery on the roadbed must be deposited and spread on the prepared subgrade under section nume .
numcnum mixing mix roadmixed ctb by either of the following methods num .
roadmixed method on the roadbed or at a location off the roadbed num .
plantmixed method under section numd except a class num batch plant may be used section num cement treated bases num use mechanical equipment that uniformly distributes cement and water .
whenever cement is added to windrowed aggregates flatten or slightly trench the top of the windrow to receive cement .
if crossshaft mixers are used spread cement uniformly over the entire surface of the deposited aggregate .
do not spread cement on aggregate more than num hours before the roadmixing operation .
the roadmixing machine must introduce water at the time of mixing with a metering device or other authorized methods .
supply the correct quantity of water by means of controls that will produce a completed mixture with a uniform moisture content .
correct water leaks from equipment or excessive amounts of water during application before proceeding .
for ctb spread and compacted in num or more layers mix material for each layer separately .
if more than num pass of the roadmixing machine is required to obtain a uniform mixture at least num pass must be made before adding water to the material .
regulate the length of roadmixed sections to comply with section numg .
numd proportioning and mixing plantmixed cement treated base numdnum general mix plantmixed ctb at a central mixing plant by either of the following num .
batch type mixing using either of the following num .
revolving blade num .
rotary drum mixers num .
continuous type mixing .
in all mixing plants proportion aggregate cement and water by weight or volume .
the engineer must be able to readily verify the amount of water per batch or the flow rate for continuous mixing .
the time of the addition of water or the points where it is introduced into the mixer must be authorized .
in all mixing plants add cement in such a manner that it will be uniformly distributed throughout the aggregates during the mixing operation .
numdnum batch mixing if different aggregate sizes are used the aggregates must be blended as they enter the mixer .
weigh cement for each batch on scales that are separate and distinct from the aggregate batching scales .
each cement scale graduation must be approximately num of the total scale capacity .
the total capacity of the scale must not exceed the capacity of the smallest commercially available scale that is capable of weighing twice the amount of cement when the plant is operated at full capacity .
no scale is required to have a total capacity less than num lb or graduations less than num lb .
mixing plants must be class num unless class num is specified .
class num batch mixing plants must be equipped with num .
enough paddles arranged to produce a uniform mixture num .
mixer platform large enough to provide safe and convenient access to the mixer and other equipment num .
timing device accurate to within num seconds that indicates the end of the mixing period by an audible or visual signal for class num mixing plants the mixing period begins after all the ingredients are in the mixer and ends when the mixer is half empty .
mix until a homogeneous mixture with uniformly distributed and properly coated aggregates that do not change appearance is produced and testing indicates the cement content consistently complies with section numdnum .
the mixing period must not be less than num seconds .
class num mixing plants must be equipped with automatic sampling devices actuated by operation of a push button or similar device .
when a sampling device is actuated it must simultaneously deliver a representative sample of each size of aggregate or the combined aggregates to adequately sized receptacles .
each sample must weigh from num to num lb .
locate receptacles safely clear of plant operations with convenient access .
section num cement treated bases num class num mixing plants must comply with the specifications for a class num mixing plant except num a timing device to signal the end of mixing is not required and num automatic sampling devices are not required .
class num mixing plants must provide safe and convenient access to sampling facilities for obtaining representative samples of aggregate and the mixture .
numdnum continuous mixing draw aggregate from storage facilities by a feeder or feeders that continuously supply the correct amount of aggregate in proportion to cement .
if different aggregate sizes are used arrange feeders such that the proportion of each aggregate size can be separately adjusted .
storage facilities for fine aggregate must be equipped with a device that effectively vibrates the side walls of the feeder preventing hangup of material while the plant is operating .
the plant must be equipped with a control system that automatically closes down the plant when the material in any storage facility approaches the strikeoff capacity of the feed gate .
the plant must not be operated unless the automatic control system is in good working condition .
the aggregate feeder must be mechanically or electrically driven .
mechanically driven feeders must be directly connected to the cement feeder drive .
the drive shaft on the feeder must be equipped with a revolution counter that reads to num revolution with sufficient capacity to register the total number of revolutions in a days run .
electrically driven feeders must be actuated by the same circuit that provides power to the cement feeder motor .
for electric power obtained from a noncommercial source a frequency meter must be connected to the cement feeder motor circuit .
the meter must have a minimum range from num to num hz and must be graduated in num hz increments or less .
a voltage regulating transformer must be installed in the circuit of vibratory aggregate feeders .
the transformer must maintain the voltage to the feeder motors to within num percent of their nameplate voltage .
a voltmeter must be connected to the secondary of the voltage regulating transformer .
the meter must have a range from num to num percent of the motor nameplate voltage and must be graduated in increments of num percent of the nameplate voltage or less .
for plants equipped with electrically actuated aggregate feeders the power must have a frequency of num num hz .
continuous mixing plants must be equipped with an automatic sampling device specified for class num plants in section numdnum that allows sampling when the plant is in full operation .
the cement feeder and aggregate feeders must be equipped with devices that allow the feed rate to be determined when the plant is in full operation .
nume spreading treated mixture transport materials mixed at a location off the roadbed as a uniform mixture .
cover the mixture during transport to avoid moisture loss if ordered .
deposit the mixture on the roadbed at a quantity that provides the specified compacted thickness without spotting picking up or shifting the mixture .
just before depositing plantmixed or spreading roadmixed ctb moisten the area to be covered .
the area must be kept moist but not excessively wet .
avoid material segregation .
ctb must be free from pockets of coarse or fine material .
spread the mixed materials in widths of not less than num lanes insofar as the width of the ctb to be spread permits .
sections with numlane width may be spread as a numlane width and a numlane width .
spread materials with num spreader or with several spreaders operating in a staggered position across the subgrade unless traffic conditions limit spreading to less than a numlane width .
if traffic conditions limit spreading to less than a numlane width spread the remainder of the numlane section within num hours .
for traffic conditions that prevent placement of ctb in adjacent lanes within num hours a longer time may be authorized .
longitudinal construction joints must be within num foot of lane line delineation .
section num cement treated bases num for areas inaccessible to mechanical spreading equipment spread ctb in num layer using an authorized method .
after spreading thoroughly compact the mixture with pneumatic tampers or other compacting equipment that obtains the degree of compaction specified in section numf to the required lines grades and cross section .
do not mix or place ctb while the atmospheric temperature is below num degrees f. do not place ctb on frozen ground .
apply curing seal to completed ctb before the atmospheric temperature falls below num degrees f. comply with one of the following types of spreading operations num .
for type num spreading operation spread ctb with a selfpropelled mechanical spreader in num operation .
the ctb must be ready for compaction without further shaping .
equipment not propelled by the unloading equipment is considered selfpropelled .
the spreader must be equipped with a screed that strikes off and distributes the material to the full width being spread and within the specified surface tolerance .
the screed must be adjustable to produce the required cross section .
screed action includes any cutting crowding or other practical motion that produces a finished surface texture of uniform appearance .
the mechanical spreader must be equipped with fully automatic screed and grade sensing controls that control the longitudinal grade and cross slopes of the screed .
screed controls must be able to automatically compensate for differences from the slope and grade established by the engineer .
num .
for type num spreading operation comply with type num except automatic screed controls and grade sensing controls are not required .
num .
for type num spreading operation spread the treated mixture with any equipment that will consistently finish the base within the tolerance specified in section numf without material segregation .
if a spreading type is not specified use type num on ramps and type num at all other locations .
except as otherwise specified in section numf do not use motor graders for spreading and compacting operations .
to finish the base within the specified tolerance motor graders may be used to trim the edges and surface of ctb after initial compaction .
a motor grader is considered a selfpropelled mechanical spreader if num .
it is equipped with end wings on the blade num .
blade is locked in a position perpendicular to the direction of travel num .
it is equipped with cross slope and automatic grade controls that comply with the requirements for the specified type of spreading operation numf compacting compacting equipment must produce the required compaction within the operation time limit specified in numg .
immediately following the spreading operation compact the ctb with at least num complete coverage .
after initial compaction wherever the finished surface is higher than the specified tolerance trim off high spots to within tolerance .
do not fill low areas by drifting or hauling trimmed material .
following trimming the trimmed areas must be compacted with num complete coverage such that the entire layer of ctb complies with the specified compaction requirements .
perform final compaction in such a manner that no loose material remains on the surface and tear marks are eliminated .
if ctb is spread and compacted in more than num layer compact each layer to the required degree of compaction before placing the next layer .
trim only to comply with the specified layer thickness .
the compacted thickness of any num layer must not exceed num foot or be less than num foot .
when placed in more than num layer keep the compacted material moist until covering with the next layer or applying curing seal .
apply curing seal to the surface of a lower layer that will not be covered with the next layer on the same day .
the finished ctb surface must be uniform and must not deviate at any point by more than num foot from the bottom of a numfoot straight edge laid in any direction .
section num cement treated bases num the finished ctb surface must be within num foot above or below the grade established by the engineer except wherever concrete pavement will be placed on ctb the finished ctb surface must not extend above the grade established by the engineer .
the surface must be kept moist at all times until the curing seal is applied .
wherever the surface of hardened ctb is lower than num foot from the grade established by the engineer remove the base and replace it with ctb or if authorized fill low areas according to the pavement material as follows num .
for hma pavement fill low areas with hma that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of pavement .
do not fill low areas concurrently with the paving operation .
num .
for concrete pavement fill low areas with pavement concrete concurrent with the paving operation .
if ctb is paid for by the cubic yard a deduction will be made if there are areas that are deficient in thickness and the deficient thickness has not been compensated for by filling of low areas .
the deduction will be computed as the product of num .
deficient thickness less allowable tolerance num .
spread width num .
longitudinal distance of the deficient thickness num .
num per cubic yard or the item bid price whichever is higher for determining areas of deficient thickness the longitudinal distance between thickness measurements will not exceed num linear feet for each direction of travel .
whenever requested the engineer will make additional measurements at the engineers discretion to define the area of deficient thickness at your cost .
excess material may be placed as aggregate for shoulder construction if num .
shoulder subgrade is prepared as specified .
num .
hardened chunks of trimmed material are removed or reduced to the maximum size specified for shoulder aggregate .
num .
trimmed material incorporated into the shoulder does not exceed num percent of the planned volume of shoulder aggregate per foot of shoulder .
if trimmed material exceeds this limit it must be removed and placed in other areas under the num percent limit .
num .
excess material is uniformly distributed in the shoulder area before spreading additional shoulder aggregate .
excess material may be used in other work if the material complies with the applicable specifications .
numg operation time requirement complete initial compaction before trimming within num hours of adding water to the aggregate and cement .
complete final compaction after trimming within num hours of adding water to the aggregate and cement .
numh contact joints construct a contact joint at the end of each work day and whenever ctb operations are delayed or stopped for more than num hours .
contact joints must be constructed in thoroughly compacted material normal to the roadbed centerline with a vertical face .
do not place additional ctb until the contact joint is accepted .
where ctb has been finally compacted for more than num hour construct longitudinal joints by cutting vertically into the existing edge approximately num inches deep .
moisten the face of the cut joint in advance of placing adjacent base .
material from cutting may be used as excess material as specified in section num numf .
numi curing cover the completed ctb with asphaltic emulsion curing seal .
dilute and thoroughly mix asphaltic emulsion for curing seal at a ratio of num part water to num part asphaltic emulsion .
the water must not cause premature separation of the emulsion .
uniformly apply the diluted section num cement treated bases num curing seal at a rate between num to num galsq yd of ctb surface .
the engineer determines the exact rate .
apply curing seal on the same day as completion of final compaction and as soon after final compaction is practicable .
keep the surface moist until curing seal is applied .
do not allow traffic or equipment on the ctb for num hours after application of the curing seal .
after num hours limit traffic and equipment on the ctb to that used in paving operations or placing additional layers of ctb .
num payment if excess material is placed in an area in which the item is measured by the ton payment as the item where placed is not made unless applicable measurement specifications for the item where placed are complied with .
if cement treated base is paid for by the ton the payment quantity for cement treated base does not include the quantity of excess material except for the quantity of excess material used in shoulders .
if cement treated base is paid for by the cubic yard num .
the payment quantity for cement treated base is the volume determined from the dimensions shown num .
the payment quantity for cement treated base does not include the volume of any cement treated base placed below the grade established by the engineer .
num .
if an increase or decrease in the specified quantity of cement is ordered the quantity of cement subject to increased or decreased payment is the difference between the specified theoretical quantity of cement and the theoretical quantity of cement ordered .
the theoretical quantity of cement is determined from the following formula wc numc x vd m num c where wc theoretical quantity of cement in lb v pay volume of cement treated base in cu yd c percentage of cement in the mix d average inplace wet density in gcc m average inplace moisture in gcc if cement treated base is paid for by the ton num .
payment quantity of cement treated base is the sum of the weight of the aggregate used in the mix and the weight of cement to be added to the mix .
num .
weight of aggregate for roadmixed cement treated base that is mixed on the roadbed is measured before delivery to the roadbed under section num except the weight to be paid for is determined by deducting from the weight of the aggregate the weight of the water in the aggregate at the time of weighing in excess of num percent of the dry weight of the aggregate .
num .
weight of cement for roadmixed cement treated base that is mixed on the roadbed to be included in the payment quantity of roadmixed cement treated base is the product of the specified percentage of cement to be added to the mix and the weight of dry aggregate .
num .
weight of plantmixed cement treated base or roadmixed cement treated base that is mixed by the plantmixed method is measured after mixing under section num except that moisture in excess of num percent of the dry weight of the mixture is deducted from the weight of the combined aggregate cement and water .
when the specified quantity of cement is increased in plantmixed cement treated base or roadmixed cement treated base mixed by the plantmixed method the weight of cement for which increased compensation is made as specified in section num is deducted from the combined weight of aggregate and cement .
if an increase or decrease in the specified cement content is ordered payment is adjusted based on the cost of cement per ton fob from the cement mill including sales tax plus the freight cost per ton for delivery from the mill to the plant .
in determining the cost of cement any cash or trade discount offered or available is credited to the department even if the purchaser did not take the discount .
section num cement treated bases num maintain records that allow a clear determination of the cement costs associated with the increase or decrease .
submit evidence of the cost of cement used for the increase or decrease .
if your records show an excessive cost for the increase or decrease of cement or you furnish inadequate evidence for the cost the engineer determines the cost to be the lowest wholesale price that the cement was available for in the quantities delivered to the point of production less any available discounts .
the quantity of cement subject to increased or decreased compensation will be the difference between the specified theoretical quantity of cement and the theoretical quantity of cement ordered .
the department does not adjust payment for variations in the cost of work resulting from the change in the quantity of cement .
num num concrete bases num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for constructing concrete bases .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals for a concrete base requiring field qualification submit the name of your proposed testing laboratory at least num days before the qualification .
for a base not requiring field qualification submit the name of the proposed laboratory at least num days before submitting your mix design .
numd quality assurance testing laboratories and testing equipment must comply with the departments independent assurance program .
aggregate samples must not be treated with lime cement or chemicals before testing for sand equivalent .
stop concrete base activities and immediately notify the engineer whenever num .
any qc or qa test result does not comply with the specifications num .
visual inspection shows a noncompliant concrete base if concrete base activities are stopped before resuming activities num .
notify the engineer of the adjustments you will make num .
remedy or replace the noncompliant concrete base num .
field qualify or construct a new test strip as specified for the concrete base involved to demonstrate compliance with the specifications num .
obtain authorization sample the base under california test num .
num materials aggregate must be clean and free of decomposed material organic material and other deleterious substances .
num construction numa general reserved numb subgrade preparation immediately before placing the base verify that the subgrade to receive the base complies with the specified compaction and elevation tolerances and is num .
free of loose and extraneous material num .
uniformly moist but free of standing or flowing water numc placing place concrete base under section numfnum except the numrd paragraph does not apply .
spread screed shape and consolidate concrete base under section numfnum or under section num numfnum except where there are confined work areas .
if authorized for confined work areas you may num .
spread and shape concrete base using suitable powered finishing machines and supplement with hand work as necessary .
section num concrete bases num num .
consolidate the base using highfrequency internal vibrators within num minutes after depositing the base on the subgrade .
num .
vibrate such that adequate consolidation occurs across the full paving width .
do not use vibrators for extensive weight shifting of the concrete base .
contraction joints must comply with section numbnum .
num payment the payment quantity for any type of concrete base is the volume determined from the dimensions shown .
the payment quantity for asphaltic emulsion concrete base is determined from the gauge reading on the curing seal equipment .
num lean concrete bases num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing lean concrete base .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general submit qc test data and qc test results within num hours of test completion .
at least num days before field qualification submit num .
aggregate qualification test results num .
proposed aggregate gradation num .
mix design including num .
proportions num .
types and amounts of chemical admixtures num .
optional notice of intent to produce lcb qualifying for a transverse contraction joint waiver under section numd numcnum field qualification for each field qualification test submit num of the num cylinders within num to num hours after preparing them .
submit field qualification data and test reports including num .
mixing date num .
mixing equipment and procedures used num .
batch volume in cubic yards the minimum is num cu yd num .
type and source of ingredients used num .
age and strength from compression strength results the test reports must be signed by the person in responsible charge of the laboratory performing the tests .
numd quality assurance numdnum general the molds for compressive strength testing under astm cnum or astm cnum must be num by num inches .
if the aggregate gradation or sand equivalent test results comply with the contract compliance requirements but not the operating range requirements you may continue placing lcb for the remainder of the work day .
do not place additional lcb until you demonstrate the lcb to be placed complies with the operating range requirements .
section num concrete bases num numdnum qualifications field qualification tests and calculations must be performed by an aci certified concrete laboratory technician grade i .
numdnum aggregate qualification testing qualify the aggregate for each proposed aggregate source and gradation .
the qualification tests include num a sand equivalent and num an average numday compressive strength under astm cnum of num cylinders manufactured under astm cnum .
for the compressive strength test the cement content for each cylinder must be num lbcu yd .
the numday average compressive strength must be at least num psi .
the cement must be type ii portland cement .
lcb must have from num to num percent air content during aggregate qualification testing .
numdnum field qualification testing before placing lcb you must perform field qualification testing and obtain authorization for each mix design .
retest and obtain authorization for changes to the authorized mix designs .
notify the engineer at least num business days before field qualification .
perform the field qualification at the job site or an authorized location .
field qualification testing includes tests for compressive strength air content and penetration or slump .
for compressive strength field qualification testing num .
prepare num cylinders under astm cnum from a single batch .
num .
perform num tests each test consists of determining the average compressive strength of num cylinders at num days under astm cnum .
the average compressive strength for each test must be at least num psi if you submitted a notice to produce lcb qualifying for a transverse contraction joint waiver manufacture additional specimens and test the lcb for compressive strength at num days .
prepare the compressive strength cylinders under astm cnum at the same time using the same material and procedures as the num day compressive strength cylinders except do not submit num additional test cylinders .
the average numday compressive strength for each test must be not more than num psi .
numdnum quality control provide a testing laboratory to perform quality control tests .
maintain sampling and testing equipment in proper working condition .
test the lcb under the test methods and at the locations and frequencies shown in the following table lcb sampling location and testing frequencies quality characteristic test method sampling location minimum sampling and testing frequency sand equivalent astm dnum source num per num cubic yards but at least num per day of production aggregate gradation astm cnum air content astm cnum job site penetrationa astm cnum slumpa astm cnum compressive strength astm cnum b atest for either penetration or slump bprepare cylinders under astm cnum section num concrete bases num numdnum department acceptance the department accepts lcb based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table lcb requirements for acceptance quality characteristic test method requirement compressive strength min psi at num days astm cnum a num b a cylinders prepared under astm cnum b a compressive strength test represents up to num num cu yd or num num days production if less than num cu yd .
num materials numa general you may use a waterreducing chemical admixture .
waterreducing chemical admixture must comply with astm cnum type a or type f. the air content in lcb must not exceed num percent .
if the aggregate used for lcb is produced from processed reclaimed asphalt concrete or other material that may cause the air content to exceed num percent reduce the air content with an admixture .
portland cement content in lcb must not exceed num lbcu yd .
lcb must comply with the requirements shown in the following table lcb requirements quality characteristic test method requirement sand equivalent min astm dnum num aggregate gradation astm cnum note a air content max percent b astm cnum num penetration inches astm cnum num to num nominal c slump inches astm cnum num nominal c compressive strength min psi at num days astm cnum num compressive strength max psi at num days d astm cnum num a comply with the table titled aggregate gradation in section numc .
b if no single test in the first num air content tests exceeds num percent no further air content tests are required .
c maximum penetration must not exceed num inches and maximum slump must not exceed num inches d only applicable if you num submitted a notice stating intent to produce lcb qualifying for a transverse contraction joint waiver and num successfully field qualified the lcb for numday compressive strength .
numb cementitious material scm must comply with section numb except the equations for scm content under section num numbnum do not apply .
for aggregate qualification testing use type ii portland cement under section numbnum without scm .
numc aggregate use either num inch or num inch gradation .
do not change your selected aggregate gradation without authorization .
when tested under astm cnum the aggregate gradation must be within the percentage passing limits for the sieve sizes shown in the following table section num concrete bases num aggregate gradation sieve size percentage passing num maximum num maximum operating range contract compliance operating range contract compliance num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num aggregate must comply with the quality requirements shown in the following table aggregate quality quality characteristic test method operating range contract compliance sand equivalent min astm dnum num num compressive strength min psi at num days astm cnum astm cnum num at num lbcu yd cement content note cement must comply with the specifications for type ii portland cement in section numbnum .
num construction numa general do not allow traffic or equipment on the lcb for at least num hours after the numst application of the curing compound and completion of contraction joints .
limit the traffic and equipment on the lcb to that required for placing additional layers of lcb or paving .
numb subgrade areas of the subgrade lower than the grade established by the engineer must be filled with lcb .
numc proportioning mixing and transporting proportion lcb under section numf except the aggregate does not have to be separated into sizes .
mix and transport lcb under section numg except the numth and numth paragraphs in section numgnum do not apply .
numd placing do not mix or place lcb if the atmospheric temperature is below num degrees f. do not place lcb on frozen ground .
unless otherwise described construct lcb in minimum widths of num feet separated by construction joints .
for lcb constructed monolithically in widths greater than num feet construct a longitudinal contraction joint offset no more than num feet from the centerline of the width being constructed .
if concrete pavement will be placed on lcb construct longitudinal construction and longitudinal contraction joints in the lcb to provide at least num foot of horizontal clearance from planned longitudinal construction and longitudinal contraction joints in the concrete pavement .
construct transverse contraction joints in intervals that result in lcb areas where the lengths and widths are within num percent of each other .
measure the widths from any longitudinal construction or longitudinal contraction joints .
the engineer waives the requirement for transverse contraction joints if you num .
submitted a notice under numcnum section num concrete bases num num .
successfully field qualified lcb for numday compressive strength testing under section numa .
num .
submit qc test results for numday compressive strength under section numdnum .
nume finishing for lcb to be paved with hma before the curing operation texture the lcb finished surface by dragging either a broom burlap or a spring steel tine device .
if using a spring steel tine device the device must produce a scored surface with scores parallel or transverse to the pavement centerline .
texture at a time and in a manner that produces the coarsest texture for the method used .
for lcb to be paved with hma the finished surface must not vary more than num foot from the grade established by the engineer .
for lcb to be paved with concrete pavement do not texture lcb .
before applying curing compound finish lcb to a smooth surface free from mortar ridges and other projections .
for lcb to be paved with concrete pavement the finished surface must not be above the grade or more than num foot below the grade established by the engineer .
the finished surface must be free from porous areas .
numf curing after finishing lcb cure lcb with pigmented curing compound under section numbnum and numi except for lcb to be paved with concrete pavement comply with section num .
apply curing compound to the area to be paved with concrete pavement num .
in num separate applications num .
before the atmospheric temperature falls below num degrees f num .
at a rate of num galnum sq ft for the first application num .
at a rate of num galnum sq ft for the second application within num days after the first application clean the surface and apply the second application .
immediately repair damage to the curing compound or lcb .
numg surfaces not within tolerance for lcb not to be paved with concrete pavement remove the base where the surface is higher than num foot above the grade established by the engineer and replace it with lcb .
for lcb to be paved with concrete pavement remove the base where the surface is higher than the grade established by the engineer and replace it with lcb .
if authorized grind the surface with either a diamond or carborundum blade to within tolerance .
after grinding lcb to be paved with concrete pavement and after all free water has left the surface clean foreign material and grinding residue from the surface .
apply curing compound to the ground area at a rate of approximately num galnum sq ft. where the surface of the lcb is lower than num foot from the grade established by the engineer remove the base and replace it with lcb or if authorized fill low areas according to the pavement material as follows num .
for hma pavement fill low areas with hma that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of pavement .
do not fill low areas concurrently with the paving operation .
num .
for concrete pavement fill low areas with pavement concrete concurrent with the paving operation .
num payment the payment quantity for lean concrete base does not include lean concrete base used to fill low areas of subgrade num rapid strength concrete base num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing rapid strength concrete base .
section num concrete bases num numb definitions final set time elapsed time after the initial contact of the cement and water required for the mortar sieved from the concrete to reach a penetration resistance of num psi determined under astm cnum .
early age any age less than num times the rsc base final set time .
opening age age at which the rsc base achieves the specified strength for opening to traffic and construction traffic .
numc submittals numcnum general at least num days before placing rsc base submit a mix design that includes num .
opening age num .
proposed aggregate gradation num .
proportions of hydraulic cement and aggregate num .
types and amounts of chemical admixtures num .
maximum time allowed between batching and placing num .
final set time num .
any special instructions or conditions such as water temperature requirements numcnum quality assurance submittals at least num days before placing rsc base submit num a sample of cement from each proposed lot and num samples of proposed admixtures in the quantities ordered .
during rsc base activities submit uniformity reports for hydraulic cement at least once every num days to mets attention cement laboratory .
uniformity reports must comply with astm cnum except testing age and water content may be modified to suit the particular material .
numcnum quality control plan reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general at the preconstruction meeting be prepared to discuss the project specifications and methods of performing each item of work .
items discussed must include the processes for num .
production num .
transportation num .
placement num .
qc plan if specified in the special provisions num .
contingency plan num .
qc sampling and testing num .
acceptance criteria beams for modulus of rupture testing must be fabricated and tested under california test num .
the beams may be fabricated using an internal vibrator under astm cnum .
for each test num beam must be fabricated and the test results averaged .
no single test represents more than that days production or num cu yd whichever is less .
for early age testing beams must be cured so the monitored temperatures in the beams and the test strip are always within num degrees f. the internal temperatures of the rsc base and early age beams must be monitored and recorded at intervals of at least num minutes .
thermocouples or thermistors connected to stripchart recorders or digital data loggers must be installed to monitor the temperatures .
temperature recording devices must be accurate to within num degrees f. until early age testing is completed internal temperatures must be measured at num inch from the top num inch from the bottom and no closer than num inches from any edge .
section num concrete bases num for other age testing beams must be cured under california test num except beams must be placed into sand at a time that is the earlier of either from num to num times the final set time or num hours .
numdnum preconstruction meeting reserved numdnum test strip reserved numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb quality control manager reserved numdnumc quality control testing during the placement of rsc base fabricate beams and test for the modulus of rupture num .
at opening age num .
at num days after placing the first num cu yd num .
at least once every num cu yd num .
within the final truckload opening age tests must be performed in the presence of the engineer .
rsc base must have an opening age modulus of rupture of not less than num psi and a numday modulus of rupture of not less than num psi .
numdnum department acceptance the department accepts rsc base based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table rsc base requirements for acceptance quality characteristic test method requirement modulus of rupture min psi at num days california test num num the engineer adjust payment for rsc base for the numday modulus of rupture as follows num .
payment for a base with a modulus of rupture of num psi or greater is not adjusted .
num .
payment for a base with a modulus of rupture of less than num and greater than or equal to num psi is reduced by num percent .
num .
payment for a base with a modulus of rupture of less than num and greater than or equal to num psi is reduced by num percent .
num .
payment for a base with a modulus of rupture of less than num psi is not adjusted and no payment is made .
remove and replace this base .
num materials numa general reserved numb rapid strength concrete base concrete for rsc base must be rsc .
for batches with a volume of num cu yd or more comply with one of the following methods num .
batch the ingredients at a central batch plant and charge them into a mixer truck for transportation to the pour site .
section num concrete bases num num .
batch the ingredients except the cement at a central batch plant and charge them into a mixer truck for transportation to a cement silo and weigh system which must proportion cement for charging into the mixer truck .
num .
batch ingredients except the cement at a central batch plant and charge them into a mixer truck for transportation to a location where preweighed containerized cement is added to the mixer truck .
the cement preweighing operation must use a platform scale .
the platform scale must have a maximum capacity of num tons with a maximum graduation size of num lb .
preweigh cement into a fabric container .
the minimum amount of cement to be proportioned into any single container must be num of the total amount required for the load of rsc base being produced .
num .
proportion cement water and aggregate volumetrically .
for the combined aggregate gradation the difference between the percent passing the numinch sieve and the percent passing the no .
num sieve must be at least num percent of the total aggregate .
you may use type c accelerating and type e accelerating and water reducing chemical admixtures .
numc curing seal asphaltic emulsion must be grade rsnum or ssnum .
num construction numa general reserved numb subgrade reserved numc placing spreading and shaping you may place rsc base in numlane monolithic segments .
a longitudinal joint is not required in the center of the concrete base .
construct transverse contraction joints at numfoot intervals .
cut a groove in the rscb with a power driven concrete saw .
grooves for longitudinal and transverse contraction joints must be the minimum width possible for the type of saw used .
immediately wash slurry from the joint with water at a pressure less than num psi .
the rsc base finished surface must not vary more than num inch from the bottom of a numfoot long straightedge placed parallel with the center line .
broom the rsc base surface to produce a uniform rough surface .
do not broom the surface until the concrete base has set sufficiently .
numd curing begin curing work as soon as free water leaves the rsc base surface .
cure rsc base by applying a curing seal of asphaltic emulsion under section num .
apply curing seal at a rate from num to num galsq yd .
the engineer determines the exact application rate .
if you damage applied curing seal immediately cover the damaged area with additional curing seal .
do not remove curing seal until surfacing is placed .
if you do not place hma within num hours of applying curing seal apply more asphaltic emulsion at a rate from num to num galsq yd residual binder content immediately before placing hma .
nume surfaces not within tolerance rsc base must be within num foot of the grade established be the engineer .
remove and replace hardened rsc base with a surface higher than numfoot above the grade established by the engineer with rsc base or if authorized high areas may be ground until the surface of rsc base conforms to the tolerances specified .
grinding equipment must be equipped with diamond or carborundum blades .
clean the ground area of rsc base that is to be covered with pavement of all foreign material and grinding residue as soon as any free water has left the surface and apply curing seal .
section num concrete bases num where the surface of rsc base is lower than num foot from the grade established by the engineer remove the base and replace it with rsc base or if authorized fill low areas with hma that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of pavement .
do not fill low areas concurrently with the paving operation .
num payment not used num lean concrete base rapid setting num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing lean concrete base rapid setting .
numb definitions final set time elapsed time after initial contact of cement and water required for the mortar sieved from the concrete to reach a penetration resistance of num psi determined under astm cnum .
early age any age less than num times the lean concrete base rapid setting final set time .
opening age age at which the lean concrete base rapid setting achieves the specified strength for opening to traffic including construction traffic .
numc submittals numcnum general at least num days before field qualification submit the name of your proposed testing laboratory .
submit qc test date and qc test results within num hours of test completion .
numcnum mix design at least num days before field qualification submit a mix design for lean concrete base rapid setting and include num .
opening age num .
proposed aggregate gradation num .
mix design including num .
proportions num .
types and amounts of chemical admixtures num .
maximum time allowed between batching and placing num .
range of ambient temperatures over which the mix design is applicable num .
finalsettime num .
aggregate qualification test results if required submit num mix design for each ambient temperature variation anticipated during base placement .
each mix design must have a maximum ambient temperature range of num degrees f. submit compressive strength development data for each mix design .
you may use strength development data from laboratoryprepared samples .
the testing ages for strength development data must include num hour before opening age opening age num hour after opening age num hours and num days .
numcnum field qualification submit field qualification data and test reports including num .
mixing date num .
mixing equipment and procedures used num .
batch volume in cubic yards minimum num cu yd num .
type and source of ingredients used num .
age and strength at time of cylinder testing reports must be certified with a signature by an official in responsible charge of the laboratory performing the tests .
section num concrete bases num numd quality assurance numdnum general for compressive strength testing prepare num cylinders under california test num .
test cylinders must be num by num inches .
as an alternative to rodding a vibrator may be used under california test num .
test cylinders under california test num and perform num tests with each test consisting of num cylinders .
the test result is the average from the num cylinders .
numdnum field qualification before placing lean concrete base rapid setting you must perform field qualification testing and obtain authorization for each mix design .
retest and obtain authorization for changes to authorized mixed designs .
proposed mix designs must be field qualified before you place the base represented by those mix designs .
the technician performing the field test must hold current american concrete institute aci certification as a concrete field testing techniciangrade i .
notify the engineer at least num days before field qualification .
perform field qualification within the job site or a location authorized .
field qualification testing includes compressive strength air content and penetration or slump in compliance with the table titled lean concrete base rapid setting requirements .
field qualification must comply with the following num .
test for compressive strength at opening age and num days of age num .
at opening age the compressive strength for each test must be at least num psi and the average strength for the num tests must be at least num psi num .
at num days age the compressive strength for each test must be at least num psi and the average strength for the num tests must be at least num psi numdnum quality control perform sampling under california test num .
test the base under the test methods and at the locations and frequencies shown in the following table lcb rapid setting sampling location and testing frequencies quality characteristic test method sampling location minimum sampling and testing frequency sand equivalent astm dnum source num per num cu yd minimum num per day of production aggregate gradation astm cnum air content astm cnum job site num per num hours of placement work plus one in the last hour of placement work penetrationa astm cnum slumpa astm cnum compressive strength california test num atest either penetration or slump numdnum department acceptance the department accepts lcb rapid setting based on compliance with the requirement shown in the following table lcb rapid setting requirements for acceptance quality characteristic test method requirement compressive strength min psi at num days california test numa num acylinders made under california test num section num concrete bases num num materials numa general lcb rapid setting must comply with the requirements shown in the following table lcb rapid setting requirements quality characteristic test method requirement sand equivalent min astm dnum numa aggregate gradation astm cnum comply with section num numc air content max percent b astm cnum num penetration inches astm cnum num nominal num maximum slump inches astm cnum num nominal num maximum compressive strength min psi at num days california test num num compressive strength min psi at opening age california test num num a if aggregate is qualified under section numd item num the minimum is num. b if no single test in the first num air content tests exceeds num percent no further air content tests are required .
numb cement cement must comply with the requirements for rsc .
numc chemical admixtures chemical admixtures must comply with chemical admixtures for concrete except you may use type e chemical admixture .
you may submit a request to use citric acid or borax .
your request must include a request from the cement manufacturer and a test sample .
numd aggregates aggregate must comply with either of the following num .
section numc except aggregate gradation must comply with the aggregate gradation table in section numc num .
section numc and the following num .
qualify the aggregate for each proposed aggregate source and gradation num .
qualification tests include num sand equivalent and num average numday compressive strength under astm cnum on num specimens manufactured under astm cnum .
the cement content for this test must be num lbcu yd and the numday compressive strength must be at least num psi .
cement must be type ii portland cement under section numbnum without scm .
num construction numa general construct lcb rapid setting under section num except num section numa does not apply and num the numrd through numth paragraphs of section numd do not apply .
do not open the lcb rapid setting to traffic before opening age .
subsequent paving operations may begin only after final set time of the lcb base .
the lcb base must have a compressive strength of at least num psi under california test num before num .
placing hma num .
placing additional base num .
operating equipment on the lcb rapid setting numb proportioning mixing and transporting for batches num cu yd or more comply with one of the following methods section num concrete bases num num .
batch the ingredients at a central batch plant and charge them into a mixer truck for transportation to the pour site .
num .
batch the ingredients except the cement at a central batch plant and charge them into a mixer truck for transportation to a cement silo and weigh system which must proportion cement for charging into the mixer truck .
num .
batch ingredients except the cement at a central batch plant and charge them into a mixer truck for transportation to a location where preweighed containerized cement is added to the mixer truck .
the cement preweighing operation must utilize a platform scale .
the platform scale must have a maximum capacity of num tons with a maximum graduation size of num lb .
preweigh cement into a fabric container .
the minimum amount of cement to be proportioned into any single container must be num of the total amount required for the load of lean concrete base rapid setting being produced .
num .
proportion cement water and aggregate volumetrically under astm cnum or section numb .
numc spreading compacting and shaping you may use metal or wood side forms .
wood side forms must be at least num inches thick .
after you deposit the lcb rapid setting on the subgrade consolidate it with highfrequency internal vibrators .
consolidate adjacent to the forms and across the full pavement width .
place the base as nearly as possible to its final position .
spread and shape the base with powered finishing machines and supplement with hand work if necessary after you place lean concrete base rapid setting do not add water to the surface to facilitate finishing .
if authorized you may use surface finishing additives as recommended by the manufacturer of the cement .
num payment if volumetric proportioning is used and calibration is performed more than num miles from the project limits the department deducts num for each calibration session .
num concrete base num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing concrete base .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general for each lot of concrete for a concrete base num .
quantity must not exceed num cu yd .
num .
department determines the modulus of rupture of test beams aged num days under california test num .
num .
department calculates the modulus of rupture by averaging the individual test results of num beams aged for num days .
numdnum department acceptance the department accepts a concrete base based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table concrete base requirements for acceptance quality characteristic test method requirement modulus of rupture min psi at num days california test num num section num concrete bases num acceptance for the modulus of rupture is on a lot basis .
the department provides the molds and machines for the modulus of rupture acceptance testing .
provide any material and labor the engineer may require for the testing .
num materials numa general reserved numb portland cement concrete concrete must be pcc .
for the combined aggregate gradation the difference between the percentage passing the numinch sieve and the percentage passing the no .
num sieve must be at least num percent of the total aggregate .
the specifications for the reduction in operating range and contract compliance for cleanness value and sand equivalent for coarse aggregate in section numcnum and fine aggregate in section numcnum do not apply to a concrete base .
the base must contain not less than num lb of cementitious material per cubic yard .
numc curing seal the curing seal must be asphaltic emulsion grade rsnum or ssnum .
num construction numa general aggregate and bulk cementitious material must be proportioned by weight using authorized automatic proportioning devices .
numb placing spreading and shaping you may place concrete base in numlane monolithic segments .
a longitudinal joint is not required in the center of the base .
the finished surface must not vary more than num inch from the bottom of a numfoot long straightedge placed parallel with the centerline .
after the base has sufficiently set broom the concrete base surface to produce a uniform rough surface .
after the free water leaves the surface and the surface is finished but not later than num hours after placement cure the base by applying asphaltic emulsion .
apply the curing seal at a rate from num to num galsq yd .
the engineer determines the exact application rate .
if you damage the applied curing seal immediately cover the damaged area with additional curing seal .
construct transverse contraction joints at numfoot intervals .
apply the curing seal on cleaned contraction joints .
saw transverse contraction joints before any volunteer cracking occurs and after the concrete base is hard enough to saw without spalling raveling or tearing .
the base must be within num foot of the grade established be the engineer where the surface of the base is lower than num foot from the grade established by the engineer remove and replace it with concrete base or if authorized fill low areas with hma that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of pavement .
do not fill low areas concurrently with the paving operation .
if you do not place the hma within num hours of applying curing seal apply more asphaltic emulsion at a residual binder rate from num to num galsq yd immediately before placing the hma .
num payment not used section num concrete bases num num reserved num existing concrete bases num general numa general section num contains specifications for performing work on existing concrete bases .
work performed on existing bases must comply with section num .
numb materials not used numc construction not used numd payment not used num replace bases reserved num reserved num num treated permeable bases num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing treated permeable bases .
num materials not used num construction numa general immediately before spreading the treated permeable base the subgrade must num .
comply with the specified compaction and elevation tolerance for the material involved num .
be free from loose or extraneous material num .
be uniformly moist areas of subgrade lower than the grade established by the engineer must be filled with permeable base .
spread the permeable base when the atmospheric temperature is above num degrees f. finish the permeable base to a uniform surface within num foot of the grade established by the engineer .
place filter fabric on the edge and on the top of the high side the side opposite the edge drain side of the treated permeable base and at intermediate cross drain interceptors .
place filter fabric under section num num .
place and compact the treated permeable base for edge drains under section num .
numb surfaces out of tolerance where the surface of the permeable base is higher than num foot from the grade established by the engineer remove the base and replace it with the specified treated permeable base .
if authorized remove high spots to comply with the specified tolerance by any method that does not produce contaminating fines or damage the base remaining in place .
grinding is not allowed .
where the surface of the treated permeable base is lower than num foot from the grade established by the engineer remove the base and replace it with the specified treated permeable base .
if authorized fill low areas with pavement material as follows num .
for hma pavement fill low areas with hma that complies with the specifications for the lowest layer of hma pavement .
do not fill low areas concurrently with the hma paving operation .
num .
for concrete pavement fill low areas with paving concrete concurrent with the concrete pavement paving operation .
num payment the payment quantity for treated permeable base is the volume determined from the dimensions shown .
the payment quantity for treated permeable base does not include num .
quantity used for edge drains installed adjacent to the treated permeable base num .
treated permeable base used to fill low areas of subgrade num asphalt treated permeable bases num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing asphalt treated permeable bases .
numb definitions reserved section num treated permeable bases num numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance the engineer determines the asphalt content of the asphalt mixture under california test num .
the bitumen ratio pounds of asphalt per num lb of dry aggregate must not vary more than num lb of asphalt above or below the amount designated by the engineer .
samples used to determine the bitumen ratio are obtained from trucks at the plant or from the mat behind the paver before rolling .
if the sample is taken from the mat behind the paver the bitumen ratio must not be less than the amount designated by the engineer less num lb of asphalt per num lb of dry aggregate .
num materials numa general aggregate for atpb must be clean and free from decomposed material organic material and other deleterious substances .
produce atpb under section numbnum except a jmf is not required .
do not use rap .
the temperature of the aggregate must be from num to num degrees f before adding the asphalt binder .
do not store atpb material longer than num hours .
combine aggregate with num percent asphalt binder by weight of dry aggregate .
an increase or decrease in the asphalt content may be ordered after your proposed aggregate supply has been tested .
numb aggregate the aggregate must comply with the gradation shown in the following table aggregate gradation sieve size percentage passing num num num num num num num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num the aggregate must comply with the requirements shown in the following table aggregate requirements quality characteristic test method requirement percentage of crushed particles min california test num num los angeles rattler loss at num rev max california test num num cleanness value min california test num num film stripping max california test num num num construction equipment for spreading and compacting atpb must comply with section numcnum except compact atpb in num layer using one of the following methods num .
one complete coverage with a steeltired numaxle tandem roller that has an operating weight below num lb per linear inch of steeltire width .
compact when the base mixture is from num to num degrees f. num .
one complete coverage with a steeltired numaxle tandem roller weighing from num to num tons .
compact when the base mixture is from num to num degrees f. section num treated permeable bases num do not use water to cool the atpb .
vibratory rollers complying with the above requirements may be used if the vibratory unit is turned off .
num payment the department adjusts the unit price of asphalt treated permeable base if an ordered increase or decrease in asphalt content exceeds the specified amount by more than num percent by weight of dry aggregate .
num cement treated permeable base num general section num includes specifications for constructing cement treated permeable bases .
num materials numa general cement must comply with section numbnumtype ii .
the cement content of ctpb must be at least num lbcu yd .
the watercement ratio must be approximately num .
the engineer determines the exact watercement ratio .
numb aggregate aggregate for ctpb must comply with section numc .
aggregate gradation must comply with the specifications for the num x no .
num primary aggregate nominal size coarse gradation in section num numcnumb .
num construction store proportion mix and transport aggregates cement and water under sections numf and num numg except aggregate does not have to be separated into sizes and the quantity of water and penetration requirements do not apply .
place ctpb under section numfnum except the numrd paragraph does not apply .
spread compact and shape ctpb under section numfnum or under section numfnum .
vibrators must not be used .
compact with a numaxle steeltired roller weighing from num to num tons .
compact within num minutes after spreading the ctpb .
compaction must consist of num complete passes of the ctpb .
cure ctpb by sprinkling the completed surface with a fine spray of water every num hours for a period of num hours .
start curing the morning after base has been placed .
num payment not used num reserved num num reclaimed pavement num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for constructing reclaimed pavement bases .
numb definitions omc optimum moisture content numc submittals numcnum general at least num days before starting pavement reclamation work submit the qc plan .
the qc plan must describe the organization responsible parties and procedures you will use to num .
perform qc including sampling testing and reporting num .
determine action limits if corrective actions are needed num .
implement corrective actions num .
ensure pulverizing compacting grading and finishing activities are coordinated the qc plan must include copies of the forms that will be used to provide the required inspection records and sampling and testing results .
forms must show project requirements .
the form for recording and reporting the qc measurements must show the proportions of materials used .
the qc plan must include a contingency plan that describes the corrective actions you will take in the event of equipment break down .
the corrective actions must include repairing and reopening the roadway to traffic using minor hma under section num .
numcnum asphaltic emulsion for each dilution of asphaltic emulsion used on the finished reclaimed pavement surface submit as an informational submittal num .
asphaltic emulsion type num .
weight ratio of water to bituminous material in the original asphaltic emulsion num .
weight of asphaltic emulsion before diluting num .
weight of added water num .
final dilution weight ratio of water to asphaltic emulsion numcnum quality assurance submittals numcnuma general reserved numcnumb test strip submit a summary of the determinations made from test strips .
numcnumc quality control reporting for each lot submit a report daily that includes the following items based on the frequencies specified in the table for sampling locations and testing frequencies for the type of pavement reclamation work performed or if not specified once per lot num .
general information num .
lot number num .
location description num .
beginning and ending stations num .
lane number and offset from centerline num .
a summary of any weight or load slips for each weighed material indicating truck and trailer numbers tare weight gross weight net weight and date num .
for asphalt emulsion used on finished reclaimed pavement surface if asphaltic emulsion is specified num .
emulsion type section num reclaimed pavements num num .
emulsion application rate in galsq yd num .
emulsion dilution as the weight ratio of added water to the original asphaltic emulsion num .
calculated supplementary aggregate application rate in lbsq yd and percent of dry weight of reclaimed processed material if supplementary aggregate is specified num .
calculated cement application rate by lbsq yd and percent dry weight of reclaimed processed material if cement is specified num .
qc test results for num .
gradation num .
moisture content if applicable num .
inplace wet density num .
relative compaction num .
depth of cut num .
note on the daily report the postmile or station limits of any unsuitable materials locations and when the engineer was notified update each days submitted report within num hours of obtaining test results .
consolidate all lots completed in a day into one report with each lot reported separately .
numd quality assurance numdnum general divide the area to be reclaimed into lots except the numst test strip is the numst lot and must be at least num sq yd .
a quantity placed at the end of a work shift greater than num sq yd is considered num lot .
if a quantity of reclaimed pavement placed at the end of a work shift is less than num sq yd you may either count this quantity as num lot or include the test results for quality control in the previous lot .
for any lot including the test strip stop reclaimed pavement activities and immediately inform the engineer if any test result does not comply with the specifications .
stop reclaimed pavement activities for noncompliance with the specifications .
before resuming activities num .
notify the engineer of the adjustments you will make num .
remedy or replace the noncompliant lot until it complies with specifications num .
construct a num sq yd test strip with proposed adjustments demonstrating ability to comply with the specifications num .
obtain authorization numdnum preoperation meeting schedule a preoperation meeting at a mutually agreed time at the job site to meet with the engineer .
discuss the project specifications and methods of performing each item of the work .
items discussed must include the processes for num .
determining the mix design num .
production num .
compacting num .
grading num .
finishing num .
implementing the authorized qc plan num .
implementing the contingency plan num .
qc sampling and testing num .
acceptance criteria preoperation meeting attendees must sign an attendance sheet provided by the engineer .
the preoperation meeting must be attended by your num .
project superintendent num .
project manager num .
qc manager num .
workers and your subcontractors workers including num .
foremen num .
ground supervisors section num reclaimed pavements num num .
representative from testing lab do not start pavement reclamation activities including test strips until the listed personnel have attended a preoperation meeting .
numdnum test strip on the numst day of pavement reclamation activities and using the same equipment and materials that will be used during production construct at least num feet in a single lane width to determine the num .
equipment materials and processes can produce reclaimed pavement in compliance with the specifications num .
effect of varying the pulverizing machines forward speed and drum rotation rate on the consistency of the pulverized material num .
optimal proportions as applicable of supplementary aggregate stabilizing agents and water num .
rolling method and sequence complies with the compaction and finishing specifications num .
application rate of asphaltic emulsion as applicable do not proceed with reclaimed pavement activities until the engineer informs you the test strip is authorized .
for production adjustments to the equipment material and process determined by the test strip must be authorized .
if qc or acceptance test results are not available you may proceed at your own risk .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb sampling and testing take samples under california test num .
testing must be performed by an authorized laboratory .
testing personnel for qc must be qualified under the departments independent assurance program .
measure and record the actual cut depth at both ends of the pulverizing drum at least once every num feet along the cut length .
take measurements in the engineers presence .
numdnum department acceptance reserved num materials numa general reserved numb supplementary aggregate if supplementary aggregate is specified supplementary aggregate must comply with num inch maximum gradation specified in section num .
supplementary aggregate must not include cinders .
do not use supplementary aggregate with more than num percent by volume of reclaimed asphalt concrete .
supplementary aggregate must weigh at least num lbcu ft determined under california test num compacted method by rodding .
numc water notify the engineer if a water source other than potable water is used and perform testing for chlorides and sulfates before starting work .
if potable water is not used water must be clean and contain no more than num parts per million of chlorides as cl determined under california test num and no more than num parts per million of sulfates as sonum determined under california test num .
numd cement if cement is specified cement must be type ii or type v portland cement as specified in astm cnumm .
section num reclaimed pavements num nume asphaltic emulsion asphaltic emulsion must be grade ssnumh or cssnumh .
for dilution the weight ratio of water added to asphaltic emulsion must not exceed num to num .
num construction numa general except for pulverized roadbed before starting daily pavement reclaiming activities sweep the area constructed the previous day to remove loose material .
do not use a heating device to soften the pavement .
numb equipment do not interrupt traffic while servicing equipment .
grading equipment must be a motor grader with automatic grade controls for profile elevation and cross slope .
if specified supplementary aggregate or cement spreading equipment must uniformly distribute the supplementary aggregate or cement throughout the area to receive it .
the spreader must be equipped with working scales or proportioning and distance measuring devices to control the spread rate .
if supplementary aggregate or cement is spread before pulverizing the existing pavement the pulverizing equipment must produce a uniform mixture without segregation .
numc surface preparation before pavement reclamation activities start prepare the existing roadway surface by num .
clearing foreign matter including vegetation num .
removing standing water num .
referencing the profile and cross slope num .
marking the proposed longitudinal cut lines on the existing pavement as follows num .
cut lines must coincide with points where the existing cross slope changes approximately at the centerline and edge of traveled way num .
cut lines must indicate the sequence of the cuts num .
referencing existing lane lines and striping layout if excess material is to be stored adjacent to the shoulder clear and dispose of the weeds grass and debris from the area .
numd pulverizing and mixing if the established grade will cause noncompliance with the thickness requirements notify the engineer .
if you encounter unstable subgrade or rocks greater than num inches in the roadway section notify the engineer .
the engineer determines the extent of the problem and the corrective measures to be taken .
nume compacting and grading remove any solids that are larger than num inches in the pulverized roadbed mixture before shaping and compacting .
numf finishing the finished roadbed surface must not vary more than num foot from the lower edge of a numfoot straight edge laid in directions parallel and perpendicular to the centerline .
num payment the payment quantity for supplementary aggregate is determined as specified for aggregate base in section num .
the payment quantity for asphaltic emulsion is measured under section num .
section num reclaimed pavements num num pulverized roadbed num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing a uniform reclaimed pavement base by pulverizing the asphalt concrete pavement and underlying material .
numb definitions lot num sq yd of pulverized roadbed numc submittals at least num days before starting pulverized roadbed activities submit the qc plan .
the qc plan must include a pulverizing and paving plan outlining the sequence of work including the maximum production rate for pulverizing activities .
submit the test results for the quality characteristics within the times after sampling shown in the following table quality characteristic maximum reporting time allowance gradation num hours depth of cut inplace wet density relative compaction numd quality assurance numdnum general the specifications for a preoperation meeting under section numdnum do not apply to pulverized roadbed .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general meet with the engineer num week before starting pulverized roadbed activities to review the qc plan .
perform sampling and testing for each test strip and production work at the specified frequency for the quality characteristics shown in the following table pulverized roadbed quality characteristic sampling locations and testing frequencies quality characteristic test method minimum sampling and testing frequency sampling location gradation california test num test strip and num per lot loose mix after pulverizing and mixing depth of cut na num feet both sides of reclaiming machine along cut length inplace wet density california test num the same locations as relative compaction tests relative compaction california test num one per test strip and num random locations per lot compacted roadbed numdnumb test strip allow num hours for authorization of the test strip .
numdnum department acceptance the department accepts pulverized roadbed based on section num reclaimed pavements num num .
visual inspection including num .
segregation tearing and scarring of the finished surface num .
variance of more than num foot measured from the lower edge of a numfoot straightedge num .
uniform surface texture throughout the work limits num .
repaired areas num .
compliance with the following table pulverized roadbed requirements for acceptance quality characteristic test method requirement relative compaction min california test num num thickness ft field measurement not more than num ft less than the thickness shown num materials numa general the quality characteristics of pulverized roadbed must comply with the requirements shown in the following table pulverized roadbed quality characteristic requirements quality characteristic test method requirement gradation passing sieve size num inch num num inch california test num num num depth of cut ft na not more than num ft less than the thickness shown inplace wet density lbcu ft california test num report only relative compaction min california test num num numb sand cover reserved numc supplementary aggregate if supplementary aggregate is specified supplementary aggregate must comply with the specifications for class num aggregate base in section num .
num construction numa general reserved numb equipment pulverizing equipment must num .
be a selfpropelled reclaiming machine num .
pulverize the existing pavement and underlying material to the required size num .
mix the pulverized pavement underlying material and water into a homogeneous and uniform mixture num .
be equipped with automatic depth controls capable of maintaining the cutting depth to within num foot of the depth shown num .
have a minimum numfoot wide cutter that can remove the existing pavement to the specified depths section num reclaimed pavements num compacting equipment must be a sheepsfoot roller a vibratory steeltired roller and a pneumatictired roller .
all compacting equipment must be selfpropelled and reversible .
the frequency of amplitude of vibrating rollers must be adjustable and exceed a static force of num tons in vibratory mode .
numc spreading reserved numd compacting and grading reserved nume finishing the finished surface must be free from segregation tearing and scarring and have a uniform surface texture throughout the work limits .
maintain the pulverized roadbed surface free of ruts bumps indentations raveling and segregation .
repair damaged pulverized roadbed with minor hma .
num payment not used num full depth reclamationfoamed asphalt num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing a reclaimed pavement base using fdrfoamed asphalt .
constructing an fdrfoamed asphalt base includes num .
pulverizing existing asphalt concrete and existing underlying materials num .
mixing with water foamed asphalt cement and if required supplementary aggregate num .
grading and compacting the mixture num .
applying asphaltic emulsion numb definitions lot num sq yd of fdrfoamed asphalt numc submittals numcnum general with the qc plan submit the mix design .
numcnum quality assurance submittals numcnuma general reserved numcnumb mix design submit fdrfoamed asphalt mix design under california test num .
with the mix design forms include actual test results worksheets photographs and graphs .
the mix design submittal must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
numcnumc quality control reporting with the daily report specifed in section numcnumc submit the following based on the testing frequencies specified or if not specified once per lot num .
general information num weather num .
ambient air temperature before starting daily fdrfoamed asphalt activities including time of temperature reading num .
road surface temperature before starting daily fdrfoamed asphalt activities including time of temperature reading section num reclaimed pavements num num .
asphalt binder num .
injection rate from controller num .
temperature in degrees f from thermometer in the asphalt binder feed line for each truck load num .
water application rate by percent dry weight of fdrfoamed asphalt from the controller num .
average forward speed of pulverizing equipment num .
fdrfoamed asphalt core thickness in feet and location of coring with the daily report submit the test results for the quality characteristics within the times after sampling shown in the following table fdrfoamed asphalt quality characteristic test results reporting time allowances quality characteristic maximum reporting time allowance water sulfates before work starts water chlorides moisture content before hma paving asphalt binder expansion ratio num hours asphalt binder halflife gradation moisture content inplace wet density relative compaction indirect dry tensile strength num business days indirect wet tensile strength tensile strength ratio before each day of hma paving submit a report of the moisture content at mid depth based on the frequency specified in section numdnumc for the area to be paved that day .
numd quality assurance numdnum general numdnuma general relative compaction must be determined under california test num and the following num .
nuclear gauge counts are taken at num elevations within the fdrfoamed asphalt layer identified as enum enum and enum measured from the finished fdrfoamed asphalt surface as follows num .
enum num x fdrfoamed asphalt thickness num inch .
num .
enum num x fdrfoamed asphalt thickness num inch .
num .
enum fdrfoamed asphalt thickness num inch .
num .
do not take nuclear gauge counts at elevations less than num inches below finished surface .
num .
correction for oversize material does not apply .
num .
a sample must contain no more than num percent retained on the numinch sieve and num percent retained on the numinch sieve .
num .
use the laboratory wet test maximum density closest in proximity to the lot to determine relative compaction .
if the relative compaction for a lot is less than num percent perform california test num and california test num for each noncompliant lot and recalculate the relative compaction .
num .
measure relative compaction at each elevation enum enum and enum .
do not average the elevation compaction measurements at each location .
before starting fdrfoamed asphalt activities calibrate the asphalt meter in the presence of the engineer in compliance with the material plant quality program .
the engineer determines the frequency of testing and calibration .
before placing hma test moisture content at mid depth of the fdrfoamed asphalt layer under california test num .
sampling must not introduce water to the material .
test in the engineers presence .
numdnumb preoperation meeting in addition to the listed personnel in section numdnum the preoperation meeting must be attended by your section num reclaimed pavements num num .
fdrfoamed asphalt machine operators num .
grading and compacting equipment operators numdnumc test strip the engineer tests each test strip under section numdnum and california test num .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb mix design sampling and testing the fdrfoamed asphalt mix design process must comply with california test num .
notify the engineer at least num business days before sampling for a mix design .
obtain representative pavement and underlying base material samples for fdrfoamed asphalt from the test pits .
if additional samples of subgrade material are needed test pits can be excavated outside the edge of pavement to variable dimensions .
characterize and record test pit features such as layer thicknesses and types distresses interlayers thin or thick areas digouts and adhesion to the base .
use the sampled material to determine the mix design according to the proportions of the pavement structure shown .
before opening the mix design sampling locations to traffic backfill test pits by replacing and compacting the remaining excavated materials .
place and compact authorized material or minor hma complying with section num to the existing grade and thickness of ac in the engineers presence .
when mix design sampling is complete at all locations remove authorized backfill material at test pit locations and place and compact with minor hma to existing grade .
numdnumc quality control sampling and testing assign a ground supervisor whose sole purpose is to monitor the fdrfoamed asphalt activities advise project personnel and interface with the quality control testing personnel .
the ground supervisor must not have any sampling or testing duties .
perform sampling and testing for each test strip and at the specified frequency for the quality characteristics shown in the following table fdrfoamed asphalt quality characteristic sampling locations and testing frequencies quality characteristic test method sampling location minimum testing frequency moisture content before hma paving california test num mid depth one per num lots asphalt binder expansion ratio asphalt binder spray bar one before start of fdrfoamed asphalt work each day and num per day asphalt binder halflife gradation california test num loose mix after pulverizing and mixing test strip and num per lot moisture content california test num test strip and num per daya inplace wet density california test num test strip and num per daya relative compaction california test num compacted mix test strip and num per lot indirect dry tensile strength california test num loose mix after pulverizing and mixing test strip indirect wet tensile strength california test num tensile strength ratio california test num aif lot fails minimum test frequency is one per lot .
section num reclaimed pavements num take a numquart asphalt binder sample and record the temperature from the truck for each load delivered to the job site .
sample asphalt binder in the engineers presence and provide the sample to the engineer .
take num thickness core for every lot .
record the location and station or postmile for each thickness core .
numdnum department acceptance the department accepts fdrfoamed asphalt based on num .
visual inspection for num .
segregation raveling and loose material num .
variance of more than num foot measured from the lower edge of a numfoot straightedge num .
uniform surface texture throughout the work limits num .
repaired areas num .
compliance with the quality characteristics shown in the following table fdrfoamed asphalt requirements for acceptance quality characteristic test method requirements relative compaction min california test num num at each elevation enum enum and enum thickness ft a core measurements num ft of the specified thickness atake num or numinch cores from random locations the engineer selects .
the engineer may require num locations per lot coring more than three locations per lot is change order work .
at time of coring submit cores to the engineer for measurement .
num materials numa general the quality characteristics of the fdrfoamed asphalt must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num reclaimed pavements num fdrfoamed asphalt quality characteristic requirements quality characteristic test method requirement moisture content before hma paving california test num num of omc asphalt binder expansion ratio min note a num asphalt binder halflife seconds min num gradation passing sieve size num inch num inch num inch california test num num num num moisture content california test num omc num num inplace wet density lbcu ft california test num report only relative compaction min california test num num indirect dry tensile strength psib california test num num of mix design value indirect wet tensile strength psib california test num num of mix design value tensile strength ratio california test num num of mix design value atest at the foaming temperature and percentage of foaming water by dry weight of fdrfoamed asphalt material designated in the mix design .
to test asphalt binder expansion ratio and halflife use a pail of known volume and a dipstick calibrated for the pail .
from the inspection nozzle on the asphalt binder spray bar inject foamed asphalt into the pail without exceeding the pails capacity .
with the dipstick immediately measure and record the level of foamed asphalt in the pail .
record the halflife in seconds from the time the injection of foamed asphalt in the pail is turned off to half the dip stick reading after peak .
calculate the expansion ratio as the volume of the foamed asphalt upon injection divided by the volume of the unfoamed asphalt binder .
bfrom material passing the numinch sieve compact num specimens under california test num part num .
cure the specimens at num degrees f for num hours and allow the specimens to cool to room temperature .
test num specimens for dry tensile strength under california test num .
test num specimens for wet tensile strength under california test num after moisture conditioning .
numb asphalt binder asphalt binder must be pg num .
do not heat asphalt binder above num degree f. numc core backfill material material to fill cored holes for thickness measurements must be packaged rapidhardening cementitious material under astm cnum type rnum or rnum .
num construction numa general do not start fdrfoamed asphalt activities if the ambient air temperature is below num degrees f or the road surface is below num degrees f. if the ambient air temperature falls below num degrees f during fdrfoamed asphalt activities you may only compact and finish fdrfoamed asphalt .
numb equipment the fdrfoamed asphalt machine must have independent and interlocked systems for water and foamed asphalt and each must include num .
digital electronic controller system num .
pumping system section num reclaimed pavements num num .
spray bar system based on the mix design of the material being reclaimed and the equipments forward speed num .
controller pumping and spray bar systems must regulate the foamed asphalt and the moisture content of the pulverized material .
num .
rate by weight of foaming water must be controlled with the same controller .
spray bars must be fitted with selfcleaning nozzles or nozzles that indicate flow .
space the nozzles evenly at a rate of num nozzle for every num to num inches of mixing chamber width .
apply the asphalt binder atomized under pressure through individual and separate small orifices .
fit an inspection nozzle at num end of the asphalt binder spray bar .
the inspection nozzle must produce a representative sample of foamed asphalt .
asphalt binder storage equipment must num .
be attached to the fdrfoamed asphalt machine num .
not leak num .
have a sampling valve num .
have a heating system to maintain the temperature of asphalt binder above num degrees f including when the asphalt binder is injected num .
have a thermometer in the asphalt binder feed line before introduction of water use a mass flow coriolis effect type asphalt meter with a visible readout display and printing capabilities .
the distance from the foamed asphalt spray nozzle to the top of the cutter tooth holder must be at least equal to the cut depth .
storage equipment for compaction water must be attached to the fdrfoamed asphalt machine and not leak .
the fdrfoamed asphalt machine must spread the mixed material or a screed mounted on the machine may be used .
compacting equipment must consist of num vibratory sheepsfoot roller with a blade for each fdrfoamed asphalt machine a vibratory steel drum roller and a pneumatictired roller .
all compacting equipment must be selfpropelled and reversible .
the frequency and amplitude of vibrating rollers must be adjustable and exceed a force of num tons in vibratory mode .
numc spreading materials reserved numd pulverizing and mixing do not leave a wedge where the pulverizing drum cuts into the existing material .
the numst cut width must use the full width of the pulverizing drum .
subsequent cuts must overlap by at least num inches .
do not leave a gap of unpulverized material between cuts .
with each cut adjust the quantity of water and foamed asphalt proportionally to the actual cut width .
if a cut deviates more than num inches outside the cut line immediately adjust .
if a cut deviates more than num inches inside the cut line immediately back up and pulverize the deviation along the correct cut line without adding water or foamed asphalt .
mark the existing pavement where the center of the pulverizing drum stops .
start the following cut on this alignment at least num feet behind the mark .
the injection rate of asphalt binder must be the percent by dry weight of pulverized material designated in the mix design but not less than num percent .
notify the engineer if adjustments to the asphalt binder injection rate are necessary .
the injection rate of mixing water must be sufficient to produce the fdrfoamed asphalt material moisture content shown in table titled fdrfoamed asphalt quality characteristic requirements at time of compaction .
section num reclaimed pavements num do not apply water to an uncompacted surface .
do not allow more than num hours between mixing the pulverized material with foamed asphalt and cement and completion of compaction with vibratory steel drum rollers .
nume compacting and grading immediately after pulverizing and mixing compact fdrfoamed asphalt with a sheepsfoot roller .
each sheepsfoot roller must stay within num feet of its fdrfoamed asphalt train .
do not add water or use a motor grader to spread material until initial compaction with sheepsfoot rollers is complete .
during grading and final compaction with vibratory steel drum rollers add water to maintain the moisture content as shown in the table titled fdrfoamed asphalt quality characteristic requirements .
numf finishing immediately after compaction apply water and roll with pneumatictired rollers or steel drum roller with no vibration .
the finished surface must be free of ruts bumps indentations segregation raveling and any loose material .
keep the compacted surface damp by lightly watering until asphaltic emulsion is applied .
apply a coat of diluted asphaltic emulsion to the finished surface when it is damp but free of standing water .
the application rate of asphaltic emulsion must be from num to num galsq yd .
do not water after applying asphaltic emulsion .
place temporary traffic control .
do not open to traffic without the engineers authorization .
maintain the fdrfoamed asphalt surface free of ruts bumps indentations raveling and segregation .
repair damaged fdrfoamed asphalt material with minor hma .
take cores to determine the finished fdrfoamed asphalt thickness before placing hma .
if a core indicates fdrfoamed asphalt thickness is less than the specified thickness by more than num foot core in the vicinity of the noncompliant core to determine the extent of the deficient thickness .
remove the fdrfoamed asphalt material deficient in thickness by cold planing to a depth of num foot below the finished fdrfoamed asphalt grade .
replace the planed fdrfoamed asphalt with the hma specified for the project and compact under the method compaction specifications in section numc .
immediately before placing hma apply asphaltic emulsion at a rate from num to num percent residual binder content .
do not place hma until authorized .
num payment the payment quantity for asphalt binder is measured as specified for asphalt in section num .
the department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in cement or asphalt binder quantities .
num full depth reclamationcement num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing a reclaimed pavement base using fdrcement .
constructing an fdrcement base includes num .
pulverizing existing asphalt concrete pavement and underlying materials num .
mixing with water cement and if specified supplementary aggregate num .
grading and compacting the mixture num .
applying asphaltic emulsion numb definitions lot num sq yd of fdrcement section num reclaimed pavements num numc submittals numcnum general with the qc plan submit the mix design .
numcnum quality assurance submittals numcnuma general reserved numcnumb mix design submit each fdrcement mix design on a form you create specifically for fdrcement .
each mix design submittal must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
you may submit multiple mix designs to optimize the cement content and adjust for varying underlying materials .
each mix design submittal must include num .
area represented by the mix design by beginning and ending stations num .
gradation of the mixture before addition of cement num .
cement content in percent by weight of the dry mixture and in lbsq yd surface application rate num .
supplementary aggregate in percent by weight of the dry mixture if supplementary aggregate is specified num .
moisture content of the material when mixing relative to omc num .
test results and any worksheets photographs and graphs numcnumc quality control reporting with the daily report submit the following based on the testing frequencies specified or if not specified once per lot num .
general information num .
weather num .
ambient air temperature before starting daily fdrcement activities including time of temperature reading num .
road surface temperature before starting daily fdrcement activities including time of temperature reading num .
average forward speed of pulverizing equipment num .
fdrcement quality control test results for unconfined compressive strength with the daily report submit the test results for the quality characteristics within the times after sampling shown in the following table fdrcement quality characteristic test result reporting time allowances quality characteristic maximum reporting time allowance water sulfates before work starts water chlorides gradation num hours moisture content laboratory maximum wet density relative compaction unconfined compressive strength num hours after testing specimens numd quality assurance numdnum general relative compaction must be determined under california test num and the following num .
test in numfoot depth intervals from the bottom of the fdrcement layer regardless of the layer thickness section num reclaimed pavements num num .
correction for oversize material does not apply num .
a sample must contain no more than num percent retained on the numinch sieve and num percent retained on the num inch sieve num .
use the laboratory wet test maximum density closest in proximity to the lot to determine relative compaction .
if the relative compaction for a lot is less than num percent perform california test num and california test num for each noncompliant lot and recalculate the relative compaction the engineer tests each test strip under section numdnum .
numdnum mix design the mix design must include numday unconfined compressive strength tests on specimens with num cement contents using the proposed cement and optimum mixing moisture content .
the cement contents must be num percent of specified content specified content and num percent of specified content by dry weight of fdrcement .
manufacture num specimens for each cement content and average the results for each .
plot the average numday compressive strengths on the ordinate versus the cement contents in percent on the abscissa on a graph .
indicate the cement contents from the line corresponding to the minimum and maximum numday compressive strengths from the specified range .
based on the mix design test results you may propose a cement content different from the specified cement content .
if you propose a different cement content your mix design submittal must include data to support num the specified cement content will not produce fdrcement that complies with the specifications or num there is variability in the fdrcement materials resulting in risk of not complying with the specifications .
the revised cement content must be authorized .
compensation or deductions for an ordered increase or decrease is specified in section num .
notify the engineer at least num business days before sampling .
use materials from the specified fdrcement mixing depth .
if any portion of existing asphalt concrete pavement is to be removed before pulverizing remove that portion of asphalt concrete pavement from the samples used in the mix design .
if additional samples of subgrade material are needed sampling locations can be excavated outside the edge of pavement to variable dimensions .
characterize and record sampling location features such as layer thicknesses and types distresses interlayers thin or thick areas digouts and adhesion to the base .
use the sampled material to determine the mix design represented by the sampling location according to the proportions of the pavement structure shown .
before opening the mix design sampling locations to traffic backfill sampling locations by replacing and compacting with an authorized material or minor hma that complies with section num .
backfill and compact to the existing grade and thickness of asphalt concrete pavement in the engineers presence .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb sampling and testing assign a ground supervisor whose sole purpose is to monitor the fdrcement activities advise project personnel and interface with the quality control testing personnel .
the ground supervisor must not have any sampling or testing duties .
test the quality characteristics of fdrcement shown in the following table section num reclaimed pavements num fdrcement quality characteristic sampling locations and testing frequencies quality characteristic test method minimum sampling and testing frequency sampling location gradation california test num test strip and num per lot loose mix after pulverizing and mixing moisture content california test num test strip and num per daya loose mix after pulverizing and mixing b unconfined compressive strength astm dnum test strip and num per num lots loose mix after pulverizing and mixing b laboratory maximum wet density california test num test strip and num per day same location as a california test num test relative compaction c california test num test strip and num per lot compacted mix aif test fails minimum test frequency is num per lot b sample immediately after mixing is complete cverify the moisture content reading made under california test num with california test num .
measure and record the actual cut depth at both ends of the pulverizing drum at least once every num feet along the cut length .
take measurements in the engineers presence .
numdnum department acceptance the department accepts fdrcement based on num .
visual inspection for the following num .
segregation raveling and loose material num .
variance of more than num foot measured from the lower edge of a numfoot straightedge num .
uniform surface texture throughout the work limits num .
repaired areas num .
compliance with the quality characteristics shown in the following table fdrcement requirements for acceptance quality characteristic test method value cement application rate lbsq yd calibrated tray or equal mix design rate num relative compaction min wet density california test num num thickness ft a core measurements num of the thickness shown a take num or numinch diameter cores from random locations the engineer selects .
the engineer may require num locations per lot coring more than num locations per lot is change order work .
at time of coring submit cores to the engineer for measurement .
num materials numa general the quality characteristics for the fdrcement must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num reclaimed pavements num fdrcement quality characteristic requirements quality characteristic test method requirement gradation passing sieve size num inch num inch num inch california test num num num num moisture content california test num mix design num percent unconfined compressive strength psi astm dnuma specified in section numdnuma laboratory maximum wet density lbcu ft california test num use for relative compaction calculation relative compaction min wet densityb california test num num a method a except num .
test specimens must be compacted under astm dnum method a or b .
num .
test specimens must be cured by sealing each specimen with num layers of plastic at least num mil thick .
the plastic must be tight around the specimen .
seal all seams with duct tape to prevent moisture loss .
sealed specimens must be placed in an oven for num days at num num degrees f. at the end of the cure period specimens must be removed from the oven and aircooled .
duct tape and plastic wrap must be removed before capping .
specimens must not be soaked before testing .
bverify the moisture content reading made under california test num with california test num .
numb cement reserved numc water reserved numd supplementary aggregate if supplementary aggregate is specified supplementary aggregate must comply with the specifications for class num aggregate base in section num .
nume core backfill material material to fill cored holes for thickness measurements must be packaged rapidhardening cementitious material under astm cnum type rnum or rnum .
num construction numa general do not start fdrcement activities if the ambient air temperature is below num degrees f or the road surface is below num degrees f. if the ambient air temperature falls below num degrees f during fdr cement activities you may only compact and finish fdrcement .
numb equipment the fdrcement machine must have independent and interlocked systems for water and must include the following num .
digital electronic controller system num .
pumping system num .
spray bar system storage equipment for water must not leak and must be attached to the fdrcement machine with a tow bar and hose .
grading and compacting equipment must be selfpropelled and reversible .
the frequency and amplitude of vibrating rollers must be adjustable and exceed a force of num tons in vibratory mode .
section num reclaimed pavements num numc pulverizing do not pulverize more material than can be mixed with cement and compacted in one day .
do not leave a wedge where the pulverizing drum cuts into the existing material .
the numst cut width must use the full width of the pulverizing drum .
subsequent cuts must overlap at least num inches .
do not leave a gap of unpulverized material between cuts .
if an overlap is more than num inches immediately adjust .
if an overlap is less than num inches immediately back up and pulverize the deviation along the correct cut line .
mark the existing pavement where the center of the pulverizing drum stops .
start the following cut on this alignment at least num feet behind the mark .
numd spreading materials spread cement uniformly over the full roadway surface width .
do not spread cement more than num minutes before mixing .
do not apply dry cement in windy conditions that will result in dust outside the fdrcement area .
the spread rate must be the mix design rate or the ordered rate in lbsq yd num percent .
do not spread cement and supplementary aggregate before pulverizing .
nume mixing the overlap requirements in section numc apply to mixing .
with each cut adjust the quantity of water proportionally to the actual cut width .
if an overlap is less than num inches immediately back up and pulverize the deviation along the correct line without adding water or cement .
water must be injected through the pulverizing machine .
the injection rate of mixing water must be sufficient to produce the fdrcement material mixing moisture content described in the mix design .
mark where the center of the pulverizing drum stops .
start the following cut on this alignment at least num feet behind the mark .
numf compacting and grading immediately after pulverizing and mixing compact fdrcement to the minimum relative compaction .
do not allow more than num hours between final mixing of the pulverized material with cement and completion of compaction with vibratory steel drum rollers .
during grading and final compaction with vibratory steel drum rollers add water to maintain the mixing moisture content as described in the mix design .
numg finishing immediately after compaction apply water and roll with pneumatictired rollers or steel drum roller with no vibration .
the finished surface must be free of ruts bumps indentations segregation raveling and any loose material .
keep the compacted surface damp by lightly watering until asphaltic emulsion is applied .
during the period from num to num hours after compaction microcrack the surface by applying num single passes with a numton vibratory steel drum roller at maximum amplitude travelling from num to num mph regardless of whether asphaltic emulsion has been applied .
apply a coat of diluted asphaltic emulsion to the finished surface when it is damp but free of standing water .
the application rate of asphaltic emulsion must be from num to num galsq yd .
do not water after applying asphaltic emulsion .
do not open to traffic without authorization .
maintain the fdrcement surface free of ruts bumps indentations raveling and segregation .
repair damaged fdrcement material with minor hma .
take cores to determine the finished fdrcement thickness before placing hma .
if a core indicates fdrcement thickness is less than the specified thickness by more than num foot core in the vicinity of the noncompliant core to determine the extent of the deficient thickness .
remove the fdrcement material deficient in thickness by cold planing to a depth of num foot below the finished fdrcement grade .
replace the planed fdrcement with the hma specified for the project and compact under section numc .
section num reclaimed pavements num immediately before placing hma apply asphaltic emulsion at a rate from num to num percent residual binder content .
do not place hma until authorized .
num payment if an increase or decrease in the specified cement content is ordered payment for the increase or decrease in cement is the cost of cement per ton fob from the cement mill including sales tax plus the freight cost per ton for delivery from the mill to the job site .
if any cash or trade discount is offered or available regardless of whether it is taken that discount is deducted .
maintain records that allow a clear determination of the cement costs associated with an ordered increase or decrease .
submit evidence of the cost of cement used for the increase or decrease .
if your records show an excessive cost for the increase or decrease of cement or you furnish inadequate evidence for the cost the engineer determines the cost to be the lowest wholesale price the cement was available for in the quantities delivered to the point of production less any available discounts .
the quantity of cement subject to an increase or decrease in payment is the difference between the specified theoretical quantity of cement and the quantity of cement ordered .
num reserved num crack and seat num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing a base by cracking seating and preparing the surface of existing concrete pavement .
section num does not apply to crack and seat .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit each core in a plastic bag or tube for authorization at the time of sampling .
mark each core with a location description .
numd quality assurance numdnum general if cracking is noncompliant num .
stop crack and seat work num .
modify your equipment and procedures and crack the noncompliant pavement again num .
construct another test section num .
take additional core samples to verify compliance num .
construct an inspection strip if the concrete pavement has hma on the surface numdnum test section the engineer determines and marks a test section up to num sq ft within the crack and seat area shown .
construct the test section and obtain the engineers verbal authorization before starting crack and seat work .
immediately before cracking the test section apply water to the pavement surface so that cracking can be readily evaluated .
crack the test section and vary impact energy and striking patterns to verify your procedure .
numdnum quality control drill cores at least num inches in diameter under astm cnum to verify cracking in the engineers presence .
take at least num cores per test section and num core per lane mile for each pavement cracking machine used .
the engineer determines the core locations .
section num reclaimed pavements num numdnum department acceptance reserved num materials numa general use fastsetting or polyester concrete to fill core holes .
num construction numa general reserved numb cracking crack existing concrete pavement using the procedures and equipment from the authorized test section .
do not allow flying debris during cracking operations .
crack existing concrete pavement into segments that nominally measure num feet transversely by num feet longitudinally .
if the existing pavement is already cracked into segments crack it into equalsized square or rectangular pieces that nominally measure not more than num feet transversely and from num to num feet longitudinally .
do not impact the pavement within num foot of another break line pavement joint or edge of pavement .
cracks must be vertical continuous and penetrate the full depth of pavement .
cracks must be within num inches of vertical along the full depth of pavement .
do not cause surface spalling over numfoot deep or excessive shattering of the pavement or base .
cracking equipment must impact the pavement with a variable force in a controlled location .
do not use unguided freefalling weights such as headache balls .
if the concrete pavement has no more than num foot of asphalt concrete on the surface you may crack the pavement without removing the asphalt concrete .
after cracking construct an inspection strip by removing at least num square feet of asphalt concrete at a location determined by the engineer .
construct additional inspection strips to demonstrate compliance where ordered by the engineer .
after cracking allow public traffic on the cracked or initial pavement layer for no more than num days .
numc seating seat cracked concrete by making at least num passes over the cracked concrete with either num .
oscillating type pneumatictired roller at least num feet wide .
pneumatic tires must be of equal size diameter type and ply .
the tires must be inflated to num psi minimum and maintained so that the air pressure does not vary more than num psi .
the rollers gross static weight must be at least num tons .
num .
vibratory padfoot roller exerting a dynamic centrifugal force of at least num tons .
a pass is num movement of a roller in either direction at num mph or less .
after all segments have been seated clean loose debris from joints and cracks using compressed air free of moisture and oil .
reseat any segment of cracked pavement that has not been overlaid within num hours of seating .
numd surface preparation before opening cracked and seated pavement to traffic or overlaying num .
fill joints cracks and spalls wider than num inch and deeper than num inch by applying tack coat and placing minor hma under section num except use the no .
num gradation instead of numinch .
num .
remove all loose debris and sweep the pavement .
section num reclaimed pavements num nume reserved num payment the payment quantity for crack and seat is the area measured with no deductions for existing cracked segments .
num reserved num division v surfacings and pavements num general num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for constructing surfacings and pavements .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum preconstruction meetings at least num business days before the start of surfacing and pavement operations hold a preconstruction meeting with the engineer and your num .
project manager num .
qc manager num .
project superintendent num .
project foreman num .
plant manager num .
traffic control foreman num .
subcontractors foremen meeting attendees must sign an attendance sheet provided by the engineer .
the engineer retains the attendance sheet .
discuss the project specifications and the processes for producing materials and constructing each item of work including num .
quality assurance num .
quality control num .
department acceptance num .
placement of materials num .
training num .
checklists num .
test sections or trial slabs num .
contingency plan num .
issues specific to the project including num .
weather num .
alignment and geometrics num .
traffic control issues num .
haul distances num .
presence and absence of shaded areas num .
other local issues do not place trial slabs construct test strips or start paving activities until the listed personnel have attended the meeting .
num materials not used section num general num num construction not used num payment not used num base bond breaker num general numa summary section num includes specifications for applying or placing a base bond breaker between a base and concrete pavement .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of base bond breaker material delivered .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials the base bond breaker must be one of the following base bond breaker no .
description num pg asphalt binder grade pg num num curing compound no .
num num white opaque polyethylene film under astm cnum except the minimum thickness must be num mils num white curing paper under astm cnum num geosynthetic bond breaker num construction numa general before applying or placing a base bond breaker remove foreign and loose materials from the base .
do not place a base bond breaker until the base has cured .
pave over the base bond breaker within num hours of placing it .
numb applying and placing base bond breaker select a bond breaker to apply or place over the base material as shown in the following table base material bond breaker no .
lcb num num num concrete base lcb rapid setting num num num rsc base ctpb existing base apply base bond breaker no .
num in a single application at a uniform rate from num to num galsq yd over the entire surface of the base .
cure for at least num hours before paving .
mix base bond breaker no .
num as specified for mixing curing compound for concrete .
apply the bond breaker in num or more applications to achieve a coverage rate of at least num galsq yd over the entire surface of the base .
cure for at least num hours before paving .
section num general num place base bond breakers no .
num and num without wrinkles .
overlap adjacent sheets a minimum of num inches in the same direction as the concrete pour .
tape or bond the sheets together as needed to prevent the sheets from folding or wrinkling .
secure the bond breaker such that it remains in place during concrete placement .
ensure that no concrete gets under the bond breaker .
place base bond breaker no .
num without wrinkles .
overlap adjacent sheets a minimum of num inches in the same direction as the concrete pour .
overlap no more than num layers at any location .
secure the base bond breaker to the base with pins or nails punched through galvanized washers or discs from num to num inches in diameter .
place fasteners less than num feet apart along the edges and num feet apart elsewhere .
if the bond breaker moves or wrinkles during concrete pavement placement use more fasteners at a smaller spacing .
ensure that no concrete gets under the bond breaker .
num payment the payment quantity for base bond breaker does not include the quantity used for overlaps .
num pavement smoothness num general numa summary section num includes specifications for measuring the smoothness of pavement surfaces .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general reserved numcnum inertial profiler certification at least num business days before starting initial profiling or changing the inertial profiler or operator submit num .
inertial profiler certification issued by the department num .
operator certification for the inertial profiler issued by the department num .
manufacturers instructions and test procedures for calibration and verification of the inertial profiler within num business days after crosscorrelation testing submit a proval profiler certification analysis report for the test results to the engineer and to the electronic mailbox address smoothnessdot.ca.gov .
numcnum inertial profiler data at least num days before inertial profiling you must register with the departments secure file sharing system .
to obtain information on the registration process send an email with your contact information to smoothnessdot.ca.gov .
within num business days after each day of profiling submit the profile information to the engineer and to the departments secure file sharing system .
after submitting the profile information to the departments file sharing system send a notification of your electronic submittal to the engineer and to the above electronic mailbox address with the names of the files submitted .
the profiling information must include num .
raw profile data for each lane .
num .
proval ride quality analysis report for the international roughness index of the left and right wheel paths of each lane .
submit each report as a pdf file .
num .
proval ride quality analysis report for the mean roughness index of each lane .
submit each report as a pdf file .
num .
proval smoothness assurance analysis report for the international roughness index of the left and right wheel paths of each lane .
submit each report as a pdf file .
num .
proval smoothness assurance analysis reports for the grinding locations of the left and right wheel paths of each lane .
submit each report as a pdf file .
num .
gps data file for each lane .
submit the data file in gps exchange file format .
num .
manufacturers recommended calibration and verification test results for the inertial profiler .
section num general num num .
inertial profilers calibration and verification test results including results for bounce block and the distance measurement instrument .
submit the raw profile data in an unfiltered electronic pavement profile file format .
use the following file naming convention yyyymmdd_ttcccrrr_ea_d_l_w_b_e_x_pt.ppf where yyyy year mm month leading zero dd day of month leading zero tt district leading zero ccc county num or numletter abbreviation as shown in section num rrr route number with no leading zeros ea contract number excluding the district identification number expressed as num characters d traffic direction nb sb wb or eb l lane number from left to right in the direction of travel w wheel path l for left r for right or b for both b beginning station to the nearest foot such as num or beginning post mile to the nearest hundredth such as num with no leading zero e ending station to the nearest foot such as num or ending post mile to the nearest hundredth such as num with no leading zero x profile operation exist for existing pavement inter for after prepaving smoothness correction pave for after paving and corr for after final surface pavement correction pt type of hma or concrete pavement such as type a hma rhmag jpcp or crcp if you are submitting multiple inertial profiler data files compress the files into a .zip file format and submit them using the filenaming convention tt_ea_x_yyyymmdd.zip .
numcnum straightedge measurements within num business days of measuring smoothness with a straightedge submit a list of the areas requiring smoothness correction .
identify the areas by num .
location number num .
districtcountyroute num .
beginning station or post mile to the nearest num mile num .
for correction areas within a traffic lane num .
lane direction nb sb eb or wb num .
lane number from left to right in the direction of travel num .
wheel path l for left r for right or b for both num .
for correction areas not within a traffic lane num .
identify the pavement area such as shoulder weigh station or turnout num .
direction and distance from the centerline l for left or r for right num .
estimated size of correction area numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum certifications the inertial profiler must display a current certification decal showing the expiration date .
the certifications for the inertial profiler and operator must not be more than num months old .
the operator must be certified for each model of inertial profiler operated .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved section num general num numdnumb smoothness numdnumbi general test pavement smoothness using an inertial profiler except use a numfoot straightedge for the pavement at num .
traffic lanes less than num feet in length including ramps turn lanes and acceleration and deceleration lanes num .
areas within num feet of manholes num .
shoulders num .
weighinmotion areas num .
miscellaneous areas such as medians gore areas turnouts and maintenance pullouts where inertial profiler testing is required num .
determine the pavement smoothness for each traffic lane by obtaining the international roughness index for the left and right wheel paths in an individual lane .
the average of the international roughness index values for the left and right wheel paths for the same traffic lane is the mean roughness index of the lane .
the wheel paths are a pair of lines num feet from and parallel to the edge of a traffic lane .
left and right wheel paths are based on the direction of travel .
num .
identify the areas of localized roughness using the fhwas engineering software proval to perform smoothness assurance analysis .
calculate the continuous international roughness index values for each wheel path with a numfoot interval using a num mm filter .
where ogfc is required test pavement smoothness of the final hma or concrete pavement surface before placing ogfc and after placing ogfc .
numdnumbii inertial profiler calibration and verification tests notify the engineer at least num business days before performing calibration and verification testing of the inertial profiler .
conduct the following calibration and verification tests in the engineers presence each day before profiling num .
block test to verify the accuracy of the height sensor under california test num .
num .
bounce test to verify the combined accuracy of the height sensor and accelerometer under california test num .
num .
distance measurement instrument test to verify the accuracy of the distance measuring instrument under california test num .
num .
manufacturers recommended tests .
conduct a crosscorrelation verification test of the inertial profiler in the engineers presence before performing the initial profiling .
a verification test must be performed at least annually .
conduct num repeat runs of the inertial profiler on an authorized test section .
the test section must be a nummile segment of existing concrete pavement if you are measuring new concrete pavement or existing asphalt concrete pavement if you are measuring new asphalt concrete pavement .
calculate a crosscorrelation to determine the repeatability of your device under california test num using a proval profiler certification analysis with a numfoot maximum offset .
the crosscorrelation must be a minimum of num .
numdnumbiii performing analyzing and collecting data operate the inertial profiler under the manufacturers instructions and aashto r num at numinch recording intervals .
for concrete pavement use a minimum numinch line laser sensor .
collect profiling data under aashto r num and analyze it using num mm and international roughness index filters .
while collecting the profile data to determine the international roughness index values record the following locations in the raw profile data at the beginning and end of all num .
bridge approach slabs num .
bridges num .
culverts visible on the roadway surface section num general num num .
atgrade intersections profile the left and right wheel paths of each lane .
determine the mean roughness index for nummile fixed sections using the proval ride quality analysis with a num mm filter .
calculate the mean roughness index of each lane .
a partial section less than num mile that is the result of an interruption to a continuous pavement surface must comply with the mean roughness index specifications for a full section .
adjust the mean roughness index for a partial section to reflect a full section based on the proportion of a paved section .
determine the areas of localized roughness using proval with a continuous international roughness index for each wheel path with a numfoot interval using a num mm filter .
numdnum department acceptance the department accepts pavement surfaces for smoothness based on compliance with the smoothness specifications for the type of pavement surface specified .
for areas that require pavement smoothness determined using a numfoot straightedge the pavement surface must not vary from the lower edge of the straightedge by more than num .
num foot when the straightedge is laid parallel with the centerline num .
num foot when the straightedge is laid perpendicular to the centerline and extends from edge to edge of a traffic lane num .
num foot when the straightedge is laid within num feet of a pavement conform for each nummile section your international roughness index values must be within num percent of the departments international roughness index values .
the engineer may order you to recalibrate your inertial profiler equipment and reprofile .
if your results are inaccurate due to operator error the engineer may disqualify your inertial profiler operator .
num materials not used num construction notify the engineer of the start location by station and start time at least num business days before profiling .
before profiling remove foreign objects from the pavement surface and mark the beginning and ending station on the pavement shoulder .
the stationing must be the same when profiling more than one surface .
num payment not used num residue containing lead from paint and thermoplastic reserved num reserved num num bituminous seals num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for applying bituminous seals .
section num does not apply .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance the emulsion and binder suppliers must attend the preconstruction meeting .
num materials not used num construction numa general asphaltic emulsion for seal coats may be reheated if necessary .
after loading the asphaltic emulsion into a tank car or truck for transport to the job site do not heat it above num degrees f. during reheating agitate the asphaltic emulsion to prevent localized overheating .
except for fog seal coats apply setting grade num asphaltic emulsions at a temperature from num to num degrees f and apply setting grade num asphaltic emulsions from num to num degrees f. asphaltic emulsion must not cool to a temperature below num degrees f. numb equipment distributor trucks must be equipped with num .
pressuretype system with insulated tanks num .
spray bars num .
with minimum length of num feet and fullcirculating type num .
with fullcirculatingtype extensions if needed to cover a greater width num .
adjustable to allow positioning at various heights above the surface to be treated num .
operated by levers such that num or all valves may be quickly opened or closed in one operation num .
devices and charts to provide for accurate and rapid determination and control of asphaltic emulsion quantities being applied .
include an auxiliary wheel type bitumeter that registers num .
speed in ftmin num .
trip by count num .
total distance in feet num .
distribution system num .
capable of producing a uniform application of liquid asphalt in controlled amounts ranging from num to num galsq yd of surface and a pressure range from num to num psi num .
with a hose and nozzle for application to areas inaccessible to the distributor num .
with pressure gauges and a thermometer for determining temperatures of the asphaltic emulsion the use of gravity distributors is not allowed .
you may use cabcontrolled valves for the application of seals .
the valves controlling the flow from nozzles must act positively to provide a uniform unbroken application of asphaltic emulsion on the surface .
maintain distributor and storage tanks at all times to prevent dripping .
section num bituminous seals num num payment not used num seal coats num general numa general numanum summary section num includes general specifications for applying seal coats .
signs for seal coat work must comply with section num .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals reserved numanum quality assurance numanuma general reserved numanumb quality control reserved numanumc department acceptance the department accepts screenings based on the quality characteristic requirements specified in section numb .
if test results for the screenings gradation do not comply with the requirements in the table titled seal coat screenings you may remove the seal coat represented by these tests or request that it remain in place with a payment deduction .
if your request is authorized num per ton for noncompliant screenings left in place is deducted .
numb materials screenings must be broken stone crushed gravel or both .
at least num percent of screenings by weight must be crushed particles as determined under california test num .
screenings for seal coats must comply with the requirements shown in the following table seal coat screenings quality characteristic test method requirement los angeles rattler max loss at num revolutions loss at num revolutions california test num num num film stripping max california test num num numc construction numcnum general for seal coats on numlane twoway roadways place a wnum loose gravel sign and a wnump num mph plaque at numfoot maximum intervals along each side of the traveled way where screenings are spread on a traffic lane and at public roads or streets entering the seal coat area .
place the numst wnum sign in each direction where traffic first encounters the loose screenings regardless of which lane the screenings are spread .
a wnump num mph plaque is not required where the posted speed limit is less than num mph .
for seal coats on freeways expressways and multilane conventional highways place a wnum loose gravel sign and a wnump num mph plaque at numfoot maximum intervals along the outside edge of the traveled way nearest to the lane worked on at entrance ramps and at public roads or streets section num bituminous seals num entering the seal coat area .
place the numst wnum sign where the screenings start with respect to the direction of travel on that lane .
a wnump num mph plaque is not required where the posted speed limit is less than num mph .
maintain signs in place at each location until the final brooming of the seal coat surface for that location is complete .
signs may be set on temporary portable supports with the wnump plaque below the wnum sign or on barricades with the wnump plaque alternating with the wnum sign .
schedule the seal coat activities such that seal coat is placed on both lanes of the traveled way each work shift and such that numway traffic control is discontinued num hour before darkness .
at the end of the work shift the end of the seal coat on both lanes must generally match .
if traffic is routed over a surface where a seal coat application is intended the seal coat must not be applied to more than half the width of the traveled way at a time and the remaining width must be kept free of obstructions and open to traffic until the previously applied width is ready for traffic use .
wherever final sweeping or brooming of the seal coat surface is complete place permanent traffic stripes and pavement markings within num days .
if you fail to place the permanent traffic stripes and pavement markings within the specified time the department withholds num percent of the estimated value of the seal coat work completed that has not received permanent traffic stripes and pavement markings .
numcnum equipment equipment for seal coats must include and comply with the following num .
screenings haul trucks .
haul trucks must have num .
tailgates that discharge screenings num .
devices to lock onto the rear screenings spreader hitch num .
dump beds that will not push down on the spreader when fully raised num .
dump beds that will not spill screenings on the roadway when transferred to the spreader hopper num .
tarpaulins to cover precoated screenings if haul distance exceeds num minutes or ambient temperature is less than num degrees f num .
selfpropelled screenings spreader .
the spreader must have num .
screenings hopper in the rear num .
belt conveyors that carry the screenings to the front num .
spreading hopper capable of providing a uniform screening spread rate over the entire width of the traffic lane in num application .
num .
selfpropelled power brooms .
do not use gutter brooms or steeltined brooms .
brooms must be capable of removing loose screenings adjacent to barriers that prevent screenings from being swept off the roadway including curbs gutters dikes berms and railings .
num .
pneumatictired rollers .
pneumatictired rollers must be an oscillating type at least num feet wide .
each roller must be selfpropelled and reversible .
pneumatic tires must be of equal size diameter type and ply .
the roller must carry at least num lb of load on each wheel and each tire must have an air pressure of num num psi .
numcnum surface preparation before applying seal coat cover manholes valve and monument covers grates or other exposed facilities located within the area of application with plastic or oilresistant construction paper secured by tape or adhesive to the facility being covered .
reference the covered facilities with enough control points to locate the facilities after the application of the seal coat .
after completion of seal coat activities remove covers from the facilities .
immediately before applying seal coat clean the surface to receive seal coat by removing extraneous material and drying .
use brooms to clean the existing pavement .
numcnum applying emulsion and asphalt binder cover the edges of existing pavement not receiving seal coat using a material such as kraft paper .
remove the paper after the seal coat application .
section num bituminous seals num align longitudinal joints between seal coat applications with designated traffic lanes .
for emulsion overlap longitudinal joints by not more than num inches .
you may overlap longitudinal joints up to num inches if authorized .
for areas not accessible to a truck distributor bar apply the emulsion with a squeegee or other authorized means .
for asphalt binder hand spray nonaccessible areas .
you may overlap the emulsion or asphalt binder applications before the application of screenings at longitudinal joints .
do not apply the emulsion or asphalt binder unless enough screenings are at the job site to cover the emulsion or asphalt binder .
apply emulsion or asphalt binder to num lane at a time and cover the lane entirely with screening within the same work shift .
numcnum spreading screenings prevent vehicles from driving on asphaltic emulsion or asphalt binder before spreading screenings .
spread screenings at a uniform rate over the full lane width in num application .
broom excess screenings at joints before spreading adjacent screenings .
operate the spreader at speeds slow enough to prevent screenings from rolling over after dropping .
if the spreader is not moving screenings must not drop .
if you stop spreading and screenings drop remove the excess screenings before resuming activities .
numcnum finishing remove piles ridges or unevenly distributed screenings .
repair permanent ridges bumps or depressions in the finished surface .
spread additional screenings and roll if screenings are picked up by rollers or vehicles .
seal coat joints between adjacent applications of seal coat must be smooth straight uniform and completely covered .
longitudinal joints must be at lane lines and not overlap by more than num inches .
blend the adjacent applications by brooming .
a coverage must consist of the number of passes a roller needs to cover the width .
a pass must be num roller movement parallel to the seal coat application in either direction .
overlapping passes are part of the coverage being made and are not part of a subsequent coverage .
do not start a coverage until completing the previous coverage .
before opening to traffic finish seal coat in the following sequence num .
perform initial rolling consisting of num coverage with a pneumatictired roller num .
perform final rolling consisting of num coverages with a pneumatictired roller num .
broom excess screenings from the roadway and adjacent abutting areas num .
apply flush coat if specified the engineer may order salvaging and stockpiling excess screenings .
salvaging and stockpiling excess screenings is change order work .
dispose of excess screenings the engineer determines are not salvageable or dispose of them on embankment slopes or in authorized areas .
numcnum seal coat brooming broom seal coat surfaces for at least num consecutive days starting from the day screenings are applied .
brooming must num .
keep the surface free from loose screenings num .
distribute screenings over the surface so as to absorb any free asphaltic material num .
cover any areas deficient in cover coat material num .
prevent formation of corrugations section num bituminous seals num the engineer determines the exact time of brooming .
as a minimum brooming is required at the following times num .
on numlane numway roadways from num to num hours after traffic controlled with pilot cars has been routed on the seal coat num .
on multilane roadways from num to num hours after screenings have been placed num .
in addition to previous brooming immediately before opening any lane to traffic not controlled with pilot cars num .
on the morning following the application of screenings on any lane that has been open to traffic not controlled with pilot cars and before starting any other activities for numlane numway roadways under numway traffic control upon completion of secondary rolling traffic must be controlled with pilot cars and routed over the new seal coat for a period of num to num hours .
the engineer determines the exact period of time .
on multilane roadways start initial brooming after the screenings have been in place for a period of num to num hours .
if the initial brooming is not completed during the work shift in which the screenings were placed complete the initial brooming at the start of the next work shift .
control traffic with pilot cars and route on the new seal coat surface of the lane for a minimum of num hours after completion of the initial brooming and before opening the lane to traffic not controlled with pilot cars .
if traffic is controlled with pilot cars a maximum of num lane in the direction of travel must be open to traffic .
once traffic controlled with pilot cars is routed over the seal coat at a particular location continuous control must be maintained at that location until the seal coat placement and brooming on adjacent lanes to receive seal coat are completed .
after the num days remove excess screenings from the paved areas .
brooming must not displace screenings set in asphaltic material .
numd payment if a bid item for traffic control system is shown in the bid item list payment for furnishing and operating a pilot car is not included in the payment for any type of seal coat .
num fog seal coat numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for applying a fog seal coat .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit a num gal sample of the asphaltic emulsion in a plastic container .
take the sample from the distributor truck spray bar at midload .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials the engineer selects the grade of slowsetting asphaltic emulsion to be used .
if additional water is added to the asphaltic emulsion the resultant mixture must not be more than num part asphaltic emulsion to num part water .
the engineer determines the exact quantity of additional water .
numc construction apply asphaltic emulsion for the fog seal coat at a residual asphalt rate from num to num galsq yd .
the engineer determines the exact rate .
apply the fog seal coat when the ambient air temperature is above num degrees f. if the fog seal coat becomes tacky sprinkle water at a rate determined by the engineer .
section num bituminous seals num if a fog seal coat and seal coat with screenings are on the same project apply the fog seal coat at least num days before applying the adjoining seal coat with screenings .
the joint between the seal coats must be neat and uniform .
numd payment the department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the asphaltic emulsion fog seal coat quantity .
num flush coats numa general section num includes specifications for applying a flush coat .
applying a flush coat includes applying a fog seal coat followed by sand .
numb materials the engineer selects the grade of slowsetting or quicksetting asphaltic emulsion to be used .
sand for flush coat must comply with the material specifications for fine aggregate gradation in section numcnum .
sand must not include organic material or clay .
numc construction apply asphaltic emulsion for flush coat at a residual asphalt rate from num to num galsq yd .
the engineer determines the exact rate .
during flush coat activities close adjacent lanes to traffic .
do not track asphaltic emulsion on existing pavement surfaces .
apply sand immediately after the asphaltic emulsion application .
spread sand with a selfpropelled screenings spreader equipped with a mechanical device that spreads sand at a uniform rate over the full width of a traffic lane in a single application .
spread sand at a rate from num to num lbsq yd .
the engineer determines the exact rate .
numd payment the department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the sand cover seal quantity .
num asphaltic emulsion seal coat numa general numanum general numanuma summary section num includes specifications for applying an asphaltic emulsion seal coat .
applying an asphaltic emulsion seal coat includes applying asphaltic emulsion followed by screenings followed by a flush coat .
an asphaltic emulsion seal coat must be a nonpolymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat or a polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat .
a double asphaltic emulsion seal coat consists of the application of asphaltic emulsion followed by screenings applied twice in sequence .
numanumb definitions reserved numanumc submittals at least num days before starting asphaltic emulsion seal coat application submit the name of an authorized laboratory that will be performing asphaltic emulsion qc testing .
section num bituminous seals num submit a num gal sample of asphaltic emulsion in a plastic container to the engineer and to the authorized laboratory .
each sample must be submitted in an insulated shipping container within num hours of sampling .
within num days after taking samples submit the authorized laboratorys test results for asphaltic emulsion .
numanumd quality assurance samples for the screenings gradation and cleanness value must be taken from the spreader conveyor belt .
within num business days of sampling the authorized laboratory must test the asphaltic emulsion for num .
viscosity under aashto t num num .
sieve test under aashto t num num .
demulsibility under aashto t num num .
torsional recovery under california test num for polymer asphaltic emulsion num .
elastic recovery under aashto t num for polymer asphaltic emulsion circulate asphaltic emulsion in the distributor truck before sampling .
take samples from the distributor truck at midload or from a sampling tap or thief .
before taking samples draw and dispose of num gal .
in engineers presence take two num gal samples every num tons or at least num days production .
numanum materials not used numanum construction the engineer determines the exact application rate .
apply the asphaltic emulsion at an emulsion temperature from num to num degrees f. when tested under california test num the application rate for asphaltic emulsion must not vary from the average by more than num .
num percent in the transverse direction num .
num percent in the longitudinal direction you may stockpile screenings for asphaltic emulsion seal coat if you prevent contamination .
screenings must have damp surfaces at spreading .
if water visibly separates from the screenings do not spread .
you may redampen them in the delivery vehicle .
numanum payment not used numb nonpolymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat numbnum general numbnuma summary section numb includes specifications for applying a nonpolymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat .
numbnumb definitions reserved numbnumc submittals reserved numbnumd quality assurance numbnumdi general reserved numbnumdii quality control reserved section num bituminous seals num numbnumdiii department acceptance the department accepts screenings for nonpolymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat based on compliance with the cleanness value requirements specified in section numbnum .
if a test result for the screenings cleanness value is from num to less than num you may remove the seal coat represented by this test or request that it remain in place with a payment deduction .
if your request is authorized the department deducts the corresponding amount for the cleanness value shown in the following table asphaltic emulsion seal coat cleanness value deductions cleanness value deduction less than num numton num numton num numton if the screenings cleanness value is less than num remove the asphaltic emulsion seal coat .
numbnum materials screenings for nonpolymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat must have the gradation as determined under california test num in the following table nonpolymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat screenings gradation percentage passing sieve size coarse num max medium num max medium fine num max fine num max num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num num the cleanness value determined under california test num must be num or greater .
numbnum construction asphaltic emulsion must be applied within the application rate ranges shown in the following table asphaltic emulsion application rates screenings application rate range galsq yd fine num medium fine num medium num coarse num apply asphaltic emulsion when the ambient air temperature is from num to num degrees f and the pavement surface temperature is at least num degrees f. do not apply asphaltic emulsion when weather forecasts predict the ambient air temperature will fall below num degrees f within num hours after application .
for double asphaltic emulsion seal coat the asphaltic emulsion must be applied within the application rates shown in the following table section num bituminous seals num asphaltic emulsion application rates screenings application rate range galsq yd double numst application num numnd application num spread screenings before the asphaltic emulsion sets or breaks .
the screenings spread rate must be within the ranges shown in the following table screening spread rates seal coat type range lbsq yd fine num medium fine num medium num coarse num the engineer determines the exact screenings spread rate .
spread screenings within num percent of the rate determined by the engineer .
do not spread screenings more than num feet ahead of the completed initial rolling .
for double asphaltic emulsion seal coat screenings must have a spread rate within the ranges shown in the following table screening spread rates seal coat type range lbsq yd double numst application num numnd application num remove excess screenings on the numst application before the numnd application of asphaltic emulsion .
numbnum payment not used numc polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat numcnum general numcnuma summary section numc includes specifications for applying a polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat .
numcnumb definitions reserved numcnumc submittals at least num days before starting polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat application submit a signed copy of the test result report of the vialit test method for aggregate retention in chip seals french chip to the engineer and to department of transportation division of maintenance roadway maintenance office num n street ms num sacramento ca num section num bituminous seals num numcnumd quality assurance the authorized laboratory must test screenings for retention under the vialit test method for aggregate in chip seals french chip .
the vialit test results are not used for acceptance .
the vialit test is available at the mets website .
a test for polymer asphaltic emulsion represents the smaller of num tons or num days production .
a test for the screenings gradation or cleanness value represents the smaller of num tons or num days production .
if the test results for polymer asphaltic emulsion do not comply with the specifications the engineer assesses a pay factor value for the following quality characteristics and increments polymer asphaltic emulsion pay factor table quality characteristic test method increment pay factor test on polymer asphaltic emulsion viscosity at num c saybolt furol seconds aashto t num each num seconds above max or below min num settlement in num days aashto t num each num above max num sieve test aashto t num each num above max num demulsibility aashto t num each num below min num test on residue from evaporation penetration at num c aashto t num each num dm above max or below min num field softening point c astm dnumdnumm num c below min num torsional recoverya california test num for each num increment below the min value of num num for each num increments below the min value of num num for each num increments below the min value of num num elastic recovery aashto t num for each num increment below the min value of num num for each num increments below the min value of num num for each num increments below the min value of num num athe highest pay factor applies .
the engineer assesses a pay factor of num for sampling not performed in compliance with the specifications including shipping and sampling containers .
for noncompliant polymer asphaltic emulsion you may request seal coat to remain in place .
if the request is authorized the department makes a payment deduction corresponding to the total pay factor value shown in the following table polymer asphaltic emulsion pay factor deductions total pay factor value deduction num none num numton num numton num numton num numton num numton you must remove polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat with a total pay factor value greater than num .
section num bituminous seals num for polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat if a test result for the screenings cleanness value is from num to less than num you may request that the seal coat remain in place .
if the request is authorized the department makes a payment deduction corresponding to the cleanness value shown in the following table polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat cleanness value deductions cleanness value deduction num or over none num numton num numton num numton if the test results for polymer asphaltic emulsion aggregate gradation and cleanness value do not comply with the specifications both payment deductions are made .
numcnum materials polymer asphaltic emulsion must include elastomeric polymer .
polymer asphaltic emulsion must comply with section num table num under the test on residue from evaporation test for grades pmrsnum pmrsnumh pmcrsnum and pmcrsnumh and the following num .
penetration at num degrees f numg for num seconds determined under aashto t num must be at least num .
num .
elastic recovery of at least num percent when tested under aashto t num .
num .
polymer content in percent by weight does not apply .
num .
ring and ball softening point temperature determined under aashto t num for test on residue from evaporation test must comply with the following minimum temperature requirement num .
num degrees f for a geographical ambient temperature from num to num degrees f num .
num degrees f for a geographical ambient temperature from num to num degrees f num .
num degrees f for a geographical ambient temperature from num to greater than num degrees f screenings for polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat must have the gradation as determined under california test num in the following table polymer asphaltic emulsion seal coat screenings gradation percentage passing sieve size coarse num max medium num max medium fine num max fine num max num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num num num the cleanness value determined under california test num must be num or greater .
numcnum construction polymer asphaltic emulsion must be applied within the application rate ranges shown in the following table section num bituminous seals num polymer asphaltic emulsion application rates screenings application rate range galsq yd fine num medium fine num medium num coarse num apply polymer asphaltic emulsion when the ambient air temperature is from num to num degrees f and the pavement surface temperature is at least num degrees f. do not apply polymer asphaltic emulsion when weather forecasts predict the ambient air temperature will fall below num degrees f within num hours after application .
for double asphaltic emulsion seal coat polymer asphaltic emulsion must be applied within the application rates shown in the following table polymer asphaltic emulsion application rates screenings application rate range galsq yd double numst application num numnd application num you may stockpile screenings for polymer emulsion seal coat if you prevent contamination .
screenings must have damp surfaces at spreading .
if water visibly separates from the screenings do not spread them .
you may redampen them in the delivery vehicle .
spread screenings before the polymer emulsion sets or breaks .
screenings must have a spread rate within the ranges shown in the following table screening spread rates seal coat type range lbsq yd fine num medium fine num medium num coarse num the engineer determines the exact application rate .
spread screenings within num percent of the rate determined by the engineer .
do not spread screenings more than num feet ahead of the completed initial rolling .
for a double seal coat screenings must have a spread rate within the ranges shown in the following table screening spread rates seal coat type range lbsq yd double numst application num numnd application num remove excess screenings on the numst application before the numnd application of asphaltic emulsion .
numcnum payment not used section num bituminous seals num num asphalt binder seal coats numa general reserved numb asphalt rubber binder seal coats numbnum general numbnuma summary section numb includes specifications for applying asphalt rubber binder seal coat .
asphalt rubber binder seal coat consists of applying asphalt rubber binder followed by heated screenings precoated with asphalt binder followed by a flush coat .
numbnumb definitions crumb rubber modifier combination of ground or granulated high natural crumb rubber and scrap tire crumb rubber .
descending viscosity reading subsequent viscosity reading at least num percent lower than the previous viscosity reading .
high natural crumb rubber material containing num to num percent natural rubber .
scrap tire crumb rubber any combination of num .
automobile tires num .
truck tires num .
tire buffing numbnumc submittals at least num business days before use submit the permit issued by the local air district for asphalt rubber binder field blending equipment and application equipment .
if an air quality permit is not required by the local air district for producing asphalt rubber binder submit verification from the local air district that an air quality permit is not required .
at least num days before starting seal coat activities submit the name of an authorized laboratory to perform qc testing for asphalt rubber binder .
the authorized laboratory must comply with the departments independent assurance program .
for each delivery of asphalt rubber binder ingredients and asphalt rubber binder to the job site submit a certificate of compliance and a copy of the specified test results .
submit a certified volume or weight slip for each delivery of asphalt rubber binder ingredients and asphalt rubber binder .
submit sds for each asphalt rubber binder ingredient and the asphalt rubber binder .
at least num days before use submit num .
four num qt cans of mixed asphalt rubber binder num .
samples of each asphalt rubber binder ingredient num .
asphalt rubber binder formulation and data as follows num .
for asphalt binder and asphalt modifier include num .
source and grade of asphalt binder num .
source and type of asphalt modifier num .
percentage of asphalt modifier by weight of asphalt binder num .
percentage of combined asphalt binder and asphalt modifier by weight of asphalt rubber binder num .
test results for the specified quality characteristics num .
for crumb rubber modifier include num .
each source and type of scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural rubber num .
percentage of scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural rubber by total weight of asphalt rubber binder section num bituminous seals num num .
test results for the specified quality characteristics num .
for asphalt rubber binder include num .
test results for the specified quality characteristics num .
minimum reaction time and temperature submit a certificate of compliance and accuracy verification of test results for viscometers .
submit notification num minutes before each viscosity test or submit a schedule of testing times .
submit the log of asphalt rubber binder viscosity test results each day of asphalt rubber binder seal coat work .
submit viscosity rest results within num business days after testing .
submit resilience and softening point test results within num business days after testing .
numbnumd quality assurance numbnumdi general the equipment used in producing asphalt rubber binder and the equipment used in spreading asphalt rubber binder must be permitted for use by the local air district .
numbnumdii quality control numbnumdiia general reserved numbnumdiib asphalt modifier test asphalt modifier under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table asphalt modifier for asphalt rubber binder quality characteristic test method frequency viscosity astm dnum num per shipment flash point astm dnum molecular analysis asphaltenes astm dnum num per shipment aromatics astm dnum numbnumdiic crumb rubber modifier sample and test scrap tire crm and high natural crm separately .
test crm under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table crumb rubber modifier quality characteristic test method frequency scrap tire crumb rubber gradation california test num num per num tons or num per project whichever is greater high natural crumb rubber gradation california test num num per num tons or num per project whichever is greater wire in crm california test num num per num lb fabric in crm california test num crm particle length crm specific gravity california test num natural rubber content in high natural crumb rubber astm dnum num per num lb numbnumdiid asphalt rubber binder test asphalt rubber binder under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table section num bituminous seals num quality characteristic test method sampling location frequency descending viscositya astm dnumdnumm reaction vessel num per lotb viscosity at num f astm dnumdnumm distribution truck num minutes before use per lotb cone penetration astm dnum distribution truck num per lotb resilience astm dnum softening point astm dnumdnumm astart taking viscosity readings at least num minutes after adding crumb rubber modifier and continue taking viscosity readings every num minutes until num consecutive descending viscosity readings have been obtained and the final viscosity complies with the specification requirement .
bthe lot is defined in the departments mpqp .
retain the sample from each lot .
test for cone penetration resilience and softening point for the first num lots and if all num lots pass the testing frequency may be reduced to once for every num lots .
if qc test results indicate that the asphalt rubber binder does not meet the specifications take corrective action and notify the engineer .
numbnumdiii department acceptance numbnumdiiia general reserved numbnumdiiib crumb rubber modifier the department accepts crm based on the gradation requirements shown in the following table when tested under california test num crumb rubber modifier gradation requirements sieve size scrap tire crumb rubber high natural crumb rubber operating range contract compliance operating range contract compliance no .
num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num if a test result for crm gradation does not comply with the specifications the department deducts the corresponding amount for each gradation test as shown in the following table material test result a deduction scrap tire crumb rubber operating range tr contract compliance num scrap tire crumb rubber tr contract compliance num high natural crumb rubber operating range tr contract compliance num high natural crumb rubber tr contract compliance num a test result tr each gradation test for scrap tire crumb rubber represents num lbs or the quantity used in that days production whichever is less .
each gradation test for high natural crumb rubber represents num lbs or the quantity used in that days production whichever is less .
numbnumdiiic asphalt rubber binder for department acceptance testing take a sample of asphalt rubber binder in the engineers presence every num lots or once a day whichever is greater .
each sample must be in a num qt can with open top and friction lid .
section num bituminous seals num the department accepts asphalt rubber binder based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement cone penetration at num c num mm astm dnum num resilience at num c rebound astm dnum num softening point c astm dnumdnumm num viscosity at num f pas x numa astm dnumdnumm num aprepare sample for viscosity test under california test num .
numbnumdiiid precoated screenings the department accepts precoated screenings based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table precoated screenings acceptance criteria quality characteristic test method requirement los angeles rattler loss max loss at num revolutions loss at num revolutions california test num num num film stripping max california test num num cleanness value min california test num num durability min california test num num gradation passing by weight sieve size california test num coarse num max medium num max fine num max num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num no .
num num num num numbnum materials numbnuma general reserved numbnumb asphalt binder asphalt binder must comply with the specifications for asphalt binder .
do not modify asphalt binder with polymer .
numbnumc asphalt modifier asphalt modifier must be a resinous high flash point and aromatic hydrocarbon .
asphalt modifier must comply with the requirements shown in the following table asphalt modifier for asphalt rubber binder quality characteristic test method requirement viscosity at num c mnums x num astm dnum x num a flash point cl.o.c .
c astm dnum num min molecular analysis asphaltenes by mass max astm dnum num aromatics by mass min astm dnum num a x denotes the proposed asphalt modifier viscosity from num to num .
a change in x requires a new asphalt rubber binder submittal .
numbnumd crumb rubber modifier crm must be ground or granulated at ambient temperature .
section num bituminous seals num scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural crumb rubber must be delivered to the asphalt rubber binder production site in separate bags .
steel and fiber must be separated .
if steel and fiber are cryogenically separated it must occur before grinding and granulating .
cryogenicallyproduced crm particles must be large enough to be ground or granulated .
wire must not be more than num percent by weight of crm when tested under california test num .
crm must be free of contaminants except fabric which must not exceed num percent by weight of crm .
the length of an individual crm particle must not exceed num inch .
crm must be dry freeflowing particles that do not stick together .
a maximum of num percent calcium carbonate or talc by weight of crm may be added .
crm must not cause foaming when combined with the asphalt binder and asphalt modifier .
specific gravity of crm must be from num to num determined under california test num .
the crm must comply with the requirements shown in the following table crumb rubber modifier requirements quality characteristic test method requirement scrap tire crumb rubber high natural crumb rubber acetone extract astm dnum num num rubber hydrocarbon astm dnum num num min natural rubber content astm dnum num num carbon black content astm dnum num ash content astm dnum num min when tested under california test num scrap tire crumb rubber must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table scrap tire crumb rubber gradation percentage passing sieve size gradation limit operating range contract compliance no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num when tested under california test num high natural crumb rubber must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table high natural crumb rubber gradation percentage passing sieve size gradation limit operating range contract compliance no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num numbnume asphalt rubber binder asphalt rubber binder must be a combination of section num bituminous seals num num .
asphalt binder num .
asphalt modifier num .
crumb rubber modifier asphalt rubber binder blending equipment must be authorized under the departments material plant quality program .
the blending equipment must allow the determination of weight percentages of each asphalt rubber binder ingredient .
asphalt rubber binder must be num num percent by weight asphalt binder and num num percent by weight of crm .
the minimum percentage of crm must be num percent and lower values may not be rounded up .
crm must be num num percent by weight scrap tire crumb rubber and num num percent by weight high natural crumb rubber .
asphalt modifier and asphalt binder must be blended at the production site .
asphalt modifier must be from num to num percent by weight of the asphalt binder in the asphalt rubber binder .
the asphalt rubber binder supplier determines the exact percentage .
if blended the asphalt binder must be from num to num degrees f when asphalt modifier is added and the mixture must circulate for at least num minutes .
asphalt binder asphalt modifier and crm may be proportioned and combined simultaneously .
the blend of asphalt binder and asphalt modifier must be combined with the crm at the asphalt rubber binder production site .
the asphalt binder and asphalt modifier blend must be from num to num degrees f when the crm is added .
combined ingredients must be allowed to react at least num minutes at temperatures from num to num degrees f except the temperature must be at least num degrees f below the flash point of the asphalt rubber binder .
after reacting the asphalt rubber binder must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement cone penetration at num c num mm astm dnum num resilience at num c rebound astm dnum num softening point c astm dnumdnumm num viscosity at num f pas x numa astm dnumdnumm num aprepare sample for viscosity test under california test num .
maintain asphalt rubber binder at a temperature from num to num degrees f. stop heating unused asphalt rubber binder num hours after the numminute reaction period .
reheating asphalt rubber binder that cools below num degrees f is a reheat cycle .
do not exceed num reheat cycles .
if reheating asphalt rubber binder must be from num to num degrees f before use .
during reheating you may add scrap tire crumb rubber .
scrap tire crumb rubber must not exceed num percent by weight of the asphalt rubber binder .
allow added scrap tire crumb rubber to react for at least num minutes .
reheated asphalt rubber binder must comply with the specifications for asphalt rubber binder .
numbnumf screenings before precoating with asphalt binder screenings for asphalt rubber binder seal coat must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table section num bituminous seals num asphalt rubber binder seal coat screenings gradation percentage passing by weight sieve size medium num max fine num max num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num no .
num num num the seal coat screenings must comply with the requirements shown in the following table seal coat screenings quality characteristic test method requirement cleanness value min california test num num durability min california test num num numbnum construction numbnuma general reserved numbnumb equipment selfpropelled distributor truck for applying asphalt rubber binder must have the following features num .
heating unit num .
internal mixing unit num .
pumps that spray asphalt rubber binder within num galsq yd of the specified rate num .
fully circulating spray bar that applies asphalt rubber binder uniformly num .
tachometer num .
pressure gauges num .
volume measuring devices num .
thermometer num .
observation platform on the rear of the truck for an observer on the platform to see the nozzles and unplug them if needed numbnumc precoating screenings precoating of screenings must be performed at a central mixing plant .
the plant must be authorized under the departments material plant quality program .
for asphalt rubber binder seal coat do not recombine fine materials collected in dust control systems except cyclone collectors or knockout boxes with any other aggregate used in the production of screenings .
for asphalt rubber binder seal coat screenings must be preheated from num to num degrees f. coat with any of the asphalts specified in the table titled performance graded asphalt binder in section num .
the asphalt must be from num to num percent by weight of dry screenings .
the engineer determines the exact rate .
do not stockpile preheated or precoated screenings .
numbnumd asphalt rubber binder application apply asphalt rubber binder immediately after the reaction period .
at the time of application the temperature of asphalt rubber binder must be from num to num degrees f. apply asphalt rubber binder at a rate from num to num galsq yd .
the engineer determines the exact rate .
you may reduce the application rate by num galsq yd in the wheel paths .
section num bituminous seals num apply asphalt rubber binder when the ambient temperature is from num to num degrees f and the pavement surface temperature is at least num degrees f. do not apply asphalt rubber binder unless enough screenings are available at the job site to cover the asphalt rubber binder within num minutes .
intersections turn lanes gore points and irregular areas must be covered within num minutes .
do not apply asphalt rubber binder when pavement is damp or during high wind conditions .
if authorized you may adjust the distributor bar height and distribution speed and use shielding equipment during high wind conditions .
numbnume screenings application during transit cover precoated screenings for asphalt rubber binder seal coat with tarpaulins if the ambient air temperature is below num degrees f or the haul time exceeds num minutes .
at the time of application screenings for asphalt rubber binder seal coat must be from num to num degrees f. spread screenings at a rate from num to num lbsq yd .
the exact rate is determined by the engineer .
spread to within num percent of the determined rate .
numbnumf rolling and sweeping perform initial rolling within num seconds of spreading screenings .
do not spread screenings more than num feet ahead of the initial rolling .
if authorized for final rolling you may use a steelwheeled roller weighing from num to num tons in static mode only .
perform a final sweeping before contract acceptance .
the final sweeping must not dislodge screenings .
numbnum payment the payment quantity for precoated screenings is the weight measured after the screenings are preheated and precoated with asphalt binder .
if recorded batch weights are printed automatically the payment quantity for screenings is the weight determined from the printed batch weights if num .
total aggregate weight for the screenings per batch is printed num .
total asphalt binder weight per batch is printed num .
each truckloads zero tolerance weight is printed before weighing the first batch and after weighing the last batch num .
time date mix number load number and truck identification are correlated with a load slip num .
copy of the recorded batch weights is certified by a licensed weighmaster asphalt rubber binder is measured as specified for asphalt binder .
numc reserved num stress absorbing membrane interlayer numa general section num includes specifications for a stress absorbing membrane interlayer .
the stress absorbing membrane interlayer must comply with section numb except a flush coat is not required .
numb materials screenings must comply with the numinch maximum gradation .
numc construction section numcnum does not apply .
final rolling and sweeping are not required for the stress absorbing membrane interlayer .
section num bituminous seals num numd payment not used num reserved num slurry seal and microsurfacing num general numa summary section num includes specifications for applying slurry seal and microsurfacing .
applying a slurry seal consists of spreading a mixture of asphaltic emulsion or polymer modified asphaltic emulsion aggregate setcontrol additives and water on a surface or pavement .
applying a microsurfacing consists of spreading a mixture of microsurfacing emulsion water additives mineral filler and aggregate on the pavement .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general the testing laboratory must sign the original laboratory report and mix design .
if the mix design consists of the same materials covered by a previous laboratory report you may submit the previous laboratory report that must include material testing data performed within the previous num months for authorization .
if you change any of the materials in the mix design submit a new mix design and laboratory report at least num days before starting slurry seal and microsurfacing work .
numcnum slurry seal submit a laboratory report of test results and a proposed mix design num days before starting placement of slurry seal .
the report and mix design must include the specific materials to be used .
the laboratory report must include num .
test results used in the mix design num .
proportions of the following materials based on the aggregates dry weight num .
aggregate num .
filler determined from tests minimum and maximum num .
water minimum and maximum num .
asphalt solids content num .
set control agent num .
comparison of slurry seal test results to the specified values each day submit moisture data for the aggregate collected every num hours if you are unable to maintain the moisture content to within a maximum daily variation of num percent .
numcnum microsurfacing submit a laboratory report of test results and a proposed mix design num days before starting placement of microsurfacing .
the report and mix design must include the specific materials to be used and show a comparison of test results and specifications .
the report must also include num .
test results used in the mix design num .
proportions of the following materials based on the aggregates dry weight num .
aggregate num .
water minimum and maximum num .
additives num .
mineral filler minimum and maximum section num bituminous seals num num .
microsurfacing emulsion residual asphalt content minimum and maximum num .
recommended changes to the following proportions based on heating the mixture to num degrees f and mixing for num seconds num .
water num .
additives num .
mineral filler num .
comparison of each individual materials test results to its specified values num .
quantitative moisture effects on the aggregates unit weight determined under astm cnumm the recommended changes in item num in the list above do not apply to nighttime applications or if atmospheric temperatures below num degrees f are forecast for daytime applications .
submit a certificate of compliance with each shipment of microsurfacing emulsion as specified for asphaltic emulsion in section numc .
numd quality assurance numdnum general your laboratory must be able to perform international slurry surfacing association tests and mix designs .
in the presence of the engineer calibrate each mixerspreader used .
notify the engineer at least num business days before calibrating .
calibration must comply with the departments material plant quality program .
if the department authorizes a mixerspreader its calibration is valid for num months provided you num .
use the same truck verified with a unique identifying number num .
use the same materials in compliance with the authorized mix design num .
do not perform any repair or alteration to the proportioning systems numdnum slurry seal calibrate the adjustable cutoff gate settings of each mixerspreader truck on the project to achieve the correct delivery rate of aggregate and emulsion per revolution of the aggregate feeder in compliance with california test num .
checks must be performed for each aggregate source using an approved california test num vehicle scale .
individual checks of the aggregate belt feeders delivery rate to the pugmill mixer must not vary more than num percent from the average of num runs of at least num tons each .
individual checks of the emulsion pumps delivery rate to the pugmill mixer must not vary more than num percent from the average of num runs of at least num gal each .
measure aggregate moisture every num hours during slurry seal placement or maintain the moisture content within a maximum daily variation of num percent .
numdnum microsurfacing before using a variablerate emulsion pump the pump must be calibrated and sealed in the calibrated condition under the departments material plant quality program .
for the aggregate belt feeder the delivery rate for any individual check run must not deviate more than num percent from the average of the rates of num runs of at least num tons each .
for the emulsion pump the delivery rate for any individual check run must not deviate more than num percent from the average of the rates of num runs of at least num gal each .
numdnum department acceptance the department accepts aggregate for slurry seal and microsurfacing based on compliance with the aggregate gradation and sand equivalent requirements .
an aggregate gradation or cleanness value test represents num tons or num days production whichever is less .
section num bituminous seals num if the test results for aggregate gradation or sand equivalent do not comply with the specified requirements you may remove the installed microsurfacing represented by the test results or request it remain in place with a payment deduction .
if your request is authorized the department deducts num .
num per ton of slurry seal for each noncompliant aggregate gradation and sand equivalent test num .
num per ton of microsurfacing for each noncompliant aggregate gradation and sand equivalent test num materials numa general aggregate for slurry seal and microsurfacing must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table aggregate gradation requirements sieve size percentage passing by aggregate type i ii iii num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num aggregate must be rock dust or sand such as plaster sand .
aggregate larger than the no .
num sieve must be num percent crushed rock .
aggregate must be free from vegetable matter deleterious substances caked or clay lumps and oversized particles .
numb slurry seal numbnum general the slurry seal mix design must comply with the requirements shown in the following table slurry seal mix design requirements quality characteristic test methoda requirement consistency max mm technical bulletin num num wet stripping technical bulletin num pass compatibility technical bulletin num passb cohesion test c within num hour min kgmm technical bulletin num num wet track abrasion max gmnum technical bulletin num num atest methods are by the international slurry surfacing association .
bmixing test must pass at the maximum expected air temperature at the job site during placement .
cusing project source aggregate asphaltic emulsion and setcontrol agents if any .
the mix design must have the percent of asphaltic emulsion based on percentage by weight of the dry aggregate within the ranges shown in the following table asphaltic emulsion percentage aggregate type range i num ii num iii num the engineer determines the exact percentage based on the design asphalt binder content and the asphalt solids content of the asphaltic emulsion furnished .
numbnum aggregate if the specific gravities differ by num or more california test num is replaced with california test num for blends of different aggregates .
section num bituminous seals num aggregate for slurry seal must comply with the requirements for the type shown in the following table aggregate quality quality characteristic test method requirement by aggregate type i ii iii sand equivalent min california test num num num num durability index min california test num num num num each days aggregate moisture content measurements must not vary more than num percent .
numbnum polymer modified asphaltic emulsion polymer modified asphaltic emulsion must num .
consist of a polymer mixed with a bituminous material uniformly emulsified with water and an emulsifying or stabilization agent .
num .
use either neoprene polymer or butadiene and styrene copolymer .
the polymer must be homogeneous and milled into the asphaltic emulsion at the colloid mill .
num .
polymer modified asphaltic emulsion must be grade pmcqsnumh cationic and must comply with the requirements shown in the following table polymer modified asphaltic emulsion requirements quality characteristic test method requirement tests on emulsion saybolt furol viscosity num c saybolt furol seconds aashto t num num sieve test aashto t num num storage stability after num day aashto t num num residue by evaporation min california test num num particle charge aashto t num positive tests on residue by evaporation penetration at num c aashto t num num ductility at num c min mm aashto t num num torsional recovery min california test num num or polymer content min california test num num numc microsurfacing numcnum general the microsurfacing mix design must have the material proportion limits shown in the following table microsurfacing mix design proportion limits material proportion limits microsurfacing emulsion residual asphalt num of aggregate dry weight water and additives no limit mineral filler num of aggregate dry weight the microsurfacing mix design must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num bituminous seals num microsurfacing mix design tests quality characteristics test methoda requirement wet cohesion num minute set min kgcm num minute traffic min kgcm technical bulletin num num num excess asphalt max gmnum technical bulletin num num wet stripping min technical bulletin num num wet track abrasion loss numday soak max gmnum technical bulletin num num displacement lateral max specific gravity after num cycles of num kg max technical bulletin numa num num classification compatibility min grade points technical bulletin num aaa baa num mix time num c min technical bulletin num controllable to num seconds atest methods are by the international slurry surfacing association .
numcnum aggregate if you blend aggregate from different sources the aggregate from each source aggregate must comply with the aggregate specifications except gradation .
aggregate for microsurfacing except mineral filler must comply with the requirements shown in the following table microsurfacing aggregate quality characteristic test method requirement sand equivalent min california test num num durability index min california test num num percentage of crushed particles min a california test num num los angeles rattler loss at num revolutions max b california test num num acrushed particles must have at least num fractured face .
bcalifornia test num must be performed on the aggregate before crushing .
numcnum microsurfacing emulsion microsurfacing emulsion must be a homogeneous mixture of asphalt polymer and emulsifier solution .
add polymer modifier to asphalt or emulsifier solution before emulsification .
polymer solids must be a minimum num percent by weight of the microsurfacing emulsions residual asphalt .
microsurfacing emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table microsurfacing emulsion quality characteristic test method requirement saybolt furol viscosity at num c saybolt furol seconds aashto t num num sieve test max aashto t num num settlement after num days max a astm dnum num storage stability after num day max aashto t num num residue by evaporation min california test num num awaived if used within num hours of shipment .
the microsurfacing emulsions residue by evaporation must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num bituminous seals num microsurfacing emulsion residue by evaporation quality characteristic test method requirement g at num c num radsec mpa aashto t num report only penetration at num c aashto t num num phase angle at num c num radsec pa max pa base aashto t num report only softening point min c aashto t num num stiffness at num c mpa and mvalue aashto t num report only numcnum mineral filler if portland cement is used as mineral filler it must be any combination of type i type ii or type iii cement .
num construction numa general before applying slurry seal or microsurfacing cover manholes valve and monument covers grates or other exposed facilities located within the area of application using plastic or oil resistant construction paper secured by tape or adhesive to the facility being covered .
reference the covered facilities with enough control points to relocate the facilities after application of the seal coat .
in areas inaccessible to spreading equipment spread the slurry seal or microsurfacing mixture with hand tools or other authorized methods .
if placing with hand tools lightly dampen the area first .
do not handle or shift the material .
numb proportioning numbnum general the engineer determines the asphalt ratio under california test num .
the asphalt ratio in kilograms of asphalt per num kg of dry aggregate must not vary by more than num kg of asphalt from the determined amount .
numbnum slurry seal proportion slurry seal ingredients in compliance with the authorized mix design .
proportion and blend different aggregate types before adding other ingredients .
after proportioning the slurry seal mixture must be workable .
the slurry seal surface must be cured to allow traffic within num hour after placement .
the slurry seal must not show bleeding raveling separation or other distresses for num days after placing .
numbnum microsurfacing proportion the microsurfacing materials using the authorized mix design .
field conditions may require adjustments to the proportions during construction .
obtain authorization before adjusting proportions .
numc mixing and spreading equipment numcnum general mixing and spreading equipment for slurry seal and microsurfacing must proportion asphaltic emulsion water aggregate and any setcontrol additives by volume and mix them in continuous pugmill mixers .
continuous pugmill mixers must be of adequate size and power for the type of materials to be mixed .
numcnum truck mounted mixer spreaders truck mounted mixer spreaders must comply with the following num .
rotating and reciprocating equipment must be covered with metal guards .
num proportion aggregate using a belt feeder with an adjustable cutoff gate .
the engineer verifies the height of the gate opening .
num .
belt feeder must have a depth monitor device .
the depth monitor device must automatically shut down power to the belt feeder when the aggregate depth is less than num percent of the target depth .
section num bituminous seals num num .
separate monitor device must detect the revolutions of the belt feeder .
this device must automatically shut down power to the belt feeder if it detects no revolutions .
if the belt feeder is an integral part of the equipments drive chain the monitor device is not required .
num .
aggregate belt feeder must be connected directly to the drive on the emulsion pump .
the aggregate feeder drive shaft must have a revolution counter reading the nearest num revolution for micro surfacing and nearest num revolution for slurry seal .
num .
emulsion storage must be equipped with a device that automatically shuts down power to the emulsion pump and aggregate belt feeder when the level of stored emulsion is lowered .
to allow for normal fluctuations there may be a delay of num seconds between detection of low emulsion storage levels or low aggregate depths and automatic power shut down .
num .
emulsion storage must be located immediately before the emulsion pump .
num .
emulsion storage tank must have a temperature indicator at the pump suction level .
the indicator must be accurate to num degrees f. num .
noflow and revolution warning devices must be in working condition and comply with california test num .
lowflow indicators must be visible while walking alongside the equipment .
numcnum continuous selfloading mixing machine continuous selfloading mixing machines must be automatically sequenced and selfpropelled .
the mixing machine must deliver each material to a double shafted mixer and discharge the mixed material on a continuous flow basis .
the mixing machine must have sufficient storage capacity to maintain a continuous supply of material to the proportioning controls .
the mixing machine operator must have full control of forward and reverse speeds during placement .
numcnum slurry seal equipment numcnuma general introduce emulsion into the mixer with a positive displacement pump .
if you use a variablerate pump the adjusting unit must be sealed in its calibrated position .
introduce water into the mixer with a meter that measures gallons .
identifying numbers for equipment must be at least num inches high and located on the front and rear of the vehicle .
numcnumb spreader box the spreader box used to spread the slurry mixture must be num .
capable of spreading an entire lane width .
num .
equipped with flexible rubber belting on each side .
the belting must contact the pavement to prevent loss of slurry from the box .
num .
if wider than num feet equipped with baffles reversible motordriven augers or equivalent features to uniformly apply the slurry seal on superelevated sections and shoulder slopes .
num .
equipped with rear flexible strikeoff blades in close contact with the pavement and adjustable to various crown shapes to uniformly apply the slurry seal .
num .
equipped with flexible drags attached to the rear and cleaned daily and changed if longitudinal scouring occurs .
num .
clean and free of slurry seal or emulsion at the start of each work shift .
numcnum microsurfacing equipment numcnuma general choose a continuous selfloading mixing machine or truck mounted mixerspreader .
proportion microsurfacing emulsion using a positive displacement pump .
identifying numbers for equipment must be at least num inches high and located on the front and rear of the vehicle .
numcnumb spreader box the spreader box must be capable of spreading the microsurfacing a minimum of num feet wide and preventing the loss of microsurfacing .
spreader boxes over num feet in application width must have a device such as baffles or reversible motor driven augers to ensure uniform application on superelevated section num bituminous seals num sections and shoulder slopes .
clean microsurfacing and microsurfacing emulsion from the spreader box before each work shift .
the spreader box must have a series of strikeoff devices at its rear .
the leading strikeoff device must be num .
fabricated of a suitable material such as steel or stiff rubber num .
designed to maintain close contact with the pavement during spreading num .
capable of obtaining the specified thickness num .
capable of being adjusted to the various pavement cross sections the final strikeoff device must be num .
fabricated of flexible material that produces a uniform texture in the finished surface num .
cleaned daily and changed if longitudinal scouring occurs in the microsurfacing do not use flexible drags attached to the rear of the spreader box .
numcnumc shoulder equipment spread microsurfacing on shoulders with a device such as an edge box that forms clean and straight joints and edges .
numcnumd scratch course box spread scratch course with the same type of spreader box used to spread microsurfacing except use an adjustable steel strikeoff device instead of a final strikeoff device .
numcnume wheel path depression boxes each wheel path depression box must have adjustable strikeoff device between num and num feet wide to regulate depth .
the rut box must also have devices such as hydraulic augers capable of num .
moving the mixed material from the rear to the front of the filling chamber num .
guiding larger aggregate into the deeper section of the wheel path depression num .
forcing the finer material towards the outer edges of the spreader box numd placing numdnum general if truckmounted mixerspreaders are used keep at least num operational spreaders at the job site during placement .
in areas inaccessible to spreading equipment spread the slurry seal or microsurfacing mixture with hand tools .
if placing with hand tools lightly dampen the area first .
do not handle or shift the mixture .
numdnum surface preparation numdnuma general before you place slurry seal or microsurfacing clean the pavement surface by removing loose particles of extraneous materials including paving and dirt .
use any nondestructive method such as flushing or sweeping .
numdnumb slurry seal if slurry seal activities affect access to public parking residential property or commercial property notify residents businesses and local agencies at least num hours before starting activities .
the notice must num .
describe the work to be performed num .
detail streets and limits of activities num .
indicate work hours num .
be authorized before starting slurry seal activities post signs at numfoot intervals on the affected streets .
signs must display no parking tow away .
signs must state the day of the week and hours parking or access will be restricted .
section num bituminous seals num within num hour after placement slurry seal must be set enough to allow traffic without pilot cars .
slurry seal must not exhibit distress from traffic such as bleeding raveling separation or other distresses .
numdnumc microsurfacing numdnumci general you may fog the roadway surface with water ahead of the spreader box .
the fog spray must be adjusted for pavement num .
temperature num .
surface texture num .
dryness numdnumcii repair wheel path depression if repairing a wheel path depression is shown fill wheel path depressions and irregularities with micro surfacing material before spreading microsurfacing .
if the depressions are less than num foot deep fill with a scratch course .
if the depressions are num foot deep or more fill the depressions using with a wheel path depression rut box .
spread scratch course by adjusting the steel strikeoff of a scratch course box until it is directly in contact with the pavement surface .
spread microsurfacing with a wheel path depression rut box leaving a slight crown at the surface .
use multiple applications to fill depressions more than num foot deep .
do not apply more than num foot in a single application .
allow traffic to compact each filled wheel path depression for a minimum of num hours before placing additional microsurfacing .
numdnum test strips numdnuma general reserved numdnumb slurry seal test strips do not apply to slurry seal .
numdnumc microsurfacing reserved numdnum placement numdnuma general reserved numdnumai general longitudinal and transverse joints must be num .
uniform num .
straight num .
neat in appearance num .
butttype joints num .
without material buildup num .
without uncovered areas place longitudinal joints num .
on centerlines lane lines edge lines or shoulder lines num .
with overlaps not more than num inches set the leading edge of kraft paper on transverse joints to create a straight butt joint with the next application when the paper is removed .
section num bituminous seals num numdnumaii weather conditions only place slurry seal or microsurfacing if both the pavement and air temperatures are at least num degrees f and rising .
do not place slurry seal or microsurfacing if either the pavement or air temperature is below num degrees f and falling .
the expected high temperature must be at least num degrees f within num hours after placement .
do not place slurry seal or microsurfacing if rain is imminent or the air temperature is expected to be below num degrees f within num hours after placement .
numdnumb slurry seal spread slurry seal uniformly within the specified spread rate range .
do not spot rehandle or shift the mixture .
if there is a bid item for tack coat coat the pavement surface with an ss or css grade asphaltic emulsion mixed with additional water .
the ratio of water to asphaltic emulsion must be num to num .
apply the tack coat at a rate from num to num galsq yd .
the exact rate must be authorized .
the engineer determines the exact spread rate for slurry seal .
the completed rate must be within num percent of the engineers determined spread rate .
the slurry seal spread rates must be within the ranges shown in the following table slurry seal spread rates type of aggregate range lb of dry aggregatesq yd i num ii num iii num longitudinal joints must correspond with lane lines .
you may request other longitudinal joint patterns if they do not adversely affect the slurry seal .
spread slurry seal in full lane widths .
do not overlap slurry seal between adjacent lanes more than num inches .
use kraft paper at transverse joints and over previously placed slurry seal to prevent double placement .
remove the paper after use .
use hand tools to remove spillage .
the finished surface must be smooth .
the mixture must be uniform and homogeneous after spreading and there must not be separation of the emulsion and aggregate after setting .
protect the slurry seal from damage until it has cured and will not adhere or be picked up by vehicle tires .
numdnumc microsurfacing numdnumci general the engineer determines the exact spread rate for microsurfacing .
the completed spread rate must be within num percent of the engineers determined spread rate .
the microsurfacing spread rates must be within the ranges shown in the following table microsurfacing spread rates microsurfacing type location range lb of dry aggregatesq yd type ii full lane width num type iiia full lane width num type iiib full lane width num a over asphalt concrete pavement b over concrete pavement and concrete bridge decks section num bituminous seals num spread microsurfacing either in the direction of traffic or in the opposite direction .
keep hand tools available to remove spillage .
numdnumcii joints the maximum difference between the pavement surface and the bottom edge of a numfoot straightedge placed perpendicular to the joint must be num .
num foot for longitudinal joints num .
num foot for transverse joints numdnumciii finished surface finished microsurfacing must be free of irregularities such as scratch or tear marks .
you may leave up to num marks that are num inch wide or less and num inches long or less per num linear feet of microsurfacing placed .
do not leave any marks that are over num inch wide or num inches long .
sweep the microsurfacing num hours after placement without damaging the microsurfacing .
for num days afterward sweep the microsurfacing daily .
numdnumciv repair of early distress if bleeding raveling delaminating rutting or washboarding occurs after placing the microsurfacing make repairs using an authorized method .
num payment the payment quantity for slurry seal is the weight determined by combining the weights of the aggregate and asphaltic emulsion .
the payment quantity for slurry seal does not include the weights of the added water and setcontrol additives .
the payment quantity for microsurfacing is the weight determined by combining the weights of the aggregate and microsurfacing emulsion .
the payment quantity for microsurfacing does not include the weights of added water and setcontrol additives .
num parking area seals num general numa summary section num includes specifications for sealing parking areas .
sealing a parking area consists of spreading a mixture of asphaltic emulsion aggregate polymer and water on a parking area pavement surface .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals at least num days before starting placement submit samples of the aggregate to be used .
the samples must be processed the same way as the aggregate to be used in the work .
at least num days before starting placement submit the name of a laboratory to perform testing and mix design .
at least num days before starting placement submit a laboratory report of test results and a proposed mix design .
the report and mix design must include the specific materials to be used and show a comparison of test results and specifications .
the mix design report must include the quantity of water allowed to be added at the job site .
the laboratory performing the tests must sign the original laboratory report and mix design .
if the mix design consists of the same materials covered by a previous laboratory report you may submit the previous laboratory report which must include material testing data performed within the previous num months for authorization .
section num bituminous seals num if you request substitute materials submit a new laboratory report and mix design at least num days before starting placement .
at least num days before use submit the manufacturers data for oil seal primer and polymer .
submit a certificate of compliance for the parking area seal material .
numd quality assurance sample the undiluted parking area seal material .
num materials numa general aggregate must be clean hard durable uncoated and free from organic and deleterious substances .
one hundred percent of the aggregate must pass the no .
num sieve .
asphaltic emulsion must be either grade ssnumh or cssnumh except the values for penetration at num degrees c for tests on residue from distillation must be from num to num .
you may use claystabilized emulsion with a solids content not less than num percent by weight .
polymer must be either neoprene ethylene vinyl acetate or a blend of butadiene and styrene .
oil seal primer must be a quickdrying emulsion with admixtures .
oil seal primer must be manufactured to isolate the parking area slurry seal from pavement with residual oils petroleum grease and spilled gasoline .
crack sealant must comply with section num .
water must be potable and not separate from the emulsion before the material is placed .
numb mix design the proposed mix design for parking area seals must comply with the requirements shown in the following table parking area seal mix design requirements quality characteristic test method requirement mass per liter min kg astm dnum num cone penetration mm california test num num nonvolatile min astm dnuma num nonvolatile soluble in triclorethylene num wet track abrasion max gmnum astm dnum num dried film color black viscosity min kub astm dnum num aweigh num g of homogenous material into a previously tared small ointment can .
place in a constant temperature oven at num num c for num num minutes .
cool reweigh and calculate nonvolatile components as a percent of the original weight .
bkrebs units parking area seals must contain a minimum of num percent polymer by volume of undiluted asphaltic emulsion .
numc proportioning parking area seal ingredients must be mixed at a central plant .
the plant must include mechanical or electronic controls that consistently proportion the ingredients .
mix asphaltic emulsion with the other ingredients mechanically .
store the parking area seal in a tank equipped with mixing or agitation devices .
keep stored materials thoroughly mixed .
protect stored materials from freezing conditions .
section num bituminous seals num num construction numa general reserved numc surface preparation if cracks in the existing parking area pavement surface are from num to num inch wide treat the cracks under section num .
do not place the parking area seal until the engineer determines that the crack treatment is cured .
if cracks in the existing parking area pavement surface are greater than num inch wide the engineer orders the repair .
this work is change order work .
after any crack treatment and before placing parking area seal clean the pavement surface including removal of oil and grease spots .
do not use solvents .
if cleaning the pavement surface with detergents thoroughly rinse with water .
allow standing water to dry before placing parking area seal .
you must seal oil and grease spots that remain after cleaning .
use an oil seal primer and follow the manufacturers instructions .
if the pavement surface has oil or grease spots that do not come clean and sealing is insufficient the engineer orders the repair of the pavement .
this work is change order work .
numd placement do not place parking area seal when the ambient temperature is less than num degrees f or the surface temperature is less than num degrees f. do not place seal within num hours of rain or within num hours of forecast rain or freezing temperatures .
request that the engineer shut off the irrigation control system at least num days before placing the seal and keep it shut off at least num hours after the seal coat placement .
add polymer at the job site in the engineers presence .
if adding water at the job site based on the manufacturers instructions for consistency and spreadability do not exceed num percent by volume of undiluted asphaltic emulsion .
before placing the parking area seal dampen the pavement surface using a distributor truck .
place the seal on the damp pavement but do not place it with standing water on the pavement .
place the parking area seal in num or more application .
the seal must be uniform and smooth free of ridges or uncoated areas .
if placing in multiple applications allow the last application to thoroughly dry before the subsequent application .
do not allow traffic on the parking area seal for at least num hours after placement .
do not stripe the parking area seal until it is dry .
num payment the payment quantity for parking area seal is the weight determined by combining the weights of the aggregate and asphaltic emulsion .
the payment quantity for parking area seal does not include the added water and setcontrol additive .
num crack treatment num general numa summary section num includes specifications for treating cracks in asphalt concrete pavement .
numb definitions reserved section num bituminous seals num numc submittals if your selected crack treatment material is on the authorized material list for flexible pavement crack treatment material submit a certificate of compliance including num .
manufacturers name num .
production location num .
brand or trade name num .
designation num .
batch or lot number num .
crack treatment material type num .
contractor or subcontractor name num .
contract number num .
lot size num .
shipment date num .
manufacturers signature if your selected crack treatment material is not on the authorized material list submit a sample and test results from each batch or lot num days before use .
testing must be performed by an authorized laboratory and test results must show compliance with the specifications .
test reports must include the information specified for the certificate of compliance submittal .
each hotapplied crack treatment material sample must be a minimum of num lb and submitted in a silicone release container .
each coldapplied crack treatment material sample must be a minimum of num qt and submitted in a plastic container .
submit the following with each delivery of crack treatment material to the job site num .
manufacturers heating and application instructions num .
manufacturers sds num .
name of the manufacturers recommended detackifying agent numd quality assurance hotapplied crack treatment material must be sampled at least once per project in the engineers presence .
collect two num lb minimum samples of crack treatment material from the dispensing wand into silicone release boxes .
coldapplied crack treatment material must be sampled at least once per project in the engineers presence .
collect two num qt samples of crack treatment material from the dispensing wand into plastic containers .
num materials the crack treatment material must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num bituminous seals num crack treatment material quality characteristica test methodb requirement type num type num type num type num type num softening point min c astm dnumdnumm num num num num num cone penetration at num f max astm dnum num num num num num resilience at num f unaged astm dnum num num num num num flexibility cc astm dnum num num num num num tensile adhesion min astm dnum num num num num num specific gravity max astm dnum num num num num num asphalt compatibility astm dnum pass pass pass pass pass sieve test passing see note d num num num num num acoldapplied crack treatment material residue collected under astm dnum method b and sampled under astm dnum must comply with the grade specifications .
bexcept for viscosity cure each specimen at a temperature of num num c and a relative humidity of num num percent for num num hours before testing .
cfor the flexibility test the specimen size must be num num mm thick by num num mm wide by num num mm long .
the test mandrel diameter must be num num mm .
the bend arc must be num degrees .
the bend rate must be num num seconds .
at least num of num test specimens must pass at the specified test temperature without fracture crazing or cracking .
dfor hotapplied crack treatment dilute with toluene and sieve through a no .
num sieve .
for coldapplied crack treatment sieve the material asreceived through a no .
num sieve .
if the manufacturer provides a statement that added components passed the no .
num sieve before blending this requirement is void .
crack treatment material must be delivered to the job site with the information listed below .
if crack treatment material is delivered to the job site in containers each container must be marked with the following information .
num .
manufacturers name num .
production location num .
brand or trade name num .
designation num .
crack treatment trade name num .
batch or lot number num .
maximum heating temperature num .
expiration date for cold application only hotapplied crack treatment must be delivered to the job site premixed in cardboard containers with meltable inclusion liners or in a fully meltable package .
coldapplied crack treatment must have a minimum shelf life of num months from the date of manufacture .
sand applied to tacky crack treatment material must be clean free of clay and comply with the gradation shown in the following table sand gradation sieve size percent passing no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num num construction treat cracks from num to num inch in width for the entire length of the crack .
fill or repair cracks wider than num inch as ordered .
filling cracks wider than num inch is change order work .
for a traffic lane adjacent to a shoulder treat the cracks on the shoulder .
section num bituminous seals num for hotapplied crack treatment material rout cracks or saw cut to form a reservoir .
cracks must be clean and dry before treating .
before treating blast cracks with oilfree compressed air at a pressure of at least num psi .
if the pavement temperature is below num degrees f or if there is evidence of moisture in the crack use a hot air lance immediately before applying crack treatment .
the hot air lance must not apply flame directly on the pavement .
heat and apply hotapplied crack treatment material under the manufacturers instructions .
apply coldapplied crack treatment material with a distributor kettle a piston or a diaphragm barrel pump that can deliver from num to num psi .
the application line must have a pressure gauge and a filter .
the pressure in the application line must not exceed num psi .
the pressure gauge must have a regulator .
use a highpressure hose with a numinch national pipe tapered thread npt swivel connection and a dispensing wand .
apply crack treatment with a nozzle inserted into the crack .
fill the crack flush .
if after num days the crack treatment is more than num inch below the specified level the sealant fails or the crack reopens retreat the crack .
immediately remove crack treatment material that is spilled or deposited on the pavement surface .
before opening to traffic apply sand or the manufacturers recommended detackifying agent to tacky crack treatment material on the traveled way .
sweep up excess sand before opening to traffic .
num payment the payment quantity for crack treatment is the length measured in lane lines along the edge of each paved lane parallel to the pavements centerline .
num reserved num num asphalt concrete num general num general section num includes specifications for performing asphalt concrete work .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num hot mix asphalt num general numa general numanum summary section num includes general specifications for producing and placing hot mix asphalt .
hma includes one or more of the following types num .
type a hma num .
rhmag num .
ogfc num .
bwc num .
minor hma if the use of a wma technology is allowed or required by a special provision the wma technology to be used must be on the authorized material list for approved technologies .
wherever reference is made to the following test methods the year of publication for these test methods is as shown in the following table section num asphalt concrete num test method year of publication aashto m num num num aashto m num num aashto r num num num aashto r num num aashto t num num aashto t num num aashto t num num aashto t num num num aashto t num num aashto t num num aashto t num num aashto t num num aashto t num num num aashto t num num aashto t num num aashto t num num aashto t num num aashto t num num aashto t num num aashto t num num aashto t num num astm dnumdnumm numnum astm dnum numb astm dnum num astm dnum num astm dnum num astm dnum num astm dnum num reapproved num astm dnum num reapproved num astm dnum num astm dnum num astm dnumdnumm numnum numanum definitions binder replacement binder from rap expressed as a percent of the total binder in the mix .
coarse aggregate aggregate retained on a no .
num sieve .
fine aggregate aggregate passing a no .
num sieve .
leveling course thin layer of hma used to correct minor variations in the longitudinal and transverse profile of the pavement before placement of other pavement layers .
miscellaneous areas areas outside the traveled way and shoulders such as num .
median areas not including inside shoulders num .
island areas num .
sidewalks num .
gutters num .
ditches num .
overside drains num .
aprons at ends of drainage structures processed rap rap that has been fractionated .
supplemental fine aggregate mineral filler consisting of rock dust slag dust hydrated lime hydraulic cement or any combination of these and complying with aashto m num .
section num asphalt concrete num numanum submittals numanuma general reserved numanumb job mix formula numanumbi general except for the hma to be used in miscellaneous areas and dikes submit your proposed jmf for each type of hma to be used .
the jmf must be submitted on the contractor job mix formula proposal form along with num .
mix design documentation on contractor hot mix asphalt design data form dated within num months of submittal num .
jmf verification on a caltrans hot mix asphalt verification form if applicable num .
jmf renewal on a caltrans job mix formula renewal form if applicable num .
sds for num .
asphalt binder num .
supplemental fine aggregate except fines from dust collectors num .
antistrip additives the contractor hot mix asphalt design data form must show documentation on aggregate quality .
if you can not submit a departmentverified jmf on a caltrans hot mix asphalt verification form dated within num months before hma production the engineer verifies the jmf .
submit a new jmf if you change any of the following num .
target asphalt binder percentage greater than num percent num .
asphalt binder supplier num .
combined aggregate gradation num .
aggregate sources num .
liquid antistrip producer or dosage num .
average binder content in a new processed rap stockpile by more than num percent from the average rap binder content reported on page num of your contractor hot mix asphalt design data form num .
average maximum specific gravity in a new processed rap stockpile by more than num from the average maximum specific gravity value reported on page num of your contractor hot mix asphalt design data form num .
any material in the jmf allow the engineer num business days from a complete jmf submittal for document review of the aggregate qualities mix design and jmf .
the engineer notifies you if the proposed jmf submittal is accepted .
if your jmf fails verification testing submit an adjusted jmf based on your testing .
the adjusted jmf must include a new contractor job mix formula proposal form contractor hot mix asphalt design data form and the results of the failed verification testing .
you may submit an adjusted aggregate gradation tv on a contractor job mix formula proposal form before verification testing .
aggregate gradation tv must be within the tv limits specified .
numanumbii job mix formula renewal you may request a jmf renewal by submitting num .
proposed jmf on a contractor job mix formula proposal form num .
previously verified jmf documented on a caltrans hot mix asphalt verification form dated within num months num .
mix design documentation on a contractor hot mix asphalt design data form used for the previously verified jmf numanumbiii job mix formula modification for an authorized jmf submit a modified jmf if you change any of the following section num asphalt concrete num num .
asphalt binder supplier num .
liquid antistrip producer num .
liquid antistrip dosage you may change any of the above items only once during the contract .
submit your modified jmf request at least num days before production .
each modified jmf submittal must include num .
proposed modified jmf on contractor job mix formula proposal form marked modified .
num .
mix design records on contractor hot mix asphalt design data form for the authorized jmf to be modified .
num .
jmf verification on hot mix asphalt verification form for the authorized jmf to be modified .
num .
test results for the modified jmf in compliance with the mix design specifications .
perform tests at the mix design obc as shown on the contractor asphalt mix design data form .
with an accepted modified jmf submittal the engineer verifies each modified jmf within num days of receiving all verification samples .
numanumc quality control plan with your proposed jmf submittal submit a qc plan for hma .
the qc plan must describe the organization and procedures for num .
controlling hma quality characteristics num .
taking samples including sampling locations num .
establishing implementing and maintaining qc num .
determining when corrective actions are needed num .
implementing corrective actions num .
using methods and materials for backfilling core locations the qc plan must address the elements affecting hma quality including num .
aggregates num .
asphalt binder num .
additives num .
production num .
paving the qc plan must include aggregate qc sampling and testing during lime treatment .
allow num business days for review of the qc plan .
if you change qc procedures personnel or sample testing locations submit a qc plan supplement before implementing the proposed change .
allow num business days for review of the qc plan supplement .
numanumd test results for mix design jmf verification production startup and each num tons submit aashto t num and aashto t num modified test results to the engineer and electronically to moisture_testsdot.ca.gov submit all qc test results except aashto t num and aashto t num modified within num business days of a request .
submit aashto t num qc tests within num days of sampling .
for tests performed under aashto t num modified submit test data and num tested sample set within num business days of sampling .
if coarse and fine durability index tests are required submit test results within num business days of testing .
if a tapered notched wedge is used submit compaction test result values within num hours of testing .
section num asphalt concrete num numanume reserved numanumf liquid antistrip treatment if liquid antistrip treatment is used submit the following with your proposed jmf submittal num .
one num pt sample num .
infrared analysis including copy of absorption spectra num .
certified copy of test results num .
certificate of compliance for each liquid antistrip shipment .
on each certificate of compliance include num .
your signature and printed name num .
shipment number num .
material type num .
material specific gravity num .
refinery num .
consignee num .
destination num .
quantity num .
contact or purchase order number num .
shipment date num .
proposed proportions for the liquid antistrip for each delivery of liquid antistrip to the hma production plant submit a num pt sample to mets .
submit shipping documents .
label each liquid antistrip sampling container with num .
liquid antistrip type num .
application rate num .
sample date num .
contract number at the end of each days production shift submit production data in electronic and printed media .
present data on electronic media in a tab delimited format .
use line feed carriage return with num separate record per line for each production data set .
allow enough fields for the specified data .
include data titles at least once per report .
for each hma mixing plant type submit the following information in the order specified num .
for batch plant mixing num .
production date num .
time of batch completion num .
mix size and type num .
each ingredients weight num .
asphalt binder content as a percentage of the total weight of mix num .
liquid antistrip content as a percentage of the asphalt binder weight num .
for continuous mixing plant num .
production date num .
data capture time num .
mix size and type num .
flow rate of wet aggregate collected directly from the aggregate weigh belt num .
aggregate moisture content as a percentage of the dry aggregate weight num .
flow rate of asphalt binder collected from the asphalt binder meter num .
flow rate of liquid antistrip collected from the liquid antistrip meter num .
asphalt binder content as a percentage of the total weight of mix calculated from num .
aggregate weigh belt output num .
aggregate moisture input num .
asphalt binder meter output num .
liquid antistrip content as a percentage of the asphalt binder weight calculated from num .
asphalt binder meter output num .
liquid antistrip meter output numanumg lime treatment if aggregate lime treatment is used submit the following with your proposed jmf submittal and each time you produce limetreated aggregate section num asphalt concrete num num .
exact lime proportions for fine and coarse virgin aggregates num .
if marination is required the averaged aggregate quality test results within num hours of sampling num .
for dry lime aggregate treatment a treatment data log from the dry lime and aggregate proportioning device in the following order num .
treatment date num .
time of day the data is captured num .
aggregate size being treated num .
hma type and mix aggregate size num .
wet aggregate flow rate collected directly from the aggregate weigh belt num .
aggregate moisture content expressed as a percentage of the dry aggregate weight num .
flow rate of dry aggregate calculated from the flow rate of wet aggregate num .
dry lime flow rate num .
lime ratio from the authorized jmf for each aggregate size being treated num .
lime ratio from the authorized jmf for the combined aggregates num .
actual lime ratio calculated from the aggregate weigh belt output aggregate moisture input and dry lime meter output expressed as a percentage of the dry aggregate weight num .
calculated difference between the authorized lime ratio and the actual lime ratio num .
for lime slurry aggregate treatment a treatment data log from the slurry proportioning device in the following order num .
treatment date num .
time of day the data is captured num .
aggregate size being treated num .
wet aggregate flow rate collected directly from the aggregate weigh belt num .
moisture content of the aggregate just before treatment expressed as a percentage of the dry aggregate weight num .
dry aggregate flow rate calculated from the wet aggregate flow rate num .
lime slurry flow rate measured by the slurry meter num .
dry lime flow rate calculated from the slurry meter output num .
authorized lime ratio for each aggregate size being treated num .
actual lime ratio calculated from the aggregate weigh belt and slurry meter output expressed as a percentage of the dry aggregate weight num .
calculated difference between the authorized lime ratio and actual lime ratio num .
dry lime and water proportions at the slurry treatment time each day during lime treatment submit the treatment data log on electronic media in tab delimited format on a removable cdrom storage disk .
each continuous treatment data set must be a separate record using a line feed carriage return to present the specified data on num line .
the reported data must include data titles at least once per report .
numanumh warm mix asphalt technology if a wma technology is used submit the following with your proposed jmf submittal num .
sds for the wma technology num .
for water injection foam technology num .
name of technology num .
proposed foaming water content num .
proposed hma production temperature range num .
certification from binder supplier stating no antifoaming agent is used num .
for additive technology num .
name of technology num .
percent admixture by weight of binder and percent admixture by total weight of hma as recommended by the manufacturer num .
methodology for inclusion of admixture in laboratoryproduced hma num .
proposed hma production temperature range collect and hold data for the duration of the contract and submit the electronic media daily .
the snapshot of production data must include the following num .
production date num .
production location section num asphalt concrete num num .
time of day the data is captured num .
hma mix type being produced and target binder rate num .
hma additive type brand and target rate num .
temperature of the binder and hma mixture num .
for a continuous mixing plant the rate of flow of the dry aggregate calculated from the wet aggregate flow rate as determined by the conveyor scale num .
for a continuous mixing plant the rate of flow of the asphalt meter num .
for a continuous mixing plant the rate of flow of hma additive meter num .
for batch plant mixing actual batch weights of all ingredients num .
dry aggregate to binder ratio calculated from metered ingredient output num .
dry aggregate to hma additive ratio calculated from metered output at the end of each days production shift submit electronic and printed media from the hma plant process controller .
present data on electronic media in commaseparated values or tabseparated values format .
the captured data for the ingredients represented by the production snapshot must have allowances for sufficient fields to satisfy the amount of data required by these specifications and include data titles at least once per report .
numanumi samples for the samples taken for jmf verification submit num parts to the engineer and use num part for your testing .
at production startup and within num tons of the halfway point of production of hma submit samples split from your hma production sample for aashto t num and aashto t num modified tests .
numanumjnumanumk reserved numanuml data cores section numanuml applies if a bid item for a data core is shown on the bid item list .
submit a summary of data cores taken and a photograph of each data core to the engineer and to coringdot.ca.gov for each data core the summary must include num .
project identification number num .
date cored num .
core identification number num .
type of materials recovered num .
type and approximate thickness of unstabilized material not recovered num .
total core thickness num .
thickness of each individual material to within num .
num inch for recovered material num .
num inch for unstabilized material num .
location including num .
county num .
route num .
post mile num .
lane number num .
lane direction num .
station each data core digital photograph must include a ruler laid adjacent to the data core .
each photograph must include num .
core num .
project identification number num .
core identification number num .
date cored num .
county num .
route section num asphalt concrete num num .
post mile num .
lane number num .
lane direction numanummnumanumo reserved numanum quality assurance numanuma general aashto t num modified is aashto t num with the following parameters num .
target air voids must equal num num percent num .
specimen height must be num num mm num .
number of test specimens must be num to run num tests num .
do not average the num test results num .
test specimen must be a num mm gyratory compacted specimen num .
test temperature must be set at num .
num num degrees f for pg num num .
num num degrees f for pg num num .
num num degrees f for pg num and above num .
measurements for impression must be taken at every num passes along the total length of the sample num .
inflection point is the number of wheel passes at the intersection of the creep slope and the stripping slope at maximum rut depth num .
testing shut off must be set at num passes num .
submersion time for samples must not exceed num hours take samples under california test num .
if a wma technology is used a technical representative for the wma technology must attend the preconstruction meeting .
numanumb job mix formula verification the engineer verifies the jmf from samples taken from hma produced by the plant to be used .
the production set point at the plant must be within num from the asphalt binder percentage tv shown in your contractor job mix formula proposal form .
notify the engineer at least num business days before sampling materials .
samples may be taken from a different project including a nondepartment project if you make arrangements for the engineer to be present during sampling .
in the engineers presence and from the same production run take samples of num .
aggregates .
coarse fine and supplemental fine aggregates must be taken from the combined cold feed belt or the hot bins .
if lime treatment is required samples must be taken from individual stockpiles before lime treatment .
samples must be at least num lb for each coarse aggregate num lb for each fine aggregate and num lb for each type of supplemental fine aggregate .
for hotbin samples the department combines these aggregate samples to verify the tv submitted on a contractor job mix formula proposal form .
num .
asphalt binder .
take at least two num qt samples .
each sample must be in a cylindricalshaped can with an open top and friction lid .
if the asphalt binder is modified or rubberized the asphalt binder must be sampled with the components blended in the proportions to be used .
num .
rap .
samples must be at least num lb from each fractionated stockpile used or num lb from the belt .
num .
plantproduced hma .
the hma samples must be at least num lb .
for aggregate rap and hma split the samples into at least num parts and label their containers .
three parts are for the departments verification testing and num part is for your testing .
after acceptance of the jmf submittal the engineer verifies each proposed jmf within num days of receiving all verification samples .
for jmf verification the engineer tests the following for compliance with the specifications num .
aggregate quality num .
aggregate gradation section num asphalt concrete num num .
voids in mineral aggregate on laboratoryproduced hma num .
hma quality characteristics for department acceptance to verify the hma for air voids voids in mineral aggregate and dust proportion the engineer uses an average of num briquettes .
the engineer tests plantproduced material .
if the engineer verifies the jmf the engineer furnishes you a hot mix asphalt verification form .
if the engineers test results on plantproduced samples do not show compliance with the specifications the engineer notifies you .
adjust your jmf based on your testing unless the engineer authorizes reverification without adjustments .
jmf adjustments may include a change in num .
asphalt binder content tv up to num percent from the obc value submitted on the contractor hot mix asphalt design data form num .
aggregate gradation tv within the tv limits specified in the aggregate gradation table you may adjust the jmf only once due to a failed verification test .
for each hma type and aggregate size specified the engineer verifies up to num proposed jmf submittals including a jmf adjusted after verification failure .
if you submit more than num jmfs for each type of hma and aggregate size the engineer deducts num from payments for each verification exceeding this limit .
this deduction does not apply to verifications initiated by the engineer or if a jmf expires while hma production is stopped longer than num days .
a verified jmf is valid for num months .
numanumc job mix formula authorization you may start hma production if num .
engineers review of the jmf shows compliance with the specifications num .
department has verified the jmf within num months before hma production num .
engineer authorizes the verified jmf numanumd job mix formula renewal for a jmf renewaland upon request in the engineers presence and from the same production run take samples of num .
aggregates .
coarse fine and supplemental fine aggregates must be taken from the combined cold feed belt or the hot bins .
if lime treatment is required samples must be taken from individual stockpiles before lime treatment .
samples must be at least num lb for each coarse aggregate num lb for each fine aggregate and num lb for each type of supplemental fines .
for hotbin samples the department combines these aggregate samples to verify the tv submitted on a contractor job mix formula proposal form .
num .
asphalt binder .
take at least two num qt samples .
each sample must be in a cylindricalshaped can with an open top and friction lid .
if the asphalt binder is modified or rubberized the asphalt binder must be sampled with the components blended in the proportions to be used .
num .
rap .
samples must be at least num lb from each fractionated stockpile .
num .
plantproduced hma .
the hma samples must be at least num lb .
notify the engineer at least num business days before sampling materials .
for aggregate rap and hma split samples into at least num parts .
submit num parts and use num part for your testing .
allow the engineer num business days from a complete jmf reverification submittal for document review of the aggregate qualities mix design and jmf .
the most recent aggregate quality test results within the past num months may be used for verification of jmf renewal or upon request the engineer may perform aggregate quality tests for verification of jmf renewal .
the engineer verifies the jmf for renewal under section numanumb except section num asphalt concrete num num .
engineer keeps the samples until you provide test results for your part on a contractor job mix formula renewal form .
num .
department tests samples of materials obtained from the hma production unit after you submit test results that comply with the mix design specifications .
num .
after completion of the jmf verification renewal document review the engineer verifies each proposed jmf within num days of receiving the verification renewal samples and the complete contractor job mix formula renewal form .
num .
you may not adjust the jmf due to a failed verification .
num .
for each hma type and aggregate gradation specified the engineer verifies at no cost to you num proposed jmf renewal within a nummonth period .
if the engineer verifies the jmf renewal the engineer furnishes you a hot mix asphalt verification form .
the hot mix asphalt verification form is valid for num months .
numanume job mix formula modification the engineer verifies the modified jmf after the modified jmf hma is placed and verification samples are taken within the first num tons .
the engineer tests verification samples for compliance with num .
hamburg wheel track mix design specifications num .
air void content num .
voids in mineral aggregate on plantproduced hma mix design specifications num .
dust proportion mix design specifications the engineer may test for moisture susceptibility for compliance with the mix design specifications .
if the modified jmf is verified the engineer revises your hot mix asphalt verification form to include the new asphalt binder source new liquid antistrip producer or new liquid antistrip dosage .
your revised form will have the same expiration date as the original form .
if a modified jmf is not verified stop production and any hma placed using the modified jmf is rejected .
the engineer deducts num from payments for each jmf modification .
numanumf certifications numanumfi general laboratories testing aggregate and hma qualities used to prepare the mix design and jmf must be qualified under aashto materials reference laboratory program and the departments independent assurance program .
numanumfii hot mix asphalt plants before production the hma plant must have a current qualification under the departments material plant quality program .
numanumfiiinumanumfv reserved numanumg reserved numanumh quality control numanumhi general qc test results must comply with the specifications for department acceptance .
prepare num briquettes for air voids content and voids in mineral aggregate determination .
report the average of num tests .
except for smoothness if num consecutive qc test results or any num qc test results for num days production do not comply with the materials specifications num .
stop hma production num .
notify the engineer num .
take corrective action num .
demonstrate compliance with the specifications before resuming production and placement section num asphalt concrete num for qc tests performed under aashto t num results are considered num qc test regardless of number of sieves out of compliance .
do not resume production and placement until the engineer authorizes your corrective action proposal .
numanumhii reserved numanumhiii aggregates numanumhiiia general reserved numanumhiiib aggregate lime treatments if lime treatment is required sample coarse and fine aggregates from individual stockpiles before lime treatment .
combine aggregate in the jmf proportions .
test the aggregates under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table aggregate quality control during lime treatment quality characteristic test method minimum sampling and testing frequency sand equivalenta b aashto t num num per num tons of untreated aggregate percent of crushed particles aashto t num num per num tons or num per project whichever is greater los angeles rattler aashto t num fine aggregate angularity aashto t num method a flat and elongated particles astm dnum areport test results as the average of num tests from a single sample .
buse of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in aashto t num figure num .
sections num manual shaker num alternate method no .
num and num hand method do not apply .
prepare the stock solution as specified in section num stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
for lime slurry aggregate treatment determine the aggregate moisture content at least once every num hours of treatment .
calculate moisture content under aashto t num and report it as a percent of dry aggregate weight .
use the moisture content calculations as a set point for the proportioning process controller .
the device controlling lime and aggregate proportioning must produce a treatment data log .
the log must consist of a series of data sets captured at numminute intervals throughout daily treatment .
the data must be a treatment activity register and not a summation .
the material represented by a data set is the quantity produced num minutes before and num minutes after the capture time .
collected data must be stored by the controller for the duration of the contract .
if num consecutive sets of recorded treatment data indicate a deviation of more than num percent above or below the lime ratio in the authorized jmf stop treatment and take corrective action .
if a set of recorded treatment data indicates a deviation of more than num percent above or below the lime ratio in the authorized jmf stop treatment and do not use the material represented by that set of data in hma .
if num percent or more of the total daily treatment indicates a deviation of more than num percent above or below the lime ratio in the authorized jmf stop treatment and do not use that days treated aggregate in hma .
the engineer may order you to stop aggregate treatment activities for any of following num .
you fail to submit treatment data log .
num .
you fail to submit aggregate qc data for marinated aggregate .
num .
you submit incomplete untimely or incorrectly formatted data .
num .
you do not take corrective actions .
num .
you take late or unsuccessful corrective actions .
num .
you do not stop treatment when proportioning tolerances are exceeded .
num .
you use malfunctioning or failed proportioning devices .
section num asphalt concrete num if you stop treatment for noncompliance notify the engineer of any corrective actions taken and conduct a successful numminute test run before resuming treatment .
numanumhiv liquid antistrip treatment for continuous mixing or batchplant mixing sample asphalt binder before adding liquid antistrip .
for continuous mixing sample the combined asphalt binder and liquid antistrip after the static mixer .
numanumhv production startup evaluation you and the engineer evaluate hma production and placement at production startup .
within the first num tons produced on the numst day of hma production in the engineers presence and from the same production run take samples of num .
aggregates num .
asphalt binder num .
rap num .
hma sample aggregates from the combined coldfeed belt or hot bin .
take rap samples from the rap system .
for aggregates rap and hma split the samples into at least num parts and label their containers .
submit num parts and keep num part .
you and the engineer must test the samples and report test results except for aashto t num modified and aashto t num test results within num business days of sampling .
for aashto t num modified and aashto t num test results report test results within num days of sampling .
if you proceed before receipt of the test results the engineer may consider the hma placed to be represented by these test results .
take one num or numinch diameter density core for each num tons or portion thereof of hma placed .
for each density core the engineer reports the bulk specific gravity determined under aashto t num method a in addition to the percent of theoretical maximum density .
numanumhvi hot mix asphalt density during hma placement determine hma density using a nuclear gauge .
on the numst day of production develop a correlation factor between cores and nuclear gauge under california test num .
test for inplace density using cores and a nuclear gauge .
test at random locations you select and include the test results in your qc production tests reports .
numanumhvii tapered notched wedge perform qc testing on the completed tapered notched wedge joint as follows num .
perform density tests using a calibrated nuclear gauge at a rate of num test for every numfoot section along the joint .
select random locations for testing within each numfoot section .
num .
perform density tests at the centerline of the joint num inches from the upper vertical notch after the adjacent lane is placed and before opening the pavement to traffic .
num .
determine theoretical maximum density .
num .
determine percent compaction of the longitudinal joint as the ratio of the daily average density to the maximum density test results .
determine percent compaction values each day the tapered notched wedge joint is completed .
if the percent compaction of num days production is less than num percent that days notched wedge joint is rejected .
discontinue placement of the tapered notched wedge and notify the engineer of changes you will make to your construction process to comply with the specifications .
numanumhviii density cores except for hma pavement placed using method compaction take num or numinch diameter density cores at least once every num business days .
take num density core for every num tons of hma from random locations the engineer selects .
take density cores in the engineers presence and backfill and compact holes with section num asphalt concrete num authorized material .
before submitting a density core mark it with the density cores location and place it in a protective container .
if a density core is damaged replace it with a density core taken within num foot longitudinally from the original density core location .
relocate any density core located within num foot of a rumble strip to num foot transversely away from the rumble strip .
for a tapered notched wedge joint take num or numinch diameter density cores num inches from the upper vertical notch of the completed longitudinal joint for every num feet at locations selected by the engineer .
take cores after the adjacent lane is placed and before opening the pavement to traffic .
take cores in the presence of the engineer and backfill and compact holes with authorized material .
before submitting a density core mark it with the cores location and place it in a protective container .
numanumhix pavement smoothness for hma pavement within num feet from and parallel to the construction joint formed between curbs gutters or existing pavement test pavement smoothness using a numfoot straightedge .
numanumhx reserved numanumi department acceptance numanumii general the department tests treated aggregate for acceptance before lime treatment except for gradation .
the engineer takes hma samples for aashto t num and aashto t num modified from any of the following locations num .
plant num .
truck num .
windrow the engineer takes hma samples for all other tests from any of the following locations num .
plant num .
truck num .
windrow num .
mat behind the paver to obtain workability of the hma sample for splitting the engineer reheats each sample of hma mixture not more than num cycles .
each reheat cycle is performed by placing the loose mixture in a mechanical forceddraft oven for num hours or less after the sample reaches num degrees f. the engineer conditions each attheplant sample of hma mixture in compliance with sections num num and num of aashto r num .
the engineer splits samples and provides you with a part if you request this .
no single test result may represent more than num tons or one days production whichever is less except aashto t num and aashto t num modified .
except for smoothness if num consecutive department acceptance test results or any num department acceptance test results for num days production do not comply with the specifications num .
stop hma production num .
take corrective action num .
demonstrate compliance with the specifications before resuming production and placement for department acceptance tests performed under aashto t num results are considered num department acceptance test regardless of the number of sieves out of compliance .
the engineer accepts hma based on num .
authorized jmf num .
authorized qc plan section num asphalt concrete num num .
asphalt binder compliance num .
asphalt emulsion compliance num .
visual inspection num .
pavement smoothness numanumiii inplace density except for hma pavement placed using method compaction the engineer tests the density core you take from each num tons of hma .
the engineer determines the percent of theoretical maximum density for each density core by determining the density cores density and dividing by the theoretical maximum density .
density cores must be taken from the final layer cored through the entire pavement thickness shown .
where ogfc is required take the density cores before placing ogfc .
if the percent of theoretical maximum density does not comply with the specifications the engineer may accept the hma and take a payment deduction as shown in the following table reduced payment factors for percent of maximum theoretical density hma percent of maximum theoretical density reduced payment factor hma percent of maximum theoretical density reduced payment factor num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num remove and replace num remove and replace for acceptance of a completed tapered notched wedge joint the engineer determines density from cores you take every num feet .
numanumiiii pavement smoothness for areas that require pavement smoothness determined using an inertial profiler the pavement surface must num .
have no areas of localized roughness with an international roughness index greater than num inmi num .
comply with the mean roughness index requirements shown in the following table for a num mile section section num asphalt concrete num hma pavement smoothness acceptance criteria hma thickness mean roughness index requirement num foot num inmi or less num foot num inmi or less note these requirements do not apply to the ogfc surface .
smoothness requirements for ogfc are specified in section num numanumciii .
the final surface of hma must comply with the mean roughness index requirements before placing ogfc .
correct pavement to the mean roughness index specifications .
areas of localized roughness greater than num inmi must be corrected regardless of the mean roughness index values of a nummile section .
numanumiiv dispute resolution you and the engineer must work together to avoid potential conflicts and to resolve disputes regarding test result discrepancies .
notify the engineer within num business days of receiving a test result if you dispute the test result .
if you or the engineer dispute the others test results submit your test results and copies of paperwork including worksheets used to determine the disputed test results .
an independent third party performs referee testing .
before the third party participates in a dispute resolution it must be qualified under aashto materials reference laboratory program and the departments independent assurance program .
the independent third party must have no prior direct involvement with this contract .
by mutual agreement the independent third party is chosen from num .
department laboratory in a district or region not in the district or region the project is located num .
transportation laboratory num .
laboratory not currently employed by you or your hma producer if the departments portion of the split qc samples or acceptance samples are not available the independent third party uses any available material representing the disputed hma for evaluation .
for a dispute involving jmf verification the independent third party performs referee testing as specified in the numth paragraph of section numanumb .
if the independent third party determines the departments test results are valid the engineer deducts the independent third partys testing costs from payments .
if the independent third party determines your test results are valid the department pays the independent third partys testing costs .
numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum mix design numbnuma general the hma mix design must comply with aashto r num except num .
notes num num and num do not apply num .
aashto m num does not apply on combinations of aggregate gradation and asphalt binder contents to determine the obc and hma mixture qualities the contractor hot mix asphalt design data form must show documentation on aggregate quality .
numbnumb hot mix asphalt treatments if the test results for aashto t num or aashto t num modified for untreated plantproduced hma are less than the minimum requirements for hma mix design determine the plasticity index of the aggregate blend under california test num .
do not use an aggregate blend with a plasticity index greater than num .
section num asphalt concrete num if the plasticity index is from num to num treat the aggregate with dry lime with marination or lime slurry with marination .
if the plasticity index is less than num treat the aggregate with dry lime or lime slurry with marination or treat the hma with liquid antistrip .
numbnumc warm mix asphalt technology for hma with wma additive technology produce hma mix samples for your mix design using your methodology for inclusion of wma admixture in laboratoryproduced hma .
cure the samples in a forced air draft oven at num degrees f for num hours num minutes .
for wma water injection foam technology the use of foamed asphalt for mix design is not required .
numbnum asphalt binder asphalt binder must comply with section num .
for a leveling course the grade of asphalt binder for the hma must be pg num or pg num .
numbnum aggregates numbnuma general aggregates must be clean and free from deleterious substances .
the aggregates for a leveling course must comply with the gradation specifications for type a hma in section numb .
numbnumb aggregate gradations aggregate gradation must be determined before the addition of asphalt binder and must include supplemental fine aggregates .
test for aggregate gradation under aashto t num .
do not wash the coarse aggregate .
wash the fine aggregate only .
use a mechanical sieve shaker .
aggregate shaking time must not exceed num minutes for each coarse and fine aggregate portion .
choose a tv within the tv limits shown in the tables titled aggregate gradations .
gradations are based on nominal maximum aggregate size .
numbnumc aggregate lime treatments numbnumci general if aggregate lime treatment is required as specified in section numbnumb the virgin aggregate must comply with the aggregate quality specifications .
lime for treating aggregate must comply with section num .
water for lime treatment of aggregate with lime slurry must comply with section numb .
notify the engineer at least num hours before the start of aggregate treatment .
do not treat rap .
the lime ratio is the pounds of dry lime per num lb of dry virgin aggregate expressed as a percentage .
water content of slurry or untreated aggregate must not affect the lime ratio .
coarse and fine aggregate fractions must have the lime ratio ranges shown in the following table aggregate fractions lime ratio percent coarse num fine num combined num the lime ratio for fine and coarse aggregate must be within num percent of the lime ratio in the accepted jmf .
the lime ratio must be within num percent of the authorized lime ratio when you combine the section num asphalt concrete num individual aggregate sizes in the jmf proportions .
the lime ratio must be determined before the addition of rap .
if marination is required marinate treated aggregate in stockpiles from num hours to num days before using in hma .
do not use aggregate marinated longer than num days .
treated aggregate must not have lime balls or clods .
numbnumcii dry lime if marination is required num .
treat and marinate coarse and fine aggregates separately num .
treat the aggregate and stockpile for marination only once num .
treat the aggregate separately from hma production proportion dry lime by weight with an automatic continuous proportioning system .
if you use a batchtype proportioning system for hma production control proportioning in compliance with the specifications for continuous mixing plants .
use a separate dry lime aggregate treatment system for hma batch mixing including num .
pugmill mixer num .
controller num .
weigh belt for the lime num .
weigh belt for the aggregate if a continuous mixing plant for hma production without limemarinated aggregates is used use a controller that measures the blended aggregate weight after any additional water is added to the mixture .
the controller must determine the quantity of lime added to the aggregate from the aggregate weigh belt input in connection with the manually input total aggregate moisture the manually input target lime content and the lime proportioning system output .
use a continuous aggregate weigh belt and pugmill mixer for lime treatment in addition to the weigh belt for the aggregate proportioning to asphalt binder in the hma plant .
if you use a water meter for moisture control for lime treatment the meter must comply with departments mpqp manual .
when mixing dry lime with aggregate the aggregate moisture content must ensure complete lime coating .
the aggregate moisture content must not cause aggregate to be lost between the point of weighing the combined aggregate continuous stream and the dryer .
add water to the aggregate for mixing and coating before dry lime addition .
immediately before mixing lime with aggregate water must not visibly separate from the aggregate .
mix aggregate water and dry lime with a continuous pugmill mixer with twin shafts .
immediately before mixing lime with aggregate water must not visibly separate from the aggregate .
store dry lime in a uniform and freeflowing condition .
introduce dry lime to the pugmill in a continuous process .
the introduction must occur after the aggregate cold feed and before the point of proportioning across a weigh belt and the aggregate dryer .
prevent loss of dry lime .
the pugmill must be equipped with paddles arranged to provide sufficient mixing action and mixture movement .
the pugmill must produce a homogeneous mixture of uniformly coated aggregates at mixer discharge .
if the aggregate treatment process is stopped longer than num hour clean the equipment of partially treated aggregate and lime .
aggregate must be completely treated before introduction into the mixing drum .
numbnumciii lime slurry for lime slurry aggregate treatment treat aggregate separate from hma production .
stockpile and marinate the aggregate .
proportion lime and water with a continuous or batch mixing system .
section num asphalt concrete num add lime to the aggregate as slurry consisting of mixed dry lime and water at a ratio of num part lime to from num to num parts water by weight .
the slurry must completely coat the aggregate .
immediately before mixing lime slurry with the aggregate water must not visibly separate from the aggregate .
proportion lime slurry and aggregate by weight in a continuous process .
numbnum liquid antistrip treatment liquid antistrip must be from num to num percent by weight of asphalt binder .
do not use liquid antistrip as a substitute for asphalt binder .
liquid antistrip total amine value must be num minimum when tested under astm dnum .
use only num liquid antistrip type or brand at a time .
do not mix liquid antistrip types or brands .
store and mix liquid antistrip under the manufacturers instructions .
numbnumbnum reserved numbnum hot mix asphalt production numbnuma general do not start hma production before verification and authorization of jmf .
the hma plant must have a current qualification under the departments material plant quality program .
weighing and metering devices used for the production of hma modified with additives must comply with the departments mpqp .
if a lossinweight meter is used for dry hma additive the meter must have an automatic and integral material delivery control system for the refill cycle .
calibrate the lossinweight meter by num .
including at least num complete system refill cycle during each calibration test run num .
operating the device in a normal run mode for num minutes immediately before starting the calibration process num .
isolating the scale system within the lossinweight feeder from surrounding vibration num .
checking the scale system within the lossinweight feeder for accuracy before and after the calibration process and daily during mix production num .
using a minimum num minute or minimum num lb test run size for a dry ingredient delivery rate of less than num ton per hour .
num .
complying with the limits of table b conveyor scale testing extremes in the departments mpqp proportion aggregate by hot or coldfeed control .
aggregate temperature must not be more than num degrees f when mixed with the asphalt binder .
asphalt binder temperature must be from num to num degrees f when mixed with aggregate .
mix hma ingredients into a homogeneous mixture of coated aggregates .
the temperature of hma with or without rap must not be more than num degrees f. for hma produced using wma technology the temperature of hma must from num to num degrees f. if method compaction is used hma must be produced at a temperature from num to num degrees f. if you stop production for longer than num days a production startup evaluation is required .
numbnumb liquid antistrip if num consecutive sets of recorded production data show that the actual delivered liquid antistrip weight is more than num percent of the authorized mix design liquid antistrip weight stop production and take corrective action .
section num asphalt concrete num if a set of recorded production data shows that the actual delivered liquid antistrip weight is more than num percent of the authorized mix design liquid antistrip weight stop production .
if the liquid antistrip weight exceeds num percent of the asphalt binder weight do not use the hma represented by that data .
the continuous mixing plant controller proportioning the hma must produce a production data log .
the log must consist of a series of data sets captured at numminute intervals throughout daily production .
the data must be a production activity register and not a summation .
the material represented by the data is the quantity produced num minutes before and num minutes after the capture time .
for the duration of the contract the collected data must be stored by the plant controller or a computers memory at the plant .
the engineer orders proportioning activities stopped for any of the following reasons num .
you fail to submit data num .
you submit incomplete untimely or incorrectly formatted data num .
you fail to take corrective actions num .
you take late or unsuccessful corrective actions num .
you fail to stop production when proportioning tolerances are exceeded num .
you use malfunctioning or failed proportioning devices if you stop production notify the engineer of any corrective actions taken before resuming .
numbnumc warm mix asphalt technology proportion all ingredients by weight .
the hma plant process controller must be the sole source of ingredient proportioning control and be fully interfaced with all scales and meters used in the production process .
the addition of the hma additive must be controlled by the plant process controller .
liquid ingredient additive including a normally dry ingredient made liquid must be proportioned with a mass flow meter at continuous mixing plants .
use a mass flow meter or a container scale to proportion liquid additives at batch mixing plants .
continuous mixing plants using hma additives must comply with the following num .
dry ingredient additives for continuous production must be proportioned with a conveyor scale or a lossinweight meter .
num .
hma plant process controller and ingredient measuring systems must be capable of varying all ingredientfeed rates proportionate with the dry aggregate delivery at all production rates and rate changes .
num .
liquid hma additive must enter the production stream with the binder .
dry hma additive must enter the production stream at or before the mixing area .
num .
if dry hma additives are used at continuous mixing hma plants baghouse dust systems must return all captured material to the mix .
this requirement is waived for limetreated aggregates .
num .
hma additive must be proportioned to within num percent of the target additive rate .
batch mixing plants using hma additives must comply with the following num .
metered hma additive must be placed in an intermediate holding vessel before being added to the stream of asphalt binder as it enters the pugmill .
num .
if a container scale is used weigh additive before combining with asphalt binder .
keep the container scale separate from other ingredient proportioning .
the container scale capacity must be no more than twice the volume of the maximum additive batch size .
the container scales graduations must be smaller than the proportioning tolerance or num times the container scale capacity .
num .
dry hma additive proportioning devices must be separate from metering devices for the aggregates and asphalt binder .
proportion dry hma additive directly into the pugmill or place in an intermediate holding vessel to be added to the pugmill at the appropriate time in the batch cycle .
dry ingredients for batch production must be proportioned with a hopper scale .
num .
zero tolerance for the hma additive batch scale is num percent of the target additive weight .
the indicated hma additive batch scale weight may vary from the preselected weight setting by up to num percent of the target additive weight .
section num asphalt concrete num numbnum geosynthetic pavement interlayer geosynthetic pavement interlayer must comply with the specifications for pavement fabric paving mat paving grid paving geocomposite grid or geocomposite strip membrane as shown .
the asphalt binder for geosynthetic pavement interlayer must be pg num pg num or pg num .
numbnum tack coat tack coat must comply with the specifications for asphaltic emulsion or asphalt binder .
choose the type and grade of emulsion or binder .
numbnum miscellaneous areas and dikes for miscellaneous areas and dikes num .
choose either the numinch or numinch aggregate gradation for type a hma .
num .
minimum asphalt binder content must be num percent for numinch aggregate and num percent for numinch aggregate .
you may reduce the minimum asphalt binder content if authorized .
num .
choose asphalt binder grade pg num pg num or pg num .
for hma used in miscellaneous areas and dikes sections numanum numanum numbnum num numbnumc and numbnum do not apply .
numc construction numcnum general do not place hma on wet pavement or frozen surface .
you may deposit hma in a windrow and load it in the paver if num .
paver is equipped with a hopper that automatically feeds the screed num .
loading equipment can pick up the windrowed material and deposit it in the paver hopper without damaging base material num .
activities for depositing pickup loading and paving are continuous num .
hma temperature in the windrow does not fall below num degrees f hma placed in a windrow on the roadway surface must not extend more than num feet in front of the loading equipment or material transfer vehicle .
you may place hma in num or more layers on areas less than num feet wide and outside the traveled way including shoulders .
you may use mechanical equipment other than a paver for these areas .
the equipment must produce uniform smoothness and texture .
hma handled spread or windrowed must not stain the finished surface of any improvement including pavement .
do not use petroleum products such as kerosene or diesel fuel to release hma from trucks spreaders or compactors .
hma must be free of num .
segregation num .
coarse or fine aggregate pockets num .
hardened lumps complete finish rolling activities before the pavement surface temperature is num .
below num degrees f for hma with unmodified binder num .
below num degrees f for hma with modified binder num .
below num degrees f for hma with wma technology numcnum spreading and compacting equipment numcnuma general paving equipment for spreading must be section num asphalt concrete num num .
selfpropelled num .
mechanical num .
equipped with a screed or strikeoff assembly that can distribute hma the full width of a traffic lane num .
equipped with a fullwidth compacting device num .
equipped with automatic screed controls and sensing devices that control the thickness longitudinal grade and transverse screed slope install and maintain grade and slope references .
the screed must be heated and produce a uniform hma surface texture without tearing shoving or gouging .
the paver must not leave marks such as ridges and indentations unless you can eliminate them by rolling .
rollers must be equipped with a system that prevents hma from sticking to the wheels .
you may use a parting agent that does not damage the hma or impede the bonding of layers .
in areas inaccessible to spreading and compacting equipment num .
spread the hma by any means to obtain the specified lines grades and cross sections num .
use a pneumatic tamper plate compactor or equivalent to achieve thorough compaction numcnumb material transfer vehicle if a material transfer vehicle is specified the material transfer vehicle must have sufficient capacity to prevent stopping the paver and must be capable of num .
either receiving hma directly from trucks or using a windrow pickup head to load it from a windrow deposited on the roadway surface num .
remixing the hma with augers before transferring into the pavers receiving hopper or feed system num .
transferring hma directly into the pavers receiving hopper or feed system numcnumc method compaction equipment for method compaction each paver spreading hma must be followed by num rollers num .
one vibratory roller specifically designed to compact hma .
the roller must be capable of at least num vibrations per minute and must be equipped with amplitude and frequency controls .
the rollers gross static weight must be at least num tons .
num .
one oscillatingtype pneumatictired roller at least num feet wide .
pneumatic tires must be of equal size diameter type and ply .
the tires must be inflated to num psi minimum and maintained so that the air pressure does not vary more than num psi .
num .
one steeltired numaxle tandem roller .
the rollers gross static weight must be at least num tons .
each roller must have a separate operator .
rollers must be selfpropelled and reversible .
numcnumdnumcnumf reserved numcnum surface preparation numcnuma general before placing hma remove loose paving particles dirt and other extraneous material by any means including flushing and sweeping .
numcnumb subgrade prepare subgrade to receive hma under the sections for the material involved .
subgrade must be free of loose and extraneous material .
numcnumc reserved numcnumd prepaving inertial profiler section numcnumd applies to existing asphalt concrete surfaces receiving an hma overlay if a bid item for prepaving inertial profiler is shown on the bid item list .
section num asphalt concrete num before starting paving activities perform prepaving inertial profiler measurements .
prepaving inertial profiler work includes taking profiles of the existing pavement and analyzing the data with proval to determine existing pavement international roughness index mean roughness index and areas of localized roughness .
if the contract includes cold planing take prepaving inertial profiler measurements before cold planning .
if the contract includes replace asphalt concrete surfacing take prepaving inertial profiler measurements after replacing the asphalt concrete surfacing .
numcnume prepaving grinding section numcnume applies to existing asphalt concrete surfaces num .
that will not be cold planned or milled num .
that will receive an hma overlay less than or equal to num foot exclusive of ogfc num .
if a bid item for prepaving grinding day is shown on the bid item list after performing prepaving inertial profiling correct areas of localized roughness greater than num inmi .
notify the engineer of those areas of localized roughness that can not be corrected by prepaving grinding according to the proval smoothness assurance analysis grinding report .
the engineer responds to your notification within num business days .
for those areas of localized roughness that can not be corrected by grinding the engineer may order you to either num not correct the areas of localized roughness or num correct areas of localized roughness by a different method and take profiles of the corrected areas with an inertial profiler .
corrective work performed by a different method taking profiles of the corrected areas the associated traffic control is change order work .
if ordered not to correct areas of localized roughness the smoothness specifications do not apply to the final pavement surface placed in those areas .
after correcting areas of localized roughness take profiles of the corrected area and submit profile data as specified in section numanummiv .
dispose of grinding residue .
pave within num days of correcting areas .
the final pavement surface must comply with section numanumiiii .
if the engineer determines more time is required for prepaving grinding than the contract allows for and if prepaving grinding is a controlling activity the engineer makes a time adjustment .
numcnumf tack coat apply a tack coat num .
to existing pavement including planed surfaces num .
between hma layers num .
to vertical surfaces of num .
curbs num .
gutters num .
construction joints equipment for the application of tack coat must comply with section numb .
before placing hma apply a tack coat in num application at the minimum residual rate shown in the following table for the condition of the underlying surface section num asphalt concrete num tack coat application rates for hma hma over minimum residual rates galsq yd cssnumcssnumh ssnumssnumh and qsnumhcqsnumh asphaltic emulsion crsnumcrsnum rsnumrsnum and qsnumcqsnum asphaltic emulsion asphalt binder and pmrsnumpmcrsnum and pmrsnumhpmcrsnumh asphaltic emulsion new hma between layers num num num concrete pavement and existing asphalt concrete surfacing num num num planed pavement num num num if a stress absorbing membrane interlayer as specified in section num is applied the tack coat application rates for new hma apply .
notify the engineer if you dilute asphaltic emulsion with water .
the weight ratio of added water to asphaltic emulsion must not exceed num to num .
measure added water either by weight or volume under section num or use water meters from water districts cities or counties .
if you measure water by volume apply a conversion factor to determine the correct weight .
with each dilution submit num .
weight ratio of water to bituminous material in the original asphaltic emulsion num .
weight of asphaltic emulsion before diluting num .
weight of added water num .
final dilution weight ratio of water to asphaltic emulsion apply a tack coat to vertical surfaces with a residual rate that will thoroughly coat the vertical face without running off .
if authorized you may num .
change tack coat rates num .
omit tack coat between layers of new hma during the same work shift if num .
no dust dirt or extraneous material is present num .
surface is at least num degrees f immediately in advance of placing hma apply additional tack coat to damaged areas or where loose or extraneous material is removed .
close areas receiving tack coat to traffic .
do not allow the tracking of tack coat onto pavement surfaces beyond the job site .
if you use an asphalt binder for tack coat the asphalt binder temperature must be from num to num degrees f when applied .
numcnumg geosynthetic pavement interlayer where shown place geosynthetic pavement interlayer over a coat of asphalt binder and in compliance with the manufacturers instructions .
do not place the interlayer on a wet or frozen surface .
before placing the interlayer and asphalt binder num .
repair cracks num inch and wider spalls and holes in the pavement .
repairing cracks is change order work .
num .
clean the pavement of loose and extraneous material .
immediately before placing the interlayer apply num num gal of asphalt binder per square yard of interlayer or until saturated .
apply asphalt binder the width of the interlayer plus num inches on each side .
at section num asphalt concrete num an interlayer overlap apply asphalt binder on the lower interlayer the same overlap distance as the upper interlayer .
align and place the interlayer with no overlapping wrinkles except a wrinkle that overlaps may remain if it is less than num inch thick .
if the overlapping wrinkle is more than num inch thick cut the wrinkle out and overlap the interlayer no more than num inches .
overlap the interlayer borders between num to num inches .
in the direction of paving overlap the following roll with the preceding roll at any break .
you may use rolling equipment to correct distortions or wrinkles in the interlayer .
if asphalt binder tracked onto the interlayer or brought to the surface by construction equipment causes interlayer displacement cover it with a small quantity of hma .
before placing hma on the interlayer do not expose the interlayer to num .
traffic except for crossings under traffic control and only after you place a small hma quantity num .
sharp turns from construction equipment num .
damaging elements pave hma on the interlayer during the same work shift .
the minimum hma thickness over the interlayer must be num foot thick including at conform tapers .
numcnum longitudinal joints numcnuma general longitudinal joints in the top layer must match lane lines .
alternate the longitudinal joint offsets in the lower layers at least num foot from each side of the lane line .
other longitudinal joint placement patterns are allowed if authorized .
a vertical longitudinal joint of more than num foot is not allowed at any time between adjacent lanes open to traffic .
for an hma thickness of num foot or less the distance between the ends of the adjacent surfaced lanes at the end of each days work must not be greater than can be completed in the following day of normal paving .
for an hma thickness greater than num foot you must place hma on adjacent traveled way lanes or shoulder such that at the end of each work shift the distance between the ends of hma layers on adjacent lanes is from num to num feet .
place additional hma along the transverse edge at each lanes end and along the exposed longitudinal edges between adjacent lanes .
hand rake and compact the additional hma to form temporary conforms .
you may place kraft paper or other authorized release agent under the conform tapers to facilitate the taper removal when paving activities resume .
if placing hma against the edge of existing pavement saw cut or grind the pavement straight and vertical along the joint and remove extraneous material .
numcnumb tapered notched wedge for divided highways with an hma lift thickness greater than num foot you may construct a numfoot wide tapered notched wedge joint as a longitudinal joint between adjacent lanes open to traffic .
a vertical notch of num inch maximum must be placed at the top and bottom of the tapered wedge .
the tapered notched wedge must keep its shape while exposed to traffic .
pave the adjacent lane within num day .
construct the tapered portion of the tapered notched wedge with an authorized strikeoff device .
the strikeoff device must provide a uniform slope and must not restrict the main screed of the paver .
you may use a device attached to the screed to construct longitudinal joints that will form a tapered notched wedge in a single pass .
the tapered notched wedge must be compacted to a minimum of num percent compaction .
section num asphalt concrete num numcnum pavement edge treatments construct edge treatment on the hma pavement as shown .
where a tapered edge is required use the same type of hma used for the adjacent lane or shoulder .
the edge of roadway where the tapered edge is to be placed must have a solid base free of debris such as loose material grass weeds or mud .
grade the areas to receive the tapered edge as required .
the tapered edge must be placed monolithic with the adjacent lane or shoulder and must be shaped and compacted with a device attached to the paver .
the device must be capable of shaping and compacting hma to the required cross section as shown .
compaction must be accomplished by constraining the hma to reduce the cross sectional area by num to num percent .
the device must produce a uniform surface texture without tearing shoving or gouging and must not leave marks such as ridges and indentations .
the device must be capable of transitioning to cross roads driveways and obstructions .
for the tapered edge the angle of the slope must not deviate by more than num degrees from the angle shown .
measure the angle from the plane of the adjacent finished pavement surface .
if paving is done in multiple lifts the tapered edge must be placed with each lift .
short sections of hand work are allowed to construct tapered edge transitions .
numcnum widening existing pavement if widening existing pavement construct new pavement structure to match the elevation of the existing pavements edge before placing hma over the existing pavement .
numcnum shoulders medians and other road connections until the adjoining through lanes top layer has been paved do not pave the top layer of num .
shoulders num .
tapers num .
transitions num .
road connections num .
driveways num .
curve widenings num .
chain control lanes num .
turnouts num .
turn pockets if the number of lanes changes pave each through lanes top layer before paving a tapering lanes top layer .
simultaneous to paving a through lanes top layer you may pave an adjoining areas top layer including shoulders .
do not operate spreading equipment on any areas top layer until completing final compaction .
if shoulders or median borders are shown pave shoulders and median borders adjacent to the lane before opening a lane to traffic .
if shoulder conform tapers are shown place conform tapers concurrently with the adjacent lanes paving .
if a driveway or a road connection is shown place additional hma along the pavements edge to conform to road connections and driveways .
hand rake if necessary and compact the additional hma to form a smooth conform taper .
numcnum leveling section numcnum applies if a bid item for hot mix asphalt leveling is shown on the bid item list .
fill and level irregularities and ruts with hma before spreading hma over the base existing surfaces or bridge decks .
you may use mechanical equipment other than a paver for these areas .
the equipment must produce uniform smoothness and texture .
hma used to change an existing surfaces cross slope or profile is not paid for as hot mix asphalt leveling .
section num asphalt concrete num numcnum miscellaneous areas and dikes prepare the area to receive hma for miscellaneous areas and dikes including excavation and backfill as needed .
spread the hma in miscellaneous areas in num layer and compact to the specified lines and grades .
in median areas adjacent to slotted median drains each layer of hma must not exceed num foot maximum compacted thickness .
the finished surface must be num .
textured uniformly num .
compacted firmly num .
without depressions humps and irregularities numcnumcnum reserved numcnum compaction numcnuma general rolling must leave the completed surface compacted and smooth without tearing cracking or shoving .
if a vibratory roller is used as a finish roller turn the vibrator off .
do not open new hma pavement to traffic until its mid depth temperature is below num degrees f. if the surface to be paved is both in sunlight and shade pavement surface temperatures are taken in the shade .
numcnumb method compaction use method compaction for any of the following conditions num .
hma pavement thickness shown is less than num foot num .
replace asphalt concrete surfacing num .
leveling courses num .
areas the engineer determines conventional compaction and compaction measurement methods are impeded hma compaction coverage is the number of passes needed to cover the paving width .
a pass is num rollers movement parallel to the paving in either direction .
overlapping passes are part of the coverage being made and are not a subsequent coverage .
do not start a coverage until completing the prior coverage .
method compaction must consist of performing num .
breakdown compaction of each layer with num coverages using a vibratory roller .
the speed of the vibratory roller in miles per hour must not exceed the vibrations per minute divided by num .
if the hma layer thickness is less than num foot turn the vibrator off .
num .
intermediate compaction of each layer of hma with num coverages using a pneumatictired roller at a speed not to exceed num mph .
num .
finish compaction of hma with num coverage using a steeltired roller .
start rolling at the lower edge and progress toward the highest part .
the engineer may order fewer coverages if the layer thickness of hma is less than num foot .
numcnumcnumcnume reserved numcnum smoothness corrections if the pavement surface does not comply with section numanumiiii grind the pavement to within specified tolerances remove and replace the pavement or place an overlay of hma .
do not start corrective work until your method is authorized .
do not use equipment with carbide cutting teeth to grind the pavement unless authorized .
section num asphalt concrete num smoothness corrections must leave at least num percent of the specified hma thickness .
if ordered core the pavement at the locations selected by the engineer .
coring including traffic control is change order work .
remove and replace deficient pavement areas where the overlay thickness is less than num percent of the thickness specified .
corrected hma pavement areas must be uniform rectangles with edges num .
parallel to the nearest hma pavement edge or lane line num .
perpendicular to the pavement centerline on ground areas not to be overlaid with ogfc apply a fog seal coat under section num .
where corrections are made within areas requiring testing with inertial profiler reprofile the entire lane length with the inertial profiler .
where corrections are made within areas requiring testing with a numfoot straightedge retest the corrected area with the straightedge .
numcnum data cores section numcnum applies if a bid item for data core is shown on the bid item list .
take data cores of the completed hma pavement underlying base and subbase material .
notify the engineer num business days before coring .
protect data cores and surrounding pavement from damage .
take numinch or numinch diameter data cores num .
at the beginning end and every num mile within the paving limits of each route on the project num .
after all paving is complete num .
from the center of the specified lane on a numlane roadway take data cores from either lane .
on a numlane roadway take data cores from the outermost lane in each direction .
on a roadway with more than num lanes take data cores from the innermost lane and the outermost lane in each direction .
each core must include the stabilized materials encountered .
you may choose not to recover unstabilized material but you must identify the material .
unstabilized material includes any of the following num .
granular material num .
crumbled or cracked stabilized material num .
sandy or clayey soil where data core samples are taken backfill and compact the holes with an authorized material .
after data core summary and photograph submittal dispose of cores .
numd payment the payment quantity for geosynthetic pavement interlayer is the area measured from the actual pavement covered .
except for tack coat used in minor hma payment for tack coat is not included in the payment for hot mix asphalt .
the department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the tack coat quantity .
the payment quantity for hma of the type shown on the bid item list is measured based on the combined mixture weight .
if recorded batch weights are printed automatically the bid item for hma is measured by using the printed batch weights provided num .
total aggregate and supplemental fine aggregate weight per batch is printed .
if supplemental fine aggregate is weighed cumulatively with the aggregate the total aggregate batch weight must include the supplemental fine aggregate weight .
num .
total virgin asphalt binder weight per batch is printed .
section num asphalt concrete num num .
each truckloads zero tolerance weight is printed before weighing the first batch and after weighing the last batch .
num .
time date mix number load number and truck identification is correlated with a load slip .
num .
copy of the recorded batch weights is certified by a licensed weigh master and submitted .
the payment quantity for place hot mix asphalt dike of the type shown on the bid item list is the length measured from end to end .
payment for the hma used to construct the dike is not included in the payment for place hot mix asphalt dike .
the payment quantity for place hot mix asphalt miscellaneous areas is the area measured for the in place compacted area .
payment for the hma used for miscellaneous areas is not included in the payment for place hot mix asphalt miscellaneous areas .
the engineer does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the prepaving grinding day quantity .
num type a hot mix asphalt numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for producing and placing type a hot mix asphalt .
you may produce type a hma using an authorized wma technology .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals numanuma general reserved numanumb job mix formula the jmf must be based on an hma mix design determined as described in the superpave mix design superpave series no .
num manual by the asphalt institute .
numanumc reclaimed asphalt pavement submit qc test results for rap gradation with the combined aggregate gradation within num business days of taking rap samples during type a hma production .
numanumdnumanumf reserved numanum quality assurance numanuma general reserved numanumb quality control numanumbi general reserved numanumbii aggregates test the quality characteristics of aggregates under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table section num asphalt concrete num aggregate testing frequencies quality characteristic test method minimum testing frequency gradationa aashto t num num per num tons and any remaining part sand equivalentb c aashto t num moisture contentd aashto t num crushed particles aashto t num num per num tons or num per project whichever is greater los angeles rattler aashto t num flat and elongated particles astm dnum fine aggregate angularity aashto t num method a aif rap is used test the combined aggregate gradation under california test num. breported value must be the average of num tests from a single sample .
cuse of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in aashto t num figure num .
sections num manual shaker num alternate method no .
num and num hand method do not apply .
prepare the stock solution as specified in section num stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
dtest at continuous mixing plants only .
if rap is used test the rap moisture content at continuous mixing plant and batch mixing plant .
for lime treated aggregate test aggregate before treatment and test for gradation and moisture content during hma production .
numanumbiii reclaimed asphalt pavement sample and test processed rap at a minimum frequency of num sample per num tons with a minimum of num samples per fractionated stockpile .
if the fractionated stockpile has not been augmented the num rap samples taken and tested for mix design can be part of this minimum sample requirement .
if a processed rap stockpile is augmented sample and test processed rap quality characteristics at a minimum frequency of num sample per num tons of augmented rap .
the combined rap sample when tested under aashto t num must be within num percent of the average asphalt binder content reported on page num of your contractor hot mix asphalt design data form .
if a new processed rap stockpile is required the average binder content of the new processed rap stockpile must be within num percent of the average binder reported on page num of your contractor hot mix asphalt design data form .
the combined rap sample when tested under aashto t num must be within num of the average maximum specific gravity reported on page num of your contractor hot mix asphalt design data form .
during type a hma production sample rap twice daily and perform qc testing for num .
aggregate gradation at least once a day under california test num num .
moisture content at least twice a day numanumbivnumanumbviii reserved numanumbix type a hot mix asphalt production test the quality characteristics of type a hma under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table section num asphalt concrete num type a hma production testing frequencies quality characteristic test method minimum testing frequency asphalt binder content aashto t num method a num per num tons and any remaining part hma moisture content aashto t num num per num tons but not less than num per paving day air voids content aashto t num num per num tons or num every num paving days whichever is greater voids in mineral aggregate spnum asphalt mixture volumetrics num per num tons or num per project whichever is greater dust proportion spnum asphalt mixture volumetrics density of core california test num num per paving day nuclear gauge density california test num num per num tons or num per paving day whichever is greater hamburg wheel track aashto t num modified num per num tons or num per project whichever is greater moisture susceptibility aashto t num numanumcnumanumd reserved numanume department acceptance the department accepts type a hma based on compliance with num .
aggregate quality requirements shown in the following table aggregate quality quality characteristic test method requirement aggregate gradationa aashto t num jmf tolerance percent of crushed particles coarse aggregate min onefractured face twofractured faces fine aggregate min passing no .
num sieve and retained on no .
num sieve .
onefractured face aashto t num num num num los angeles rattler max loss at num rev .
loss at num rev .
aashto t num num num sand equivalent min.b c aashto t num num flat and elongated particles max by weight at num astm dnum num fine aggregate angularity min d aashto t num method a num athe engineer determines combined aggregate gradations containing rap under california test num. breported value must be the average of num tests from a single sample .
cuse of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in aashto t num figure num .
sections num manual shaker num alternate method no .
num and num hand method do not apply .
prepare the stock solution as specified in section num stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
dthe engineer waives this specification if hma contains num percent or less of nonmanufactured sand by weight of total aggregate .
manufactured sand is fine aggregate produced by crushing rock or gravel .
num .
if rap is used rap quality requirements shown in the following table reclaimed asphalt pavement quality quality characteristic test method requirement binder content within the average value reported aashto t num num specific gravity within the average value reported aashto t num num num .
in place type a hma quality requirements shown in the following table section num asphalt concrete num type a hma acceptance in place quality characteristic test method requirement asphalt binder content aashto t num method a jmf num num hma moisture content max aashto t num num air voids content at ndesign a b aashto t num num num num num for numinch aggregate voids in mineral aggregate on laboratory produced hma min d gradation no .
num numinch numinch numinch numinch with nmas numinch with nmas numinch spnum asphalt mixture volumetrics num num num num num num voids in mineral aggregate on plantproduced hma min a gradation no .
num numinch numinch numinch numinch with nmas numinch with nmas numinch spnum asphalt mixture volumetricsc num num num num num num dust proportion spnum asphalt mixture volumetrics numg density of core of max theoretical densitye f california test num num hamburg wheel track min number of passes at numinch rut depth binder grade pg num pg num pg num pg num or higher aashto t num modified num num num num hamburg wheel track min number of passes at inflection point binder grade pg num pg num pg num pg num or higher aashto t num modified num num num num moisture susceptibility min psi dry strength aashto t num num moisture susceptibility min psi wet strength aashto t num num aprepare num briquettes .
report the average of num tests .
bthe engineer determines the bulk specific gravity of each labcompacted briquette under aashto t num method a and theoretical maximum specific gravity under aashto t num method a. cdetermine bulk specific gravity under aashto t num method a. dthe engineer determines the laboratoryprepared type a hma value for only mix design verification .
ethe engineer determines percent of theoretical maximum density under california test num except the engineer uses num .
aashto t num to determine inplace density of each density core num .
aashto t num method a to determine theoretical maximum density instead of calculating test section num asphalt concrete num maximum density fthe engineer determines theoretical maximum density under aashto t num method a at the frequency specified in california test num part num section d. gfor limetreated aggregates the dust proportion requirement is num .
numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum type a hot mix asphalt mix design the mix design for type a hma must comply with the requirements shown in the following table type a hma mix design requirements quality characteristic test method requirement air voids content aashto t numa ninitial num ndesign num ndesign num for numinch aggregate nmax num gyration compaction no .
of gyrations aashto t num ninitial num ndesign num nmax num voids in mineral aggregate min b gradation no .
num numinch numinch numinch numinch with nmas numinch with nmas numinch spnum asphalt mixture volumetrics num num num num num num dust proportion spnum asphalt mixture volumetrics num hamburg wheel track min number of passes at numinch rut depth binder grade pg num pg num pg num pg num or higher aashto t num modifiedc num num num num hamburg wheel track min number of passes at the inflection point binder grade pg num pg num pg num pg num or higher aashto t num modifiedc num num num num moisture susceptibility dry strength min psi aashto t numc num moisture susceptibility wet strength min psi aashto t numc d num acalculate the air voids content of each specimen using aashto t num method a to determine bulk specific gravity .
use aashto t num method a to determine theoretical maximum specific gravity .
use a digital manometer and pycnometer when performing aashto t num. bmeasure bulk specific gravity using aashto t num method a. ctest plantproduced type a hma .
dfreeze thaw required .
section num asphalt concrete num for type a hma mixtures using rap the maximum allowed binder replacement is num percent in the upper num foot exclusive of ogfc and num percent below .
the binder replacement is calculated as a percentage of the approved jmf target asphalt binder content .
for type a hma with a binder replacement percent less than or equal to num percent of your specified obc you may request that the performance graded asphalt binder grade with upper and lower temperature classifications be reduced by num degrees c from the specified grade .
for type a hma with a binder replacement greater than num percent of your specified obc and less than or equal to num percent of obc you must use a performance graded asphalt binder grade with upper and lower temperature classifications reduced by num degrees c from the specified grade .
numbnum asphalt binder reserved numbnum aggregates numbnuma general before the addition of asphalt binder and lime treatment the aggregates must comply with the requirements shown in the following table aggregate quality quality characteristic test method requirement percent of crushed particles coarse aggregate min onefractured face twofractured faces fine aggregate min passing no .
num sieve and retained on no .
num sieve .
onefractured face aashto t num num num num los angeles rattler max loss at num rev .
loss at num rev .
aashto t num num num sand equivalent mina aashto t num num flat and elongated particles max by weight at num astm dnum num fine aggregate angularity min b aashto t num method a num athe reported value must be the average of num tests from a single sample .
use of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in aashto t num figure num .
sections num manual shaker num alternate method no .
num and num hand method do not apply .
prepare the stock solution as specified in section num stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
bthe engineer waives this specification if the type a hma contains num percent or less of nonmanufactured sand by weight of total aggregate except if your jmf fails verification .
manufactured sand is fine aggregate produced by crushing rock or gravel .
numbnumb aggregate gradations the aggregate gradations for type a hma must comply with the requirements shown in the following table aggregate gradation requirements type a hma pavement thickness shown gradation num foot num inch greater than num to less than num foot num inch num to less than num foot num inch num foot or greater num inch or num inch aggregate gradation must be within the tv limits for the specified sieve size shown in the following tables section num asphalt concrete num aggregate gradations for type a hma percentage passing num inch sieve size target value limit allowable tolerance num num num num tv num num num tv num num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num num inch sieve size target value limit allowable tolerance num num num num tv num num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num num inch sieve size target value limit allowable tolerance num num num num tv num num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num num inch sieve size target value limit allowable tolerance num num num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num sieve size target value limit allowable tolerance num num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num numbnum reclaimed asphalt pavement you may substitute rap for part of the virgin aggregate in a quantity up to num percent of the aggregate blend .
section num asphalt concrete num provide enough space at your plant for complying with all rap handling requirements .
provide a clean graded base well drained area for stockpiles .
if rap is from multiple sources blend the rap thoroughly and completely before fractionating .
for rap substitution greater than num percent of the aggregate blend fractionate rap stockpiles into num sizes a coarse fraction rap retained on numinch sieve and a fine fraction rap passing numinch sieve .
for rap substitution of num percent of the aggregate blend or less fractionation is not required .
the rap fractionation must comply with the requirements shown in the following table rap stockpile fractionation gradation requirements size test method requirement coarse passing the numinch sieve california test numa num fine passing the numinch sieve california test numa num amaximum mechanical shaking time is num minutes .
you may use the coarse fractionated stockpile the fine fractionated stockpile or a combination of the coarse and fine fractionated stockpiles .
isolate the processed rap stockpiles from other materials .
store processed rap in conical or longitudinal stockpiles .
processed rap must not be agglomerated or be allowed to congeal in large stockpiles .
numbnumbnum reserved numbnum type a hot mix asphalt production if rap is used the asphalt plant must automatically adjust the virgin asphalt binder to account for rap percentage and rap binder .
during production you may adjust hot or coldfeed proportion controls for virgin aggregate and rap .
rap must be within num of rap percentage described in your contractor job mix formula proposal form without exceeding num percent .
numc construction where the pavement thickness shown is greater than num foot you may place type a hma in multiple lifts not less than num foot each .
if placing type a hma in multiple lifts num .
aggregate gradation must comply with the requirements shown in the following table aggregate gradation requirements type a hma lift thickness gradation num to less than num foot num inch num foot to less than num foot num inch num foot or greater num inch or num inch num .
apply a tack coat before placing a subsequent lift num .
the engineer evaluates each hma lift individually for compliance spread type a hma at the ambient air and surface temperatures shown in the following table minimum ambient air and surface temperatures lift thickness feet ambient air f surface f unmodified asphalt binder modified asphalt binder unmodified asphalt binder modified asphalt binder num num num num num num num num num num for method compaction the maximum lift thickness must be num foot .
section num asphalt concrete num for type a hma placed under method compaction if the asphalt binder is num .
unmodified complete num .
numst coverage of breakdown compaction before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f num .
breakdown and intermediate compaction before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f num .
finish compaction before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f num .
modified complete num .
numst coverage of breakdown compaction before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f num .
breakdown and intermediate compaction before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f num .
finish compaction before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f you may cool type a hma with water when rolling activities are complete if authorized .
numd payment not used num rubberized hot mix asphaltgap graded numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for producing and placing rubberized hot mix asphaltgap graded .
you may produce rhmag using a wma technology .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals numanuma general at least num business days before use submit the permit issued by the local air district for asphalt rubber binder blending equipment .
if an air quality permit is not required by the local air district for producing asphalt rubber binder submit verification from the local air district that an air quality permit is not required .
at least num days before rhmag production submit the name of an authorized laboratory to perform qc testing for asphalt rubber binder .
the authorized laboratory must comply with the caltrans independent assurance program .
numanumb job mix formula with your proposed jmf include the sds for num .
base asphalt binder num .
crm and asphalt modifier num .
blended asphalt rubber binder components the jmf must be based on an hma mix design determined as described in the superpave mix design superpave series no .
num manual by the asphalt institute .
numanumc asphalt rubber binder submit a proposal for asphalt rubber binder design and profile .
in the design include the asphalt binder asphalt modifier and crm and their proportions .
if you change asphalt rubber binder supplier or any component material used in asphalt rubber binder or its percentage submit a new jmf .
for the asphalt rubber binder used submit num .
log of production daily .
section num asphalt concrete num num .
certificate of compliance with test results for crm and asphalt modifier with each truckload delivered to the hma plant .
the certificate of compliance for asphalt modifier must represent no more than num lb .
num .
certified weight slips for the crm and asphalt modifier furnished .
num .
qc test results on viscosity within num business days after sampling .
num .
qc test results on cone penetration resilience and softening point within num business days after sampling .
submit a certificate of compliance for the crm and asphalt modifier .
with the certificate of compliance submit test results for crm and asphalt modifier with each truckload delivered to the hma plant .
numanum quality assurance numanuma general reserved numanumb job mix formula verification if you request the engineer verifies rhmag quality requirements within num days of receiving all verification samples and after the jmf document submittal has been accepted .
numanumc quality control numanumci general reserved numanumcii asphalt rubber binder numanumciia general the asphalt rubber binder blending plant must be authorized under the departments material plant quality program .
take asphalt rubber binder samples from the feed line connecting the asphalt rubber binder tank to the hma plant .
numanumciib asphalt modifier test asphalt modifier under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table asphalt modifier for asphalt rubber binder quality characteristic test method frequency viscosity astm dnum num per shipment flash point astm dnum molecular analysis asphaltenes aromatics astm dnum num per shipment numanumciic crumb rubber modifier sample and test scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural crumb rubber separately .
test crm under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table crumb rubber modifier for asphalt rubber binder quality characteristic test method frequency scrap tire crumb rubber gradation california test num num per num lb high natural crumb rubber gradation california test num num per num lb wire in crm california test num num per num lb fabric in crm california test num crm particle length crm specific gravity california test num natural rubber content in high natural crumb rubber astm dnum num per num lb section num asphalt concrete num numanumciid asphalt rubber binder test asphalt rubber binder under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table quality characteristic test method frequency cone penetration astm dnum num per lota resilience astm dnum softening point astm dnumdnumm viscosity astm dnumdnumm num minutes before use per lota athe lot is defined in the departments mpqp .
retain the sample from each lot .
test for cone penetration resilience and softening point for the first num lots and if all num lots pass the testing frequency may be reduced to once for every num lots .
if qc test results indicate that the asphalt rubber binder does not comply with the specifications take corrective action and notify the engineer .
numanumciii aggregates test the quality characteristics of aggregates under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table aggregate testing frequencies quality characteristic test method minimum testing frequency gradation aashto t num num per num tons and any remaining part sand equivalenta b aashto t num moisture contentc aashto t num crushed particles aashto t num num per num tons or num per project whichever is greater los angeles rattler aashto t num flat and elongated particles astm dnum fine aggregate angularity aashto t num method a areported value must be the average of num tests from a single sample .
buse of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in aashto t num figure num .
sections num manual shaker num alternate method no .
num and num hand method do not apply .
prepare the stock solution as specified in section num stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
ctest at continuous mixing plants only .
for lime treated aggregate test aggregate before treatment and test for gradation and moisture content during rhmag production .
numanumcivnumanumcviii reserved numanumcix rubberized hot mix asphaltgap graded production test the quality characteristics of rhmag under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table section num asphalt concrete num rhmag production testing frequencies quality characteristic test method minimum testing frequency asphalt binder content aashto t num method a num per num tons and any remaining part hma moisture content aashto t num num per num tons but not less than num per paving day air voids content aashto t num num per num tons or num every num paving days whichever is greater voids in mineral aggregate spnum asphalt mixture volumetrics num per num tons or num per project whichever is greater dust proportion spnum asphalt mixture volumetrics density of core california test num num per paving day nuclear gauge density california test num num per num tons or num per paving day whichever is greater hamburg wheel track aashto t num modified num per num tons or num per project whichever is greater moisture susceptibility aashto t num numanumd reserved numanume department acceptance numanumei general the department accepts rhmag based on compliance with num .
aggregate quality requirements shown in the following table aggregate quality quality characteristic test method requirement aggregate gradation aashto t num jmf tolerance percent of crushed particles coarse aggregate min onefractured face twofractured faces fine aggregate min passing no .
num sieve and retained on no .
num sieve .
onefractured face aashto t num num num los angeles rattler max loss at num rev .
loss at num rev .
aashto t num num num sand equivalent mina b aashto t num num flat and elongated particles max by weight at num astm dnum report only fine aggregate angularity min c aashto t num method a num areported value must be the average of num tests from a single sample .
buse of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in aashto t num figure num .
sections num manual shaker num alternate method no .
num and num hand method do not apply .
prepare the stock solution as specified in section num stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
cthe engineer waives this specification if rhmag contains num percent or less of nonmanufactured sand by weight of total aggregate .
manufactured sand is fine aggregate produced by crushing rock or gravel .
num .
inplace rhmag quality requirements shown in the following table section num asphalt concrete num rhmag acceptance in place quality characteristic test method requirement asphalt binder content aashto t num method a jmf num num hma moisture content max aashto t num num air voids content ndesign a b aashto t num num num voids in mineral aggregate on laboratory produced hmad min gradation numinch and numinch spnum asphalt mixture volumetricsc num voids in mineral aggregate on plantproduced hma min a gradation numinch and numinch spnum asphalt mixture volumetricsc num dust proportiona spnum asphalt mixture volumetrics report only density of core of max theoretical densitye f california test num num hamburg wheel track min number of passes at numinch rut depth binder grade pg num pg num pg num aashto t num modified num num num hamburg wheel track min number of passes at inflection point binder grade pg num pg num pg num aashto t num modified num num num moisture susceptibility min psi dry strength aashto t num num moisture susceptibility min psi wet strength aashto t num num aprepare num briquettes .
report the average of num tests .
bthe engineer determines the bulk specific gravity of each labcompacted briquette under aashto t num method a and theoretical maximum specific gravity under aashto t num method a. cdetermine bulk specific gravity under aashto t num method a. dthe engineer determines the laboratoryprepared rhmag value for only mix design verification .
ethe engineer determines percent of theoretical maximum density under california test num except the engineer uses num .
aashto t num method a to determine inplace density of each density core instead of using the nuclear gauge num .
aashto t num method a to determine theoretical maximum density instead of calculating test maximum density fthe engineer determines theoretical maximum density under aashto t num method a at the frequency specified in california test num part num section d. numanumeii asphalt rubber binder numanumeiia general the department does not use asphalt rubber binder design profile for production acceptance .
numanumeiib asphalt modifier the department accepts asphalt modifier based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table section num asphalt concrete num asphalt modifier for asphalt rubber binder quality characteristic test method requirement viscosity at num c mnums x num astm dnum x numa flash point min c astm dnum num molecular analysis asphaltenes max by mass aromatics min by mass astm dnum num num athe symbol x is the asphalt modifier viscosity .
numanumeiic crumb rubber modifier the department accepts crm scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural crumb rubber based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table crumb rubber modifier for asphalt rubber binder quality characteristic test method requirement scrap tire crumb rubber gradation passing no .
num sieve california test num num high natural crumb rubber gradation passing no .
num sieve california test num num wire in crm max california test num num fabric in crm max california test num num crm particle length max in num crm specific gravity california test num num natural rubber content in high natural crumb rubber astm dnum num scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural crumb rubber are sampled and tested separately .
numanumeiid asphalt rubber binder for department acceptance testing take samples of asphalt rubber binder in the engineers presence every num lots or once a day whichever is greater .
each sample must be in a num qt can with open top and friction lid .
the department accepts asphalt rubber binder based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement cone penetration at num c num mm astm dnum num resilience at num c min rebound astm dnum num softening point c astm dnumdnumm num viscosity at num c centipoisesa astm dnumdnumm num aprepare sample for viscosity test under california test num .
numanumeiiinumanumev reserved numb materials numbnum general reserved section num asphalt concrete num numbnum rubberized hot mix asphaltgap graded mix design for rhmag the mix design must comply with the requirements shown in the following table rhmag mix design requirements quality characteristic test method requirement air voids content aashto t numa ndesign num gyration compaction no .
of gyrations aashto t num ndesign num numb voids in mineral aggregate min spnum asphalt mixture volumetricsc num dust proportion spnum asphalt mixture volumetrics report only hamburg wheel track min number of passes at numinch rut depth binder grade pg num pg num pg num aashto t num modifiedd num num num hamburg wheel track min number of passes at the inflection point binder grade pg num pg num pg num aashto t num modifiedd num num num moisture susceptibility dry strength min psi aashto t numd num moisture susceptibility wet strength min psi aashto t numd e num acalculate the air voids content of each specimen using aashto t num method a to determine bulk specific gravity and aashto t num method a to determine theoretical maximum specific gravity .
under aashto t num use a digital manometer and pycnometer when performing aashto t num. bsuperpave gyratory compactor ram pressure may be increased to a maximum of numkpa and specimens may be held at a constant height for a maximum of num minutes .
cmeasure bulk specific gravity using aashto t num method a. dtest plant produced rhma .
efreeze thaw required .
determine the quantity of asphalt rubber binder to be mixed with the aggregate for rhmag as follows num .
base the calculations on the average of num briquettes produced at each asphalt rubber binder content .
num .
plot asphalt rubber binder content versus average air voids content for each set of num specimens and connect adjacent points with a bestfit curve .
num .
calculate voids in mineral aggregate for each specimen average each set and plot the average versus asphalt rubber binder content .
num .
calculate the dust proportion and plot versus asphalt rubber binder content .
num .
from the curve plotted select the theoretical asphalt rubber binder content at num percent air voids .
num .
at the selected asphalt rubber binder content calculate dust proportion .
num .
record the asphalt rubber binder content in the contractor hot mix asphalt design data form as the obc .
the obc must not fall below num percent by total weight of the mix .
laboratory mixing and compaction must comply with aashto r num except the mixing temperature of the aggregate must be from num to num degrees f. the mixing temperature of the asphalt rubber binder must be from num to num degrees f. the compaction temperature of the combined mixture must be from num to num degrees f. section num asphalt concrete num numbnum asphalt rubber binder numbnuma general asphalt rubber binder must be a combination of num .
asphalt binder num .
asphalt modifier num .
crm the combined asphalt binder and asphalt modifier must be num num percent by weight of the asphalt rubber binder .
numbnumb asphalt modifier asphalt modifier must be a resinous highflashpoint aromatic hydrocarbon and must comply with the requirements shown in the following table asphalt modifier for asphalt rubber binder quality characteristic test method requirement viscosity at num c mnums x num astm dnum x numa flash point min c astm dnum num molecular analysis asphaltenes max by mass aromatics min by mass astm dnum num num athe symbol x is the proposed asphalt modifier viscosity .
x must be between num and num .
a change in x requires a new asphalt rubber binder design .
asphalt modifier must be from num to num percent by weight of the asphalt binder in the asphalt rubber binder .
numbnumc crumb rubber modifier crm must be a ground or granulated combination of scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural scrap tire crumb rubber .
crm must be num num percent scrap tire crumb rubber and num num percent high natural scrap tire crumb rubber by total weight of crm .
scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural scrap tire crumb rubber must be derived from waste tires described in pub res code num .
the crm must comply with the requirements shown in the following table crumb rubber modifier for asphalt rubber binder quality characteristic test method requirement scrap tire crumb rubber gradation passing no .
num sieve california test num num high natural crumb rubber gradation passing no .
num sieve california test num num wire in crm max california test num num fabric in crm max california test num num crm particle length max ina num crm specific gravity california test num num natural rubber content in high natural crumb rubber astm dnum num atest at mix design and for certificate of compliance .
crm must be ground or granulated at ambient temperature .
if steel and fiber are cryogenically separated separation must occur before grinding or granulating .
cryogenically produced crm particles must be ground or granulated and not pass through the grinder or granulator .
crm must be dry freeflowing particles that do not stick together .
crm must not cause foaming when combined with the asphalt binder and asphalt modifier .
you may add calcium carbonate or talc up to num percent by weight of crm .
numbnumd design and profile design the asphalt rubber binder from testing you perform for each quality characteristic and for the reaction temperatures expected during production .
the profile must include the same component sources section num asphalt concrete num for the asphalt rubber binder used .
the numhour numminute interaction period determines the design profile .
at a minimum mix asphalt rubber binder components take samples and perform and record the tests shown in the following table asphalt rubber binder reaction design profile quality characteristic test method minutes of reaction a limit num num num num num num num cone penetration at num c num mm astm dnum x b x x num resilience at num c min rebound astm dnum x x x num field softening point c astm dnumdnumm x x x num viscosity centipoises astm dnumdnum m x x x x x x x num num asix hours num minutes after crm addition reduce the oven temperature to num f for num hours .
after the numhour num minutes cool down after crm addition reheat the binder to the reaction temperature expected during production for sampling and testing at num hours num minutes .
bx denotes required testing .
numbnume asphalt rubber binder production numbnumei general deliver scrap tire crumb rubber and high natural crumb rubber in separate bags .
numbnumeii mixing proportion and mix asphalt binder asphalt modifier and crm simultaneously or premix the asphalt binder and asphalt modifier before adding crm .
if you premix asphalt binder and asphalt modifier mix them for at least num minutes .
when you add crm the temperature of the asphalt binder and asphalt modifier must be from num to num degrees f. after interacting for at least num minutes the asphalt rubber binder must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement cone penetration at num c num mm astm dnum num resilience at num c min rebound astm dnum num softening point c astm dnumm num viscosity at num c centipoisesa astm dnumdnumm num aprepare sample for viscosity test under california test num .
do not use the asphalt rubber binder during the first num minutes of the reaction period .
during this period the asphalt rubber binder mixture must be between num degrees f and the lower of num or num degrees f below the asphalt binders flash point shown in the sds .
if any asphalt rubber binder is not used within num hours after the reaction period discontinue heating .
if the asphalt rubber binder drops below num degrees f reheat before use .
if you add more scrap tire crumb rubber to the reheated asphalt rubber binder the binder must undergo a numminute reaction period .
the added scrap tire crumb rubber must not exceed num percent of the total asphalt rubber binder weight .
reheated and reacted asphalt rubber binder must comply with the viscosity specifications .
do not reheat asphalt rubber binder more than twice .
numbnum aggregates numbnuma general for rhmag before the addition of asphalt binder and lime treatment the aggregates must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num asphalt concrete num aggregate quality quality characteristic test method requirement percent of crushed particles coarse aggregate min onefractured face twofractured faces fine aggregate min passing no .
num sieve and retained on no .
num sieve .
onefractured face aashto t num num num los angeles rattler max loss at num rev .
loss at num rev .
aashto t num num num sand equivalent mina aashto t num num flat and elongated particles max by weight at num astm dnum report only fine aggregate angularity min b aashto t num method a num areported value must be the average of num tests from a single sample .
the use of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in aashto t num figure num .
sections num manual shaker num alternate method no .
num and num hand method do not apply .
prepare the stock solution as specified in section num stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
bthe engineer waives this specification if the hma contains num percent or less of nonmanufactured sand by weight of total aggregate unless your jmf fails verification .
manufactured sand is fine aggregate produced by crushing rock or gravel .
numbnumb aggregate gradations the aggregate gradations for rhmag must comply with the requirements shown in the following table aggregate gradation requirements rhmag pavement thickness shown gradation num to less than num foot num inch num foot or greater num inch for rhmag the aggregate gradations must be within the tv limits for the specified sieve size shown in the following tables section num asphalt concrete num aggregate gradations for rhmag percentage passing num inch sieve size target value limit allowable tolerance num num num num tv num num num tv num num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num num inch sieve size target value limit allowable tolerance num num num num tv num num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num numbnum rubberized hot mix asphaltgap graded production asphalt rubber binder must be from num to num degrees f when mixed with aggregate .
if the dry and wet moisture susceptibility test result for treated plantproduced rhmag is less than the rhmag mix design requirement for dry and wet moisture susceptibility strength the minimum dry and wet strength requirement is waived but you must use one of the following treatments num .
aggregate lime treatment using the slurry method num .
aggregate lime treatment using the dry lime method num .
liquid antistrip treatment of rhmag numc construction use a material transfer vehicle when placing rhmag .
do not use a pneumatic tired roller to compact rhmag .
spread and compact rhmag at an ambient air temperature of at least num degrees f and a surface temperature of at least num degrees f. if the ambient air temperature is below num degrees f cover loads in trucks with tarps .
the tarps must completely cover the exposed load until you transfer the mixture to the pavers hopper or to the pavement surface .
tarps are not required if the time from discharge to truck until transfer to the pavers hopper or the pavement surface is less than num minutes .
for rhmag placed under method compaction num .
complete the numst coverage of breakdown compaction before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f. num .
complete breakdown and intermediate compaction before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f. use a static steeltired roller instead of the pneumatictired roller for intermediate compaction .
num .
complete finish compaction before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f. spread sand at a rate between num and num lbsq yd on new rhmag pavement when finish rolling is complete .
sand must be free of clay or organic matter .
sand must comply with section numcnum .
keep traffic off the pavement until spreading of the sand is complete .
section num asphalt concrete num numd payment not used num open graded friction courses numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for producing and placing open graded friction courses .
open graded friction courses include hmao rhmao and rhmaohb .
you may produce ogfc using a wma technology .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit a complete jmf except do not specify an asphalt binder content .
for rhmao and rhmaohb the jmf submittal must comply with section numanumc .
numanum quality assurance numanuma general reserved numanumb quality control numanumbi general reserved numanumbii asphalt rubber binder for rhmao and rhmaohb the asphalt rubber binder must comply with the specifications in num numanumbii .
numanumbiii aggregates test the quality characteristics of aggregates under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table aggregate testing frequencies quality characteristic test method minimum testing frequency gradation aashto t num num per num tons and any remaining part moisture contenta aashto t num num per num tons and any remaining part crushed particles aashto t num num per num tons or num per project whichever is greater los angeles rattler aashto t num flat and elongated particles astm dnum atest at continuous mixing plants only .
for lime treated aggregate test aggregate before treatment and test for gradation and moisture content during ogfc production .
numanumbiv open graded friction course production test the quality characteristics of ogfc under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table ogfc testing frequencies quality characteristic test method minimum testing frequency asphalt binder content aashto t num method a num per num tons and any remaining part hma moisture content aashto t num num per num tons but not less than num per paving day section num asphalt concrete num numanumc department acceptance numanumci general the department accepts ogfc based on compliance with num .
aggregate quality requirements shown in the following table aggregate quality quality characteristic test method requirement aggregate gradation aashto t num jmf tolerance percent of crushed particles coarse aggregate min onefractured face twofractured faces fine aggregate min passing no .
num sieve and retained on no .
num sieve .
onefractured face aashto t num num num num los angeles rattler max loss at num rev .
loss at num rev .
aashto t num num num flat and elongated particles max by weight num astm dnum report only num .
inplace ogfc quality requirements shown in the following table ogfc acceptance in place quality characteristic test method requirement asphalt binder content aashto t num method a jmf num num hma moisture content max aashto t num num numanumcii asphalt rubber binder the department accepts asphalt rubber binder in rhmao and rhmaohb under numanumeii .
numanumciii pavement smoothness pavement smoothness of ogfc must comply with the requirements shown in the following table for a num mile section ogfc pavement smoothness acceptance criteria ogfc placement on mean roughness index requirement new construction or hma overlay num inmi or less existing pavement num inmi or less milled surface num inmi or less numanumcivnumanumcv reserved numb materials numbnum general when mixed with asphalt binder aggregate must not be more than num degrees f except aggregate for ogfc with unmodified asphalt binder must be not more than num degrees f. numbnum open graded friction course mix design the department determines the asphalt binder content under california test num within num days of your complete jmf submittal and provides you a caltrans hot mix asphalt verification form .
for ogfc the numst paragraph of section numbnuma does not apply .
numbnum asphalt binder asphalt rubber binder in rhmao and rhmaohb must comply with section numbnum .
section num asphalt concrete num numbnum aggregates numbnuma general aggregates must comply with the requirements shown in the following table aggregate quality quality characteristic test method requirement percent of crushed particles coarse aggregate min onefractured face twofractured faces fine aggregate min passing no .
num sieve and retained on no .
num sieve .
onefractured face aashto t num num num los angeles rattler max loss at num rev .
loss at num rev .
aashto t num num num flat and elongated particles max by weight at num astm dnum report only numbnumb aggregate gradations the aggregate gradations for hmao must comply with the requirements shown in the following table aggregate gradation requirements hmao pavement thickness shown gradation num foot or greater to less than num foot num inch num foot or greater num inch the aggregate gradations for rhmao and rhmaohb must comply with the requirements shown in the following table aggregate gradation requirements rhmao and rhmaohb pavement thickness shown gradation num foot or greater num inch for rhmao and rhmaohb the numinch aggregate gradation is not allowed .
for ogfc the aggregate gradations must be within the tv limits for the specified sieve size shown in the following tables section num asphalt concrete num aggregate gradations for ogfc percentage passing num inch sieve size target value limit allowable tolerance num num num num num tv num num num tv num num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num num inch sieve size target value limit allowable tolerance num num num num tv num num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num if lime treatment is required you may reduce the lime ratio for the combined aggregates from num to num percent for ogfc .
numbnum sand sand for spreading over rhmao and rhmaohb pavement must be free of clay or organic matter .
sand must comply with section numcnum .
numc construction use a material transfer vehicle when placing ogfc .
if the ambient air temperature is below num degrees f cover loads in trucks with tarps .
the tarps must completely cover the exposed load until you transfer the mixture to the pavers hopper or to the pavement surface .
tarps are not required if the time from discharge to truck until transfer to the pavers hopper or the pavement surface is less than num minutes .
apply a tack coat before placing ogfc .
the tack coat application rate must comply with the requirements of the following table tack coat application rates for ogfc ogfc over minimum residual rates galsq yd cssnumcssnumh ssnumssnumh and qsnumhcqsnumh asphaltic emulsion crsnumcrsnum rsnumrsnum and qsnumcqsnum asphaltic emulsion asphalt binder and pmrsnumpmcrsnum and pmrsnumhpmcrsnumh asphaltic emulsion new hma num num num concrete pavement and existing asphalt concrete surfacing num num num planed pavement num num num compact ogfc with steeltired numaxle tandem rollers .
if placing over num tons of ogfc per hour use at least num rollers for each paver .
if placing less than num tons of ogfc per hour use at least num rollers for each paver .
each roller must weigh from num to num lb per linear inch of drum width .
turn the vibrator off .
section num asphalt concrete num compact ogfc with num coverages .
the engineer may order fewer coverages if the layer thickness of ogfc is less than num foot .
for hmao with unmodified asphalt binder num .
spread and compact only if the ambient air temperature is at least num degrees f and the surface temperature is at least num degrees f. num .
complete the numst coverage using num rollers before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f. num .
complete all compaction before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f. for hmao with modified asphalt binder except asphalt rubber binder num .
spread and compact only if the ambient air temperature is at least num degrees f and the surface temperature is at least num degrees f. num .
complete the numst coverage using num rollers before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f. num .
complete all compaction before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f. for rhmao and rhmaohb num .
spread and compact only if the ambient air temperature is at least num degrees f and surface temperature is at least num degrees f. num complete the numst coverage using num rollers before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f. num .
complete compaction before the surface temperature drops below num degrees f. spread sand at a rate between num and num lbsq yd on new rhmao and rhmaohb pavement after finish rolling activities are complete .
keep traffic off the pavement until spreading of the sand is complete .
if you choose to correct ogfc for smoothness the engineer determines if the corrective method causes raveling .
ogfc that is raveling must be removed and replaced .
numd payment not used num bonded wearing courses numa general numanum general numanuma summary section num includes specifications for producing and placing bonded wearing courses .
placing a bwc consists of applying a polymermodified asphaltic emulsion and placing the specified hma in a single pass with an integrated paving machine .
bwc using rhmag rhmao or hmao must comply with the specifications for rhmag rhmao or hmao .
numanumb definitions reserved numanumc submittals with your jmf submittal include num .
asphaltic emulsion target residual rate num .
weight ratio of water to bituminous material in the original asphaltic emulsion within num business days following the numst job site delivery submit test results for asphaltic emulsion properties performed on a sample taken from the asphaltic emulsion delivered .
section num asphalt concrete num within num business day of each job site delivery of asphaltic emulsion submit to mets a numquart sample and a certificate of compliance .
ship each sample so that it is received at mets within num hours of sampling .
each day bwc is placed submit the residual and application rate for the asphaltic emulsion .
during production submit certified volume or weight slips for the materials supplied .
numanumd quality assurance numanumdi general for each job site delivery of asphaltic emulsion take a num qt sample in the presence of the engineer .
take samples from the delivery truck at mid load from a sampling tap or thief .
if the sample is taken from the tap draw and discard num qt before sampling .
if you unload asphalt binder or asphaltic emulsion into a bulk storage tank do not use material from the tank until you submit test results for a sample taken from the bulk storage tank .
testing must be performed by an aashtoaccredited laboratory .
numanumdii quality control take two num gal samples of bwc in metal containers .
test the asphaltic emulsion under astm dnum at least once per paving day at the job site .
numanumdiii department acceptance the department accepts asphaltic emulsion based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table asphaltic emulsion quality characteristic test method requirement saybolt furol viscosity at num c saybolt furol seconds aashto t num num sieve test on original emulsion at time of delivery max aashto t num num numhour storage stability max aashto t num num residue by evaporation min california test num num tests on residue from evaporation test torsional recovery measure entire arc of recovery at num c min california test num num penetration at num c num mm aashto t num num the department accepts the bwc based on the submitted asphaltic emulsion target residual rate num galsq yd when tested under astm dnum .
numanum materials numanuma general reserved numanumb asphaltic emulsion the asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num asphalt concrete num asphaltic emulsion quality characteristic test method requirement saybolt furol viscosity at num c saybolt furol seconds aashto t num num sieve test on original emulsion at time of delivery max aashto t num num numhour storage stability max aashto t num num residue by evaporation min california test num num tests on residue from evaporation test torsional recovery measure entire arc of recovery at num c min california test num num penetration at num c num mm aashto t num num numanumc reserved numanum construction numanuma general do not dilute the asphaltic emulsion .
do not place bwc if rain is forecast for the project area within num hours by the national weather service .
numanumb spreading and compacting equipment use method compaction for placing the bwc .
use a material transfer vehicle when placing bwc .
use an integrated distributor paver capable of spraying the asphaltic emulsion spreading the hma and leveling the mat surface in num pass .
apply asphaltic emulsion at a uniform rate for the full paving width .
the asphaltic emulsion must not be touched by any part of the paver including wheels or tracks .
if the spray bar is adjusted for changing pavement widths the paver must prevent excess spraying of asphaltic emulsion beyond num inches of the hma edge .
numanumc applying asphaltic emulsion before spreading hma apply asphaltic emulsion on dry or damp pavement with no free water .
apply emulsion at a temperature from num to num degrees f and in a single application at the residual rate specified for the condition of the underlying surface .
asphaltic emulsion must have a target residual rate for the surfaces to receive the emulsion as shown in the following table asphaltic emulsion target residual rate surface to receive asphaltic emulsion target residual rates concrete pavement galsq yd num dense compacted new hma pavement galsq yd num open textured dry aged or oxidized existing asphalt concrete pavement galsq yd num if you request and your request is authorized you may change the asphaltic emulsion application rates .
numanumd placing and compacting hot mix asphalt construct a transverse joint if the hma remains in the paver for more than num minutes .
do not reintroduce hma spread over asphaltic emulsion into the paving process .
section num asphalt concrete num do not overlap or hot lap hma .
pave through lanes after paving adjacent num .
shoulders num .
curve widenings num .
tapers num .
chain control lanes num .
transitions num .
turnouts num .
road connections num .
turn pockets num .
driveways num .
ramps for bwc placed on areas adjacent to through lanes that extend into the through lanes cut the bwc to a neat straight vertical line at the lane line .
if you spill asphaltic emulsion into the paver hopper stop paving and remove the contaminated material .
numanum payment payment for asphaltic emulsion is not included in the payment for the type of hma used in a bonded wearing course .
numb bonded wearing coursesgap graded numbnum general numbnuma summary section numb includes specifications for producing bonded wearing coursegap graded .
numbnumb definitions reserved numbnumc submittals include film thickness and calculations and aashto t num results with your jmf submittal .
numbnumd quality assurance numbnumdi general reserved numbnumdii quality control numbnumdiia general reserved numbnumdiib aggregates test the quality characteristics of the aggregates under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table aggregate testing frequencies quality characteristic test method minimum testing frequency gradation aashto t num num per num tons and any remaining part sand equivalenta aashto t num moisture contentb aashto t num num per num tons and any remaining part crushed particles aashto t num num per num tons or num per project whichever is greater los angeles rattler aashto t num flat and elongated particles astm dnum fine aggregate angularity aashto t num method a areported value must be the average of num tests from a single sample .
the use of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in aashto t num figure num .
sections num manual shaker num alternate method no .
num and num hand method do not apply .
prepare the stock solution as specified in section num stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
btest at continuous mixing plants only .
section num asphalt concrete num for lime treated aggregate test the aggregate before treatment and test for gradation and moisture content during bwcg production .
numbnumdiic bonded wearing coursegap graded production take two num gal samples of bwcg in metal containers .
test the quality characteristics of bwcg under the test methods and frequencies shown in the following table bwcg testing frequencies quality characteristic test method minimum testing frequency asphalt binder content aashto t num method a num per num tons and any remaining part hma moisture content aashto t num num per num tons but not less than num per paving day numbnumdiidnumbnumdiig reserved numbnumdiii department acceptance the department accepts bwcg based on compliance with num .
asphalt binder content at jmf num num percent when tested under aashto t num method a .
num .
aggregate quality requirements shown in the following table aggregate quality quality characteristic test method requirement aggregate gradation aashto t num jmf tolerance percent of crushed particles coarse aggregate min onefractured face twofractured faces fine aggregate min passing no .
num sieve and retained on no .
num sieve .
one fractured face aashto t num num num los angeles rattler max loss at num rev .
loss at num rev .
aashto t num num num sand equivalent mina aashto t num num flat and elongated particles max by weight at num astm dnum num fine aggregate angularity min aashto t num method a num areported value must be the average of num tests from a single sample .
the use of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in aashto t num figure num .
sections num manual shaker num alternate method no .
num and num hand method do not apply .
prepare the stock solution as specified in section num stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
numbnum materials numbnuma general reserved numbnumb bonded wearing coursegap graded mix design for bwcg the numst paragraph of section numbnuma does not apply .
determine the proposed obc from a mix design that complies with the requirements shown in the following table section num asphalt concrete num hot mix asphalt mix design requirements quality characteristic test method requirement film thickness min m asphalt institute msnum table num a num drain down max aashto t num b num afilm thickness is calculated based on the effective asphalt content and determined as follows ft pbe num sa x gb x num where ft film thickness in m pbe effective asphalt content by total weight of mix using spnum asphalt mixture sa estimated surface area of the aggregate blend in mnumkg from table num in the asphalt institute manual series no .
num msnum gb specific gravity of asphalt binder bcombine aggregate and asphalt at the asphalt binder suppliers instructed mixing temperature .
coated aggregates that fall through the wire basket during loading must be returned to the basket before conditioning at num f for num hour .
the obc must be greater than num percent by total weight of mix .
numbnumc asphalt binder reserved numbnumd aggregates the aggregates must comply with the requirements shown in the following table aggregate quality quality characteristic test method requirement percent of crushed particles coarse aggregate min onefractured face twofractured faces fine aggregate min passing no .
num sieve and retained on no .
num sieve .
onefractured face aashto t num num num los angeles rattler max loss at num rev .
loss at num rev .
aashto t num num num sand equivalent mina aashto t num num flat and elongated particles max by weight num astm dnum num fine aggregate angularity min aashto t num method a num areported value must be the average of num tests from a single sample .
the use of a sand reading indicator is required as shown in aashto t num figure num .
sections num manual shaker num alternate method no .
num and num hand method do not apply .
prepare the stock solution as specified in section num stock solution with formaldehyde except omit the addition of formaldehyde .
the aggregate gradations for bwcg must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num asphalt concrete num aggregate gradation requirements bwcg pavement thickness shown gradation less than num foot no .
num or num inch num foot or greater num inch the proposed aggregate gradation must be within the tv limits for the specified sieve sizes shown in the following tables aggregate gradations for bwcg percentage passing num inch sieve size target value limit allowable tolerance num num num num tv num num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num num inch sieve size target value limit allowable tolerance num num num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num sieve size target value limit allowable tolerance num num num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num no .
num num tv num numbnum construction apply asphaltic emulsion when the ambient air and pavement temperatures are above num degrees f. numbnum payment not used section num asphalt concrete num num hot mix asphalt on bridge decks numa general section num includes specifications for producing and placing hot mix asphalt on bridge decks .
hma used for bridge decks must comply with the specifications for type a hma in section num .
numb materials do not use the numinch or numinch aggregate gradation for hma on bridge decks .
the grade of asphalt binder for hma must be pg num or pg num .
numc construction spread and compact hma on bridge decks using method compaction .
if a concrete expansion dam is to be placed at a bridge deck expansion joint tape oilresistant construction paper to the deck over the area to be covered by the dam before placing the tack coat and hma across the joint .
apply a tack coat at the minimum residual rate specified in section numcnumf .
for hma placed on a deck seal use the minimum residual rate specified for concrete pavement .
for hma placed on a deck seal num .
place the hma within num days after installing the deck seal .
num .
if a paper mask is placed on the deck under section num place the hma continuously across the paper mask .
num .
place hma in at least num approximately equal layers .
num .
for placement of the numst hma layer num .
comply with the hma application temperature recommended by the deck seal manufacturer .
num .
deliver and place hma using equipment with pneumatic tires or rubberfaced wheels .
do not operate other vehicles or equipment on the bare deck seal .
num .
deposit hma on the deck seal in such a way that the deck seal is not damaged .
do not use a windrow .
num .
place hma in a downhill direction on bridge decks with grades over num percent .
num .
selfpropelled spreading equipment is not required .
numd payment not used num minor hot mix asphalt numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for producing and placing minor hot mix asphalt .
minor hma must comply with section num except as specified in this section num .
the inertial profiler requirements in section num do not apply .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals the qc plan and test results in sections numanumc and numanumd do not apply .
numanum quality assurance numanuma general the jmf renewal requirements in section numanumd do not apply .
test pavement smoothness with a num foot straightedge .
section num asphalt concrete num numanumb quality control testing for compliance with the following quality characteristics is not required num .
flat and elongated particles num .
fine aggregate angularity num .
hamburg wheel track num .
moisture susceptibility numanumc department acceptance the department accepts minor hma under section numanume except for compliance with requirements for the following quality characteristics num .
flat and elongated particles num .
fine aggregate angularity num .
hamburg wheel track num .
moisture susceptibility numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum minor hot mix asphalt mix design the hamburg wheel track and moisture susceptibility requirements do not apply to the mix design for minor hma .
numbnum asphalt binder the grade of asphalt binder for minor hma must be pgnum or pgnum .
numbnum liquid antistrip treatment treat minor hma with liquid antistrip unless you submit aashto t num and aashto t num modified test results showing compliance with section numb and dated within num months of the submittal .
numc construction not used numd payment not used num reserved num existing asphalt concrete num general numa general section num includes general specifications for performing work on existing asphalt concrete facilities .
work performed on existing asphalt concrete facilities must comply with section num .
numb materials not used numc construction before removing a portion of an asphalt concrete facility make a numinch deep saw cut to a true line along the limits of the removal area .
numd payment not used section num asphalt concrete num num replace asphalt concrete surfacing numa general section num includes specifications for replacing asphalt concrete surfacing .
numb materials hma to be used for replacing asphalt concrete surfacing must comply with type a hma as specified in section num .
the grade of asphalt binder must be pg num or pg num .
tack coat must comply with section numbnum .
numc construction where replace asphalt concrete surfacing is shown remove the full depth of the existing asphalt concrete surfacing and replace with hma .
the engineer determines the exact limits of asphalt concrete surfacing to be replaced .
replace asphalt concrete in a lane before the lane is specified to be opened to traffic .
before removing asphalt concrete outline the replacement area and cut neat lines with a saw or grind to full depth of the existing asphalt concrete .
do not damage asphalt concrete and base remaining in place .
if you excavate the base beyond the specified plane replace it with hma .
do not use a material transfer vehicle for replacing asphalt concrete surfacing .
before placing hma apply a tack coat as specified in section numcnumf .
place hma using method compaction as specified in section numcnumc .
numd payment the payment quantity for replace asphalt concrete surfacing is the volume determined from the dimensions shown .
num remove asphalt concrete dikes numa general section num applies to removing asphalt concrete dikes outside the limits of excavation .
numb materials not used numc construction reserved numd payment not used num cold planing asphalt concrete pavement numa general section num includes specifications for cold planning asphalt concrete pavement .
cold planning asphalt concrete pavement includes the removal of pavement markers traffic stripes and pavement markings within the area of cold planning .
numb materials hma for temporary tapers must be of the same quality that is used for the hma overlay or comply with the specifications for minor hma in section num .
numc construction numcnum general do not use a heating device to soften the pavement .
section num asphalt concrete num the cold planing machine must be num .
equipped with a cutter head width that matches the planing width unless a wider cutter head is authorized .
num .
equipped with automatic controls for the longitudinal grade and transverse slope of the cutter head and num .
if a ski device is used it must be at least num feet long rigid and a numpiece unit .
the entire length must be used in activating the sensor .
num .
if referencing from existing pavement the cold planing machine must be controlled by a self contained grade reference system .
the system must be used at or near the centerline of the roadway .
on the adjacent pass with the cold planing machine a jointmatching shoe may be used .
num .
equipped to effectively control dust generated by the planing operation num .
operated such that no fumes or smoke is produced .
replace broken missing or worn machine teeth .
if you do not complete placing the hma surfacing before opening the area to traffic you must num .
construct a temporary hma taper to the level of the existing pavement .
num .
place hma during the next work shift .
num .
submit a corrective action plan that shows you will complete cold planing and placement of hma in the same work shift .
do not restart cold planing activities until the corrective action plan is authorized .
numcnum grade control and surface smoothness install and maintain grade and transverse slope references .
the final cut must result in a neat and uniform surface .
the completed surface of the planed pavement must not vary more than num foot when measured with a numfoot straightedge parallel with the centerline .
with the straightedge at right angles to the centerline the transverse slope of the planed surface must not vary more than num foot .
where lanes are open to traffic the dropoff of between adjacent lanes must not be more than num foot .
numcnum planed material remove cold planed material concurrently with planing activities such that the removal does not lag more than num feet behind the planer .
numcnum temporary hma tapers if a dropoff between the existing pavement and the planed area at transverse joints can not be avoided before opening to traffic construct a temporary hma taper .
the hma temporary taper must be num .
placed to the level of the existing pavement and tapered on a slope of num horizontalvertical or flatter to the level of the planed area num .
compacted by any method that will produce a smooth riding surface completely remove temporary tapers before placing permanent surfacing .
numd payment not used num remove base and surfacing numa general section num includes specifications for removing base and asphalt concrete surfacing .
numb materials not used section num asphalt concrete num numc construction where base and surfacing are described to be removed remove base and surfacing to a depth of at least num inches below the grade of the existing surfacing .
backfill resulting holes and depressions with embankment material under section num .
numd payment the payment quantity for remove base and surfacing is the volume determined from the dimensions shown .
num reserved num num concrete pavement num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for constructing concrete pavement .
numb definitions action limit test results at which corrective actions must be made while production continues .
fulldepth crack crack other than a working crack that runs from one edge of a slab to the opposite or adjacent side of the slab .
raveling progressive disintegration of the concrete pavement surface resulting in dislodged aggregate .
suspension limit test results at which production must be suspended while corrections are made .
working crack crack that extends through the full depth of a slab and is parallel to and within num foot of a planned contraction joint .
numc submittals numcnum general at least num days before delivery to the job site submit the manufacturers instructions for storage and installation of num .
splice couplers for threaded tie bars num .
joint filler submit calibration documentation and operational guidelines for frequency measuring devices for concrete vibrators as an informational submittal .
submit updated qc charts each paving day as an informational submittal .
if repair or replacement of noncompliant concrete is required submit a repair or replacement plan .
numcnum certificates of compliance submit a certificate of compliance for num .
tie bars num .
splice couplers for threaded tie bars num .
dowel bars num .
tie bar baskets num .
dowel bar baskets num .
joint filler num .
epoxypowder coating numcnum quality control plan submit a concrete pavement qc plan .
allow num days for review .
numcnum mix design at least num days before testing for mix proportions submit a copy of the aashto accreditation for the laboratory determining the mix proportions as an informational submittal .
at least num days before starting field qualification submit the proposed concrete mix proportions the corresponding mix identifications and laboratory test reports including measurements of the modulus of rupture for each trial mixture at num num num and num days .
numcnum justintime training reserved section num concrete pavement num numcnum concrete field qualification submit field qualification data and test reports including num .
mixing date num .
mixing equipment and procedures used num .
batch volume in cubic yards num .
type and source of ingredients used num .
penetration of the concrete num .
air content of the plastic concrete num .
age and strength at the time of concrete beam testing the minimum batch size for field qualification is num cu yd .
field qualification test reports must be certified with a signature by an official in responsible charge of the laboratory performing the tests .
numcnum test strips you may request to eliminate a test strip if you use paving equipment and personnel from a department project num for the same type of pavement and num completed within the past num months .
submit supporting documents and the previous projects information with your request to eliminate a test strip .
numcnum cores submit the name of the laboratory that will test the cores for air content .
submit each core in an individual plastic bag marked with a description of the location from which the core was taken .
numcnum coefficient of thermal expansion submit num test specimens fabricated from a single sample of concrete for testing the coefficient of thermal expansion under aashto t num for field qualification and during production .
submit your coefficient of thermal expansion test data at httpnumcte numcnumcnum reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general if the pavement quantity is at least num cu yd provide a qc manager .
core pavement as described for thickness bar placement and air content .
provide material and labor to assist the engineer in fabricating test beams for the departments modulus of rupture testing .
allow at least num days for the department to schedule testing for the coefficient of friction .
notify the engineer when a lane or lanes are scheduled to be opened to traffic and when the pavement is ready for testing which is the latter of num .
num days after paving num .
when the pavement has attained a modulus of rupture of at least num psi the department tests for the coefficient of friction within num days of receiving notification that the pavement is ready for testing .
numdnum justintime training reserved numdnum quality control plan the qc plan must describe the organization and procedures used to section num concrete pavement num num .
control the production process num .
determine whether a change to the production process is needed num .
implement a change the qc plan must include action and suspension limits and the details of the corrective action to be taken if any process is outside of those limits .
the suspension limits must not exceed the specified acceptance criteria .
the qc plan must address the elements affecting concrete pavement quality including num .
mix proportions num .
contraction and construction joints num .
aggregate gradation num .
bar reinforcement placement and alignment num materials quality num .
dowel bar placement alignment and anchorage num .
stockpile management num .
tie bar placement num .
line and grade control num .
modulus of rupture num .
proportioning num .
finishing and curing num .
mixing and transportation num .
protecting pavement num .
placing and consolidation num .
surface smoothness numdnum qualifications testing laboratories and their test equipment must be qualified under the departments independent assurance program .
use a laboratory that complies with astm cnum to determine the mix proportions for concrete pavement .
the laboratory must have a current aashto accreditation for num .
aashto t num or astm cnum num .
astm cnumcnumm use an acicertified concrete laboratory technician grade i to perform field qualification tests and calculations .
numdnum mix designs make trial mixtures no more than num months before field qualification .
using your trial mixtures determine the minimum cementitious materials content .
use your value for minimum cementitious material content for mc in equation num and equation num of section numbnum .
to determine the minimum content of cementitious materials or the maximum ratio of water to cementitious materials use modulus of rupture values of at least num psi for num days age and at least num psi for num days age .
if you change an aggregate supply source or the mix proportions produce a trial batch and field qualify the new concrete .
the department does not adjust time for sampling testing and qualifying new mix proportions or changing an aggregate supply source .
numdnum test strips construct a test strip for each type of pavement if the quantity is at least num cu yd .
obtain authorization of test strips before additional paving .
test strips must be num .
from num to num feet long num .
same width as the planned paving num .
constructed using the same equipment to be used for constructing pavement the engineer selects from num to num core locations for dowel bars and up to num locations for tie bars for each test strip .
if you use mechanical dowel bar inserters the test strip must demonstrate they do not leave voids segregations or surface irregularities such as depressions dips or high areas .
test strips must comply with the acceptance criteria for num .
smoothness except an inertial profile is not required section num concrete pavement num num .
dowel bar and tie bar placement num .
pavement thickness num .
final finishing except for the coefficient of friction allow num business days for evaluation of a test strip .
if a test strip is not authorized submit a plan for changes to your materials methods or equipment .
allow num business days for authorization of the plan .
construct another test strip under the authorized plan .
remove test strips that are not authorized .
if a test strip is compliant except for smoothness and final finishing you may grind the surface .
after grinding retest the smoothness under section num .
the engineer retests the thickness after grinding .
construct additional test strips if you change any of the following num .
paving equipment including num .
paver num .
dowel bar inserter num .
tie bar inserter num .
tining machine num .
curing equipment num .
concrete mix proportions numdnum quality control numdnuma general during paving test the concrete pavement under the test methods and at the frequencies shown in the following table concrete pavement test methods and testing frequencies quality characteristic test method minimum testing frequency cleanness value california test num num per day sand equivalent california test num aggregate gradation california test num air content air entrainment specified california test num num per hour air content air entrainment not specified california test num num per num hours density california test num penetration california test num aggregate moisture meter calibrationa california test num or num num per day a check the calibration of the plant moisture meter by comparing moisture meter readings with california test num or california test num test results .
maintain control charts to identify potential problems and assignable causes .
post a copy of each control chart at a location determined by the engineer .
control charts for individual measurements of quality characteristics must use the target values in the mix proportions as indicators of central tendency .
develop linear control charts for num .
cleanness value num .
sand equivalent num .
fine and coarse aggregate gradation num .
air content num .
penetration control charts must include num .
contract number num .
mix proportions num .
test number section num concrete pavement num num .
each test parameter num .
action and suspension limits num .
specification limits num .
qc test results for control charts for fine and coarse aggregate gradation record the running average of the previous num consecutive gradation tests for each sieve and superimpose the specification limits .
for control charts for air content the action limit is num percent of the specified value .
if no value is specified the action limit is num percent of the value used for your authorized mix design .
as a minimum a process requires corrective action if any of the following occurs num .
num consecutive running averages of num tests for fine or coarse aggregate gradation are outside the specification limits num .
num point falls outside the suspension limit line for individual penetration or air content measurements num .
num points in a row fall outside the action limit line for individual penetration or air content measurements stop production for processes requiring corrective action .
before placing concrete pavement each day and at intervals not to exceed num hours during production use a tachometer to test and record the vibration frequency of the concrete vibrators .
numdnumb concrete field qualification before paving your mix design must be field qualified .
for field qualification the modulus of rupture at an age of num days or earlier must be at least num .
num psi for each single beam num .
num psi for the average of num beams numdnumcnumdnumh reserved numdnum department acceptance numdnuma general the department tests the concrete pavement under the test methods and at the frequencies shown in the following table department acceptance testing frequency quality characteristic test method minimum testing frequencya crcp jpcp air contentb california test num num days paving modulus of rupture at num days california test num num cu yd dowel bar placement measurement num sq yd tie bar placement measurement num sq yd coefficient of friction california test num num days paving thickness california test num num sq yd aa single test represents no more than the frequency specified .
btested only if air entrainment is specified .
numdnumb verification testing numdnumbi general reserved numdnumbii air content if airentraining admixtures are specified the engineer uses a ttest to compare your qc test results with the departments test results .
the tvalue for test data is determined using the following equation section num concrete pavement num where nc number of your qc tests minimum of num required nv number of departments tests minimum of num required x c mean of your qc tests x v mean of the departments tests sp pooled standard deviation sc standard deviation of your qc tests sv standard deviation of the departments tests your qc test results are compared with the departments test results at a level of significance of  num .
the tvalue is compared to tcrit for the degrees of freedom shown in the following table degrees of freedom ncnvnum tcrit for  num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num if the calculated tvalue is less than or equal to tcrit your qc test results are verified .
if the calculated t value is greater than tcrit your qc test results are not verified .
if your qc test results are not verified core at least num specimens from the concrete pavement under section numm .
the engineer selects the core locations .
the authorized laboratory must test these specimens for air content under astm cnum .
the engineer compares these test results with your qc test results using the ttest method .
if your qc test results are verified based on this comparison the engineer uses the qc test results for acceptance of concrete pavement for air content .
if your qc test results are not verified based on this comparison the engineer uses the air content of core specimens determined by the authorized laboratory under astm cnum for acceptance .
numdnumc acceptance testing numdnumci general the department accepts concrete pavement based on compliance with the requirements shown in the following table t x c x v s p num n c num n v and s p num s c num n c num s v num n v num n c n v num section num concrete pavement num concrete pavement requirements for acceptance quality characteristic test method requirement crcp jpcp air content california test num num of the specified valuea modulus of rupture at num days min psi california test num numb bar reinforcement depth tolerance at joints min field measurement num inch below the saw cut depth dowel bar placement tolerancesc horizontal offset inch longitudinal translation inch horizontal skew max inch vertical skew max inch vertical depth field measurement num num num num the minimum distance measured from the concrete pavement surface to any point along the top of the dowel bar must be db num inch where db num of the pavement thickness or the saw cut depth in inches whichever is greater the maximum distance below the depth shown must be num inch .
tie bar placement tolerancesc horizontal and vertical skew max inches longitudinal translation inches horizontal offset embedment inches vertical depth field measurement num num num num num .
at least num inch below the bottom of the saw cut num .
at least num inches from any point along the bar to the pavement surface or bottom coefficient of friction min concrete pavement ramp termini california test num num num pavement smoothness california test num aashto r num and aashto r num num .
no area of localized roughness with an international roughness index greater than num inmi num .
mean roughness index of num inmi or less within a num mile section thickness toleranced max foot california test num num foot deficient of the thickness shown aif no value is specified the air content must be within num of the value used for your authorized mix design .
baverage of the individual test results of num test beams .
cplacement tolerance is measured relative to the completed joint .
dsee section numdnumciv for additional thickness requirements .
section num concrete pavement num numdnumcii dowel and tie bar placement core each days paving within num business days .
the engineer identifies the joint and dowel or tie bar to be tested .
each dowel or tie bar test consists of num cores num on each end of the bar to expose both ends for measurement .
if the initial cores show that dowel or tie bars are within alignment tolerances and the engineer orders more coring the additional cores are change order work .
if the coring indicates the dowel or tie bars are not placed within the specified tolerances or if unconsolidated concrete is around the dowel or tie bars perform additional coring as ordered to determine the limits of unacceptable work .
the engineer determines the limits for removal and replacement .
numdnumciii pavement smoothness the department may accept pavement smoothness based on your inertial profiler testing in the absence of its own testing .
numdnumciv thickness drill cores for the departments acceptance testing for thickness under section numm .
drill the cores in the primary area which is the area placed in num day for each thickness .
core at the locations determined by the engineer and in the engineers presence .
if grinding is required do not core until grinding has been completed .
the core specimen diameter must be num inches .
to identify the limits of concrete pavement deficient in thickness by more than num foot you may divide primary areas into secondary areas .
the engineer measures cores under california test num to the nearest num foot .
you may request additional thickness measurements to determine the average thickness variation .
the engineer determines the locations with random sampling methods .
if each thickness measurement in a primary area is deficient by less than num foot the engineer calculates the average thickness deficiency in that primary area .
the engineer uses num foot for a thickness difference more than num foot over the specified thickness .
the thickness of the concrete pavement must not be deficient by more than num foot .
for each thickness measurement in a primary area deficient by more than num foot the engineer determines a secondary area where the thickness deficiency is more than num foot .
the engineer determines this secondary area by measuring the thickness of each concrete pavement slab adjacent to the measurement found to be more than num foot deficient .
the engineer continues to measure the thickness until an area that is bound by slabs with a thickness deficient by num foot or less is determined .
slabs without bar reinforcement are defined by the areas bound by longitudinal and transverse joints and concrete pavement edges .
slabs with bar reinforcement are defined by the areas bound by longitudinal joints and concrete pavement edges and numfoot lengths .
the thickness measurements for a secondary area in a slab determine that entire slab thickness .
the engineer measures the remaining primary area thickness after removing the secondary areas from consideration for determining the average thickness deficiency .
the minimum thickness is not reduced for specifications that may affect concrete pavement thickness such as allowable tolerances for subgrade construction .
the engineer determines the areas of noncompliant pavement thickness deficiencies and limits where removal is required .
pavement with an average thickness deficiency less than num foot is acceptable .
if the thickness deficiency is num foot or more and less than num foot you may request authorization to leave the pavement in place and accept a payment adjustment .
if the deficiency is more than num foot you must remove and replace the pavement .
the deduction for pavement thickness deficiency in each primary area is as shown in the following table section num concrete pavement num deduction for thickness deficiency average thickness deficiencya deduction num foot numsq yd num foot numsq yd num foot numsq yd num foot numsq yd num foot numsq yd avalues greater than num foot are rounded to the nearest num foot .
numdnumcvnumdnumcviii reserved num materials numa general tack coat must comply with section num .
numb concrete numbnum general concrete placed for tapered edges after the pavement has been placed may be minor concrete .
numbnum cementitious material concrete must contain from num pounds to num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
the specifications for reducing cementitious material content in section numenum do not apply .
numbnum aggregate the specifications for a reduction in the operating range and contract compliance for cleanness value and sand equivalent specified in section numcnum and section numcnum for aggregate do not apply .
for coarse aggregate in high desert and high mountain climate regions the loss must not exceed num percent when tested under california test num with num revolutions .
for the combined aggregate gradation the difference between the percent passing the numinch sieve and the percent passing the no .
num sieve must not be less than num percent of the total aggregate .
numbnum air entrainment the specifications for airentraining admixtures in the numnd paragraph of section numinuma do not apply .
the air content must be within num percent of the specified value .
if no value is specified the air content must be within num percent of the value used for your authorized mix design .
for a project in the low or south mountain climate region add an airentraining admixture to the concrete at the rate required to produce an air content of num percent in the freshly mixed concrete .
for a project in a high desert or high mountain climate region add an airentraining admixture to the concrete at the rate required to produce an air content of num percent in the freshly mixed concrete .
numbnumbnum reserved numc reinforcement bars and baskets numcnum general reserved numcnum bar reinforcement bar reinforcement must be deformed bars complying with section num unless the project is shown to be in a high desert or any mountain climate region in which case it must be one of the following num .
epoxycoated bar reinforcement under section numb except bars must comply with either astm anumanumm astm anumanumm or astm anumanumm grade num or num .
bars must be handled under astm dnumdnumm and section numc .
num .
lowcarbon chromium steel bar complying with astm anumanumm .
section num concrete pavement num numcnum dowel bars for a project not shown to be in a high desert or any mountain climate region dowel bars must be plain bars complying with section num and must be one of the following num .
epoxycoated bars .
bars must comply with astm anumanumm grade num or num .
the epoxy coating must comply with either section numb or numb .
num .
stainlesssteel bars .
bars must be descaled solid stainlesssteel bars under astm anumanumm uns designation snum or snum .
num .
low carbon chromiumsteel bars under astm anumanumm .
for a project shown to be in a high desert or any mountain climate region dowel bars must be plain bars complying with section num and be one of the following num .
epoxycoated bars .
bars must comply with astm anumanumm grade num or num .
epoxy coating must comply with section numb .
num .
stainlesssteel bars .
bars must be descaled solid stainlesssteel bars under astm anumanumm uns designation snum or snum .
fabricate sample and handle epoxycoated dowel bars under astm dnumdnumm and section num numc except each sample must be num inches long .
numcnum tie bars tie bars must be deformed bars .
for a project not shown to be in a high desert or any mountain climate region tie bars must be one of the following num .
epoxycoated bar reinforcement .
bars must comply with section numb or numb except bars must comply with astm anumanumm astm anumanumm or astm anumanumm grade num or num .
num .
stainlesssteel bars .
bars must be descaled solid stainlesssteel bars under astm anumanumm uns designation snum or snum .
num .
low carbon chromiumsteel bars under astm anumanumm .
for a project shown to be in a high desert or any mountain climate region tie bars must be one of the following num .
epoxycoated bar reinforcement .
bars must comply with section numb except bars must comply with either astm anumanumm astm anumanumm or astm anumanumm grade num or num .
num .
stainlesssteel bars .
bars must be descaled solid stainlesssteel bars under astm anumanumm uns designation snum or snum .
fabricate sample and handle epoxycoated tie bars under astm dnumdnumm section num or section num .
do not bend tie bars .
numcnum dowel and tie bar baskets for dowel and tie bar baskets wire must comply with astm anumanumm and be welded under astm anumanumm section num .
assemblies must be either uframe or aframe shaped assemblies .
wire intersections must be resistance welded .
for a project not shown to be in the high desert or any mountain climate region baskets may be epoxy coated .
the epoxy coating must comply with section numb or numb .
for a project shown to be in the high desert or any mountain climate region the wire for dowel bar and tie bar baskets must be one of the following num .
epoxycoated wire complying with section numb .
section num concrete pavement num num .
stainlesssteel wire .
wire must be descaled solid stainlesssteel .
wire must comply with num the chemical requirements in astm anumanumm uns designation snum or snum and num the tension requirements in astm anumanumm .
handle epoxycoated tie bar and dowel bar baskets under astm dnumdnumm and either section num num or num .
fasteners must be driven fasteners as specified in astm fnum .
fasteners on lcb or asphalt concrete must have a minimum shank diameter of num inch and a minimum shank length of num inches .
for atpb or ctpb the shank diameter must be at least num inch and the shank length must be at least num inches .
fasteners clips and washers must have a minimum nummilthick zinc coating applied by either electroplating or galvanizing .
numd dowel bar lubricant dowel bar lubricant must be curing compound no .
num or paraffin based .
paraffinbased lubricant must be bradley coatings group bcg num or valvoline tectyl num or an authorized equal and must be factory applied .
nume joint filler joint filler for an isolation joint must be a preformed bituminoustype expansion joint filler for concrete complying with astm dnum .
numf nonshrink hydrauliccement grout nonshrink hydrauliccement grout must comply with astm cnumcnumm .
you may use clean uniform rounded aggregate filler to extend the grout .
aggregate filler must not exceed num percent of the grout mass or the maximum described in the manufacturers instructions whichever is less .
the moisture content of the aggregate filler must not exceed num percent when tested under california test num or california test num .
when tested under california test num aggregate filler must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table aggregate filler gradation sieve size percentage passing numinch num numinch num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num numgnumn reserved num construction numa general proportion aggregate and bulk cementitious material by weight using an authorized automatic proportioning device .
for widenings and lane reconstruction construct only the portion of the pavement where the work will be completed during the same closure .
if you do not complete the construction during the same closure construct temporary roadway pavement under section nume .
numb joints numbnum general do not bend tie bars or reinforcement in existing concrete pavement joints .
for contraction joints and isolation joints saw cut a groove with a powerdriven saw equipped with a diamond blade .
after cutting immediately wash slurry from the joint with water below num psi gauge pressure .
section num concrete pavement num keep joints free from foreign material including soil gravel concrete and asphalt .
to keep foreign material out of the joint you may use filler material .
the filler material must not react adversely with the concrete or damage the pavement .
after sawing and washing install the material such that it keeps moisture in the adjacent concrete during the num hours after paving .
if you install filler material the specifications for spraying the sawed joint with additional curing compound in section numi do not apply .
if you use absorptive filler material moisten the filler immediately before or after installation .
numbnum construction joints construction joints must be vertical .
before placing fresh concrete against hardened concrete existing concrete pavement or structures apply curing compound no .
num or num to the vertical surface and allow it to dry .
at joints between concrete pavement and asphalt concrete pavement apply a tack coat between the two pavements .
use a metal or wooden bulkhead to form transverse construction joints .
if dowel bars are described the bulkhead must allow dowel bar installation .
numbnum contraction joints saw contraction joints before cracking occurs and after the concrete is hard enough to saw without spalling raveling or tearing .
except for longitudinal joints parallel to a curving centerline saw the contraction joints such that they are no more than num foot from either side of a numfoot straight line .
cut transverse contraction joints within num foot of the spacing described .
adjust spacing if needed such that slabs are at least num feet long .
for widenings do not match transverse contraction joints with existing joint spacing or skew unless described .
cut transverse contraction joints straight across the full width of the concrete pavement between isolation joints and edges of pavement .
in areas of converging and diverging pavements space transverse contraction joints such that the joint is continuous across the maximum pavement width .
longitudinal contraction joints must be parallel with the concrete pavement centerline except where lanes converge or diverge .
numbnum isolation joints before placing concrete at isolation joints saw cut the existing concrete face to make a clean flat vertical surface and secure the joint filler .
make the saw cut the same depth as the depth of the new pavement .
numc bar reinforcement place bar reinforcement under section num .
bar reinforcement must be more than num inch below the saw cut depth at concrete pavement joints .
numd dowel bar placement dowel bar placement must comply with the tolerances shown in the following table section num concrete pavement num dowel bar placement dimension tolerance horizontal offset inch num longitudinal translation inch num horizontal skew max inch num vertical skew max inch num vertical depth the minimum distance measured from the concrete pavement surface to any point along the top of the dowel bar must be db num inch where db num of the pavement thickness or the saw cut depth in inches whichever is greater the maximum distance below the depth shown must be num inch .
note tolerances are measured relative to the completed joint .
if you are using curing compound as a lubricant apply the curing compound to the dowels num .
in num separate applications .
apply the last application no more than num hours before placing the dowels .
num .
such that each dowel is completely lubricated before placement .
num .
at a rate of num gallon per num square feet .
install dowel bars using one of the following methods num .
drill and bond the bars under section num .
num .
mechanically insert the bars .
eliminate evidence of the insertion by reworking the concrete over the dowels .
num .
use dowel bar baskets to hold the dowels at the specified depth and alignment before concrete placement .
anchor the baskets with at least num fastener per foot of basket section and at least num feet in advance of the pavement placement activity .
you may request not to perform advance anchoring due to construction limitations or restricted access .
after anchoring the baskets and before placing the concrete cut and remove the temporary spacer wires and demonstrate the dowel bars do not move from their specified depth and alignment during concrete placement .
if installation of dowel bars is noncompliant stop paving demonstrate your correction and obtain verbal authorization .
nume tie bar placement tie bar placement must comply with the tolerances shown in the following table tie bar placement dimension tolerance horizontal and vertical skew max inch num num longitudinal translation inch num horizontal offset embedment inch num vertical depth num .
at least num inch below the bottom of the saw cut num .
at least num inches from any point along the bar to the pavement surface or bottom note tolerances are measured relative to the completed joint .
install tie bars at longitudinal joints using one of the following methods num .
drill and bond the bars under section num .
num .
mechanically insert the bars into plastic slip formed concrete before finishing .
ensure there is full contact between the inserted bar and the concrete .
eliminate evidence of the insertion by reworking the concrete over the tie bars .
section num concrete pavement num num .
use threaded couplers to splice the tie bars .
the couplers must be fabricated from deformed bar reinforcement and free of external welding or machining .
num .
use tie bar baskets to hold the tie bars at the specified depth and alignment before concrete placement .
use fasteners to anchor tie bar baskets .
anchor the baskets at least num feet in advance of the pavement placement activity .
you may request not to perform advanced anchoring due to construction limitations or restricted access .
after anchoring the baskets and before placing the concrete demonstrate the tie bars do not move from their specified depth and alignment during concrete placement .
if installation of tie bars is noncompliant stop paving demonstrate your correction and obtain verbal authorization .
numf placing concrete numfnum general immediately before placing concrete the surface to receive the concrete must be num .
within the compaction and elevation tolerances num .
free of loose and extraneous material num .
uniformly moist but free of standing or flowing water place concrete pavement with stationary side forms or slip form paving equipment .
place consecutive concrete loads within num minutes of each other .
construct a transverse construction joint if the concrete placement is interrupted by more than num minutes .
the transverse construction joint must be at the same longitudinal location as the contraction joint in the adjacent lane location or you must remove the concrete pavement to the preceding transverse joint .
place the concrete pavement in fulllane widths separated by construction joints or monolithically with contraction joints .
do not retemper concrete .
if the surface width is constructed as shown you may construct the pavement sides on a batter not flatter than num verticalhorizontal .
numfnum paving adjacent to existing concrete pavement wherever pavement is placed adjacent to existing concrete pavement num .
grind the adjacent pavement before placing the new pavement .
num .
use paving equipment with padded crawler tracks or rubbertired wheels with enough offset to prevent damage .
num .
match the pavement grade with the elevation of the existing concrete pavement after grinding .
numfnum concrete pavement transition panel for concrete pavement placed in a transition panel texture the surface with a drag strip of burlap broom or spring steel tine device that produces scoring in the finished surface .
scoring must be either parallel or transverse to the centerline .
texture at the time that produces the coarsest texture .
numfnum stationary sideform construction stationary side forms must be straight and without defects including warps bends and indentations .
side forms must be metal except at end closures and transverse construction joints where other materials may be used .
you may build up side forms by attaching a section to the top or bottom .
if they are attached to the top of metal forms the attached section must be metal .
the side form base width must be at least num percent of the shown concrete pavement thickness .
side forms including interlocking connections with adjoining forms must be rigid enough to prevent springing from num subgrading and paving equipment and num concrete pressure .
section num concrete pavement num construct the subgrade to the final grade before placing the side forms .
the forms must bear fully on the foundation throughout their length and base width .
place the forms to the grade and alignment of the finished concrete pavement edge .
support the forms during concrete placement compaction and finishing .
after completing the subgrade and immediately before placing the concrete true up the side forms and set to the line and grade for a distance that avoids delays due to form adjustment .
clean and oil the forms before each use .
side forms must remain in place for at least num day after placing the concrete and until the pavement edge no longer requires protection from the forms .
spread screed shape and consolidate concrete with num or more machines .
the machines must uniformly distribute and consolidate the concrete .
the machines must operate to place the concrete to the shown cross section with minimal hand work .
consolidate the concrete without segregation .
if you use concrete vibrators num .
vibration rate must be at least num cycles per minute for surface vibrators and num cycles per minute for internal vibrators .
use a calibrated device to measure the frequency of vibration .
num .
amplitude of vibration must cause perceptible concrete surface movement at least num foot from the vibrating element .
num .
vibrators must not rest on side forms or new concrete pavement .
num .
power to vibrators must automatically cease if forward or backward motion of the paving machine is stopped .
num .
highfrequency internal vibrators must be used within num minutes of depositing concrete on the subgrade to uniformly consolidate the concrete across the paving width including the area adjacent to the forms .
num .
mass of concrete must not be shifted with the vibrators .
numfnum slip form construction if you use slip form construction spread screed shape and consolidate the concrete to the shown cross section with slip form machines and minimal hand work .
slip form paving machines must be equipped with traveling side forms and must not segregate the concrete .
do not deviate from the pavement alignment by more than num foot .
slip form paving machines must use highfrequency internal vibrators to consolidate concrete .
you may mount the vibrators with their axes parallel or normal to the pavement alignment .
if vibrators are mounted with their axes parallel to the pavement alignment space the vibrators no more than num feet centerto center .
if vibrators are mounted with their axes normal to the pavement alignment space vibrators with a maximum numfoot lateral clearance between individual vibrators .
each vibrator must have a vibration rate from num to num cycles per minute .
the amplitude of vibration must cause perceptible concrete surface movement at least num foot from the vibrating element .
use a calibrated tachometer to measure the frequency of vibration .
numg edge treatment if required regrade the area for the preparation of tapered edge treatment .
sections numhnum and numhnum do not apply to tapered edges .
for tapered edges placed after the concrete pavement is complete install connecting bar reinforcement under section num .
you may construct the tapered edges by saw cutting or grinding .
the angle of the tapered edge slope must not deviate by more than num degrees from the angle shown measured from the plane of the adjacent finished pavement surface .
section num concrete pavement num numh finishing numhnum general reserved numhnum preliminary finishing numhnuma general preliminary finishing must produce a smooth and truetograde finish .
after preliminary finishing mark each days paving with a stamp approximately num by num feet .
the stamp must be authorized before paving starts .
the stamp must form a uniform mark from num to num inch deep .
locate the mark num num feet from the transverse construction joint formed at the start of paving each day and num num foot from the outside edge of the pavement .
the mark must show the month day and year of placement and the station of the transverse construction joint .
orient the mark such that it can be read from the outside edge of the pavement .
do not apply water to the pavement surface before float finishing .
numhnumb stationary side form finishing if you use stationary sideform construction apply a preliminary finish to the pavement by machinefloat or hand method .
for the machinefloat method num .
use selfpropelled machine floats .
num .
determine the number of machine floats required to perform the work at a rate equal to the pavement placement .
if the time from paving to machinefloat finishing exceeds num minutes stop pavement placement .
when machine floats are in proper position you may resume pavement placement .
num .
run machine floats on side forms or adjacent pavement lanes .
if running on adjacent pavement protect the adjacent pavement surface under section numj .
floats must be hardwood steel or steelshod wood and equipped with devices that adjust the underside to a true flat surface .
for the hand method finish the pavement smooth and true to grade with manually operated floats or powered finishing machines .
numhnumc slip form finishing for slip form construction the slip form paver must give the pavement a preliminary finish .
you may supplement the slip form paver with machine floats .
before the pavement hardens correct the slump of the pavement edge in excess of num foot except for the edge rounding .
numhnum final finishing after completing preliminary finishing round the edges of the initial paving widths to a numfoot radius .
round the transverse and longitudinal construction joints to a numfoot radius .
texture the pavement before curing it .
perform the initial texturing with a burlap drag or broom device that produces striations parallel to the centerline .
perform the final texturing with a springsteel tined device that produces grooves parallel with the centerline .
construct longitudinal grooves with a selfpropelled machine designed specifically for grooving and texturing pavement .
the machine must have tracks to maintain constant speed provide traction and maintain accurate tracking along the pavement surface .
the machine must have a single row of rectangular spring steel tines .
the tines must be from num to num inch wide spaced on numinch centers and have enough length thickness and resilience to form grooves approximately num inch deep .
the machine must have horizontal and vertical controls .
the machine must apply a constant downward pressure on the surface of the pavement during texturing .
the operation must not cause raveling .
construct grooves over the entire pavement width in a single pass except do not construct grooves num inches from the pavement edges and longitudinal joints .
the final texture must be uniform and smooth .
use a guide to properly align the grooves .
the grooves must be parallel and aligned to the pavement edge across its width .
the grooves must be from num to num inch deep after the pavement has hardened .
section num concrete pavement num for irregular areas and areas inaccessible to the grooving machine you may construct grooves using the hand method .
handconstructed grooves must comply with the specifications for machineconstructed grooves .
initial and final texturing must produce a coefficient of friction of at least num .
do not open a lane or lanes to traffic unless the coefficient of friction is at least num .
for ramp termini use heavy brooming normal to the ramp centerline to produce a coefficient of friction of at least num .
numi curing cure the concrete pavement exposed area using the waterproof membrane method or curing compound method with curing compound no .
num or num .
if you remove the side forms within num hours of the start of curing also cure the pavement edges .
apply curing compound with mechanical sprayers .
reapply curing compound to saw cuts and disturbed areas .
numj protecting concrete pavement maintain the concrete pavement surface temperature at not less than num degrees f for the initial num hours .
protect the surface from activities that cause damage and reduce the texture or coefficient of friction .
prevent soil gravel petroleum products concrete or asphalt mixes from being deposited on the pavement surface .
construct crossings for traffic convenience .
you may use rsc for crossings if authorized .
do not open crossings until the department determines that the pavement modulus of rupture is at least num psi under california test num or california test num .
do not allow traffic on concrete pavement or use equipment on it num for num days after paving and num before the concrete has attained a modulus of rupture of num psi based on the departments testing unless num .
equipment is for sawing contraction joints num .
one side of the paving equipment tracks may be on the concrete pavement after a modulus of rupture of num psi has been attained if num .
unit pressure exerted on the pavement by the paver does not exceed num psi num .
you change the paving equipment tracks to prevent damage or the paving equipment tracks travel on protective material such as planks num .
no part of the track is closer than num foot to the concrete pavement edge num .
authorized if visible cracking or other damage occurs to the concrete pavement stop operating the paving equipment on the pavement and repair the damage .
numk early use of concrete pavement to request early use of concrete pavement num .
furnish molds and machines for the modulus of rupture testing num .
sample the concrete num .
fabricate beam specimens num .
test the beams for the modulus of rupture under california test num the pavement must have a modulus of rupture of at least num psi .
protect the pavement under section numj .
numl reserved numm drilling cores drill concrete pavement cores under astm cnumcnumm .
use diamondimpregnated drill bits .
section num concrete pavement num clean dry and fill core holes with nonshrink hydrauliccement grout or concrete .
coat hole walls with epoxy adhesive for bonding new concrete to old concrete .
finish the fill to match the adjacent surface elevation and texture .
numn correcting noncompliant pavement work numnnum general correct noncompliant pavement as follows num .
replace the pavement num .
repair spalls ravels and working cracks num .
correct the smoothness and coefficient of friction num .
treat partialdepth cracks num .
replace damaged joint seals under section num in addition to removing pavement for other noncompliance remove and replace jpcp slabs that have either of the following num .
num or more fulldepth cracks num .
combined raveled areas more than num percent of the total slab area or a single raveled area more than num sq ft replace jpcp for num feet on both sides of a joint with a rejected dowel bar .
numnnum spall and ravel repair repair spalled or raveled areas that are num .
deeper than num foot num .
wider than num foot num .
longer than num foot repair spalls or ravels under section num and complete the repairs before opening a lane or lanes to traffic .
numnnum crack repair treat partialdepth cracks in jpcp under section num .
if the joints are sealed repair working cracks by routing and sealing .
use a router mounted on wheels with a vertical shaft and a routing spindle that casters as it moves along the crack .
form a reservoir num inch deep by num inch wide in the crack .
the equipment must not cause raveling or spalling .
treat the contraction joint adjacent to the working crack by either of the following methods num .
applying epoxy resin under astm cnumcnumm type iv grade num num .
pressure injecting epoxy resin under astm cnumcnumm type iv grade num numo smoothness and friction correction correct pavement that is noncompliant for num .
smoothness by grinding under section num num .
coefficient of friction by grooving or grinding under section num do not start corrective work until num .
pavement has cured num days num .
pavement has at least a num psi modulus of rupture num .
corrective method is authorized correct the entire lane width .
start and end grinding at lines perpendicular to the roadway centerline .
the corrected area must have a uniform texture and appearance .
section num concrete pavement num if corrections are made within areas where testing with an inertial profiler is required retest the entire lane length with an inertial profiler .
if corrections are made within areas where testing with a numfoot straightedge is required retest the corrected area with a straightedge .
allow num days for the departments coefficient of friction retesting .
numpnumu reserved num payment the payment quantity for any type of concrete pavement is the volume determined by the dimensions shown .
the department does not pay for additional coring that you request to check dowel or tie bar alignment .
if the engineer authorizes a test strip that remains in place as part of the pavement the payment quantity for any type of concrete pavement includes the volume of the test strip .
the department does not pay for additional tie bars required due to the curvature of the pavement slab .
payment for grinding existing pavement is not included in the payment for concrete pavement .
num continuously reinforced concrete pavement num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing continuously reinforced concrete pavement .
constructing continuously reinforced concrete pavement includes terminal joints expansion joints wide flange beam terminals and pavement anchors .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals for field qualification submit the test data for the coefficient of thermal expansion of the concrete .
if you request to use plastic chairs to support the transverse bars submit a sample of the plastic chair including num .
manufacturers instructions for the applicable use and load capacity num .
chair spacing num .
your calculation for the load on a chair for the area of bar reinforcement it supports during production submit the test data for the coefficient of thermal expansion as an informational submittal .
numd quality assurance for field qualification test the coefficient of thermal expansion of the concrete under aashto t num .
the coefficient of thermal expansion must not exceed num microstraindegree f. during the evaluation of the test strip the engineer visually checks the reinforcement and dowel and tie bar placement .
during production test the coefficient of thermal expansion of the concrete at a frequency of num test for each num cu yd of paving but not less than num test for a project with less than num cu yd of concrete .
num materials numa general class num permeable material filter fabric and slotted plasticpipe cross drain for pavement anchors must comply with section num .
section num concrete pavement num numb transverse bar assembly transverse bar assemblies may be used to support longitudinal bars instead of transverse bars and other support devices .
numc wide flange beam wide flange beams and studs must be either rolled structural steel shapes complying with astm anumanumm or structural steel complying with astm anumanumm .
polyethylene foam board for wide flange beams must be commercial quality .
numd joints joint seals for wide flange beam terminals and for transverse expansion joints must comply with section num .
expanded polystyrene for transverse expansion joints and wide flange beam terminal must comply with section numbnum .
num construction numa general reserved numb bar reinforcement place bar reinforcement under section numd except you may request to use plastic chairs .
plastic chairs will be considered only for support directly under the transverse bars .
you must demonstrate the vertical and lateral stability of the bar reinforcement and plastic chairs during the construction of the test strip .
for a transverse bar in a curve with a radius under num feet place the reinforcement in a single continuous straight line across the lanes and aligned with the radius point as shown .
numc construction joints transverse construction joints must be perpendicular to the lane line .
construct the joints to allow for lap splices of the longitudinal bar .
clean joint surfaces before placing concrete against the surfaces .
remove laitance curing compound and other foreign materials .
numd wideflange beams completely fuse studs to a wideflange beam with an electric arc welder .
replace studs dislodged in shipping or that can be dislodged with a hammer .
nume correcting noncompliant pavement work numenum general the specifications for repairing cracks in section numn do not apply to crcp .
do not apply high molecularweight methacrylate to cracks in crcp .
crcp that develops raveling areas of num by num inches or greater requires partial depth repair .
crcp that develops one or more fulldepth transverse cracks with faulting greater than num inch or one or more full depth longitudinal cracks with faulting greater than num inch requires fulldepth repair .
numenum partial depth repair partial depth repair must comply with section num except num .
determine a rectangular boundary which extends num inches beyond the damaged area .
the depth of the saw cut must be between num inches from the surface to num inch above the longitudinal bars .
num .
provide additional reinforcement if each length of the repair boundaries is equal to or greater than num feet .
section num concrete pavement num numenum fulldepth repair numenuma general remove the fulldepth of crcp except for the portion of reinforcement to remain in place .
provide continuity of the reinforcement .
splicing must comply with section num .
do not damage the base concrete and reinforcement to remain in place .
place concrete in the area where you removed crcp .
numenumb transverse cracks make initial fulldepth transverse saw cuts normal to the lane line a distance of num feet on each side of the transverse crack .
numenumc longitudinal cracks remove the cracked area normal to the lane line for the full width of the lane a distance of num foot beyond each end of the crack .
you may propose alternate limits with your repair plan .
numf reserved num payment not used num reserved num jointed plain concrete pavement num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing jointed plain concrete pavement .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals at least num hours before each paving shift submit the following information as an informational submittals num .
early age stress and strength predictions num .
schedule of sawing and curing activities num .
contingency plan if cracking occurs submit the test data for the coefficient of thermal expansion of the concrete as an informational submittal .
numd quality assurance the qc plan must include a procedure for identifying the locations of transverse contraction joints relative to the dowel bars longitudinal centers and a procedure for consolidating concrete around the dowel bars .
develop and implement a system for predicting stresses and strength during the initial num hours after paving .
the system must include num .
subscription to a weather service to obtain forecasts for wind speed ambient temperatures humidity and cloud cover num .
portable weather station with an anemometer temperature and humidity sensors to be located at the paving site num .
earlyage concrete pavement stress and strength prediction plan num .
methods for analyzing monitoring updating and reporting predictions test for coefficient of thermal expansion of the concrete under aashto t num .
test at field qualification and at a frequency of num test for each num cu yd of paving but not less than num test for a project with less than num cu yd of concrete .
num materials not used section num concrete pavement num num construction numa general transverse contraction joints on a curve must be on a single straight line through the radius point of the curve .
if transverse joints do not align in a curve drill a fulldepth numinchdiameter hole under astm cnumcnumm where the joint meets the adjacent slab .
fill the hole with joint filler .
if joints are not sealed do not allow joint filler to penetrate the joint .
numb correcting noncompliant pavement work to replace the jpcp saw cut and remove it full depth .
saw cut full slabs at the longitudinal and transverse joints .
saw cut partial slabs at the joints and at locations determined by the engineer .
the saw cut must be vertical .
after lifting the slab paint the cut ends of dowels and tie bars .
construct transverse and longitudinal construction joints between the new slab and the existing concrete .
if slabs are constrained at both longitudinal edges by the existing pavement use dowel bars instead of tie bars .
for longitudinal joints offset dowel bar holes from original tie bars by num inches .
for transverse joints offset dowel bar holes from the original dowel bar by num inches .
drill and bond bars to the existing concrete under section num .
clean loose material and contaminants from the faces of joints and the underlying base .
coat the faces with a double application of pigmented curing compound under section numf .
for partial slab replacements place preformed spongerubber expansion joint filler at new transverse joints under astm dnum .
place concrete in the area where you removed jpcp .
numcnumg reserved num payment not used num reserved num num existing concrete pavement num general num general numa general section num includes general specifications for performing work on existing concrete pavement .
section num does not apply .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals at least num days before delivering fastsetting concrete polyester resin binder or bonding agent to the job site submit the manufacturers instructions sds and certificates of compliance .
notify the engineer if polyester resin binder will be stored in containers over num gallons .
numd quality assurance before using polyester concrete num .
allow num days for sampling and testing of the polyester resin binder num .
arrange for a representative from the manufacturer to provide training for num .
cleaning and preparing the area num .
mixing and applying the bonding agent num .
mixing placing and curing polyester concrete do not use polyester concrete until your personnel and the departments personnel have been trained .
num materials numa general water for washing aggregates mixing concrete curing and coring must comply with section numd .
numb fastsetting concrete fastsetting concrete must be one of the following num .
magnesium phosphate concrete that is either num .
single component water activated num .
dual component with a prepackaged liquid activator num .
modified highalumina based concrete num .
portland cement based concrete store fastsetting concrete in a cool and dry environment .
if retarders are used add them under the manufacturers instructions .
you may use any accelerating chemical admixtures complying with astm cnumcnumm type c and section nume .
fastsetting concrete must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num existing concrete pavement num fastsetting concrete requirements quality characteristic test method requirement compressive strengtha min psi at num hours at num hours california test num california test num num num flexural strengtha min psi at num hours california test num num bond strengtha min psi at num hours saturated surface dry concrete dry concrete california test num california test num num num water absorption max california test num num abrasion resistancea max g at num hours california test num num drying shrinkage max at num days astm cnum num water soluble chloridesb max by weight california test num num water soluble sulfatesb max by weight california test num num thermal stability min california test num num aperform testing with aggregate filler if used .
bperform testing on a cube specimen fabricated under california test num cured at least num days and then pulverized to num passing the no .
num sieve .
aggregate filler may be used to extend prepackaged concrete .
aggregate filler must num .
be clean and uniformly rounded .
num .
have a moisture content of numpercent by weight or less when tested under california test num .
num .
comply with sections numcnum and numcnum .
num .
not exceed num percent of the concrete volume or the maximum percent in the manufacturers instructions for the fastsetting concrete whichever is less .
aggregate filler must comply with the gradation shown in the following table aggregate filler gradation sieve size percentage passing num inch num no .
num num no .
num num numc polyester concrete polyester concrete consists of polyester resin binder and dry aggregate .
the polyester resin binder must be an unsaturated isophthalic polyesterstyrene copolymer .
polyester resin binder must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num existing concrete pavement num polyester resin binder requirements quality characteristic test method requirement viscositya pas rvt no .
num spindle num rpm at num c astm dnum num specific gravitya num c astm dnum num elongation min type i specimen num mm num num inch thick speed of testing num mmmin num inchminute condition num tnum astm dnum astm dnum num tensile strength min mpa type i specimen num mm num num inch thick speed of testing num mmmin num inchminute condition num tnum astm dnum astm dnum num num psi styrene contenta by weight astm dnum num silane coupler min by weight of polyester resin binder num pcc saturated surfacedry bond strength at num hours and num num f min psi california test num num static volatile emissionsa max gsq m south coast air quality management district method num num aperform the test before adding initiator .
silane coupler must be an organosilane ester gammamethacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane .
promoter must be compatible with suitable methyl ethyl ketone peroxide and cumene hydroperoxide initiators .
aggregate for polyester concrete must comply with sections numcnum numcnum and numcnum .
the combined aggregate gradation must comply with one of the gradations shown in the following table combined aggregate gradation sieve size percentage passing a b c num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num no .
num num num num aggregate retained on the no .
num sieve must have a maximum of num percent crushed particles under california test num .
fine aggregate must be natural sand .
the weighted average absorption must not exceed num percent when tested under california tests num and num .
you may submit an alternative gradation or request to use manufactured sand as fine aggregate but num percent of the combined gradation must pass the num inch sieve .
allow num days for review .
section num existing concrete pavement num polyester concrete must have a minimum compressive strength of num psi at num hours and num minutes under california test num or astm cnum .
numd bonding agent bonding agent must comply with the concrete manufacturers instructions .
nume temporary pavement structure temporary pavement structure consists of rsc or hma over ab .
rsc not complying with section num may be used as temporary pavement structure if num .
modulus of rupture is at least num psi before opening to traffic num .
rsc thickness is greater than or equal to the existing concrete pavement surface layer num .
rsc is replaced during the next paving shift ab used for temporary pavement structure must comply with the numinch maximum gradation specified in section numb .
hma must comply with the specifications for minor hma in section num .
numf reserved num construction numa general construct only the portion of pavement where the work will be completed during the same closure .
if removal is required remove only the portion of pavement where the work will be completed during the same closure .
concrete pavement work is complete when cured material attains the specified minimum properties required before opening to traffic .
if you fail to complete the concrete pavement work during the same closure construct temporary pavement structure before opening the lane to traffic .
except for saw cutting the equipment materials and personnel for constructing temporary pavement structure must be at the job site or an approved location before starting concrete pavement work .
if hma can be delivered to the job site within num hour you may request delivery as an alternative to having hma at the job site .
maintain the temporary pavement structure and replace it before you resume concrete pavement work .
after removing temporary pavement structure you may stockpile that ab at the job site and reuse it for another temporary pavement structure .
numb mixing and applying bonding agent mix and apply the bonding agent at the job site under the manufacturers instructions and in small quantities .
apply bonding agent after cleaning the surface and before placing concrete .
apply a thin even coat of bonding agent with a stiff bristle brush until the entire work surface is scrubbed and coated with bonding agent .
numc mixing concrete numcnum general mix concrete under the manufacturers instructions .
for repairing spalls mix in a small mobile drum or paddle mixer .
the quantity of aggregate filler water and liquid activator must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
mix the entire contents of prepackaged dualcomponent magnesium phosphate concrete as supplied by the manufacturer .
use the full amount of each component and do not add water to dualcomponent magnesium phosphate concrete .
do not mix magnesium phosphate concrete in containers containing zinc cadmium aluminum or copper or work it with tools containing these materials .
section num existing concrete pavement num for concrete other than dualcomponent magnesium phosphate concrete use the minimum amount of water to produce workable concrete and comply with the manufacturers instructions .
do not mix modified highalumina based concrete in containers containing aluminum or work it with tools containing aluminum .
numcnum polyester concrete when mixing with resin the moisture content of the combined aggregate must not exceed num of the average aggregate absorption when tested under california test num .
proportion the polyester resin and aggregate to produce a mixture with suitable workability for the intended work .
only a minimal amount of resin may rise to the surface after finishing .
numd placing concrete the pavement surface temperature must be at least num degrees f before placing concrete .
you may propose methods to heat the surfaces .
place polyester concrete on surfaces treated with a hmwm bonding agent .
place magnesium phosphate concrete on a dry surface .
place portland cement and modified highalumina concrete on surfaces treated with a bonding agent recommended by the concrete manufacturer .
if no bonding agent is recommended by the manufacturer place concrete on damp surfaces that are not saturated .
do not retemper concrete .
use dry finishing tools cleaned with water before working the concrete .
nume curing concrete cure concrete under the manufacturers instructions .
when curing compound is used comply with section numb for curing compound no .
num or num .
numf reserved num payment not used num subsealing and jacking num general numa summary section num includes specifications for subsealing and jacking using grout to fill voids under existing concrete pavement .
subsealing and jacking includes num .
drilling holes through existing concrete pavement num .
injecting grout num .
cleaning num .
filling the drilled holes with mortar or concrete jacking includes raising pavement to grade using injected grout .
section numdnum does not apply .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit shipping invoices with packaged or bulk fly ash and cement .
before grouting activities begin submit a proposal for the materials to be used .
include authorized laboratory test data for the grout indicating num .
time of initial setting under astm cnum section num existing concrete pavement num num .
compressive strength results at num num and num days for num num and numsecond grout efflux times to request a substitution of grout materials submit a proposal that includes test data .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control test grout compressive strength under california test num part num at numdays with num seconds efflux time .
follow the procedures for moist cure .
the numday compressive strength must be at least num psi .
numdnum department acceptance for department acceptance the final pavement elevation must be within num foot of the required grade .
num materials numa general reserved numb grout grout must consist of type ii portland cement fly ash and water .
use from num to num parts fly ash to num part portland cement by weight .
use enough water to produce the following grout efflux times determined under california test num part d num .
from num to num seconds for subsealing num .
from num to num seconds for jacking cement for grout must comply with the specifications for type ii portland cement in section numbnum .
fly ash must comply with aashto m num class c or class f. fly ash sources must be on the authorized material list for cementitious materials for use in concrete .
you may use chemical admixtures and calcium chloride .
chemical admixtures must comply with section numenum .
calcium chloride must comply with astm dnum .
numc mortar mortar must be a prepackaged fastsetting mortar that complies with astm cnum .
numd reserved num construction numa general drill holes in the pavement inject grout plug the holes and finish the holes with mortar .
drill holes through the pavement and underlying base to a depth from num to num inches below the pavement surface .
the hole diameter must match the fitting for the grout injecting equipment .
numb injecting grout numbnum general inject grout within num days of drilling holes .
immediately before injecting grout clean the drilled holes with water at a minimum pressure of num psi .
the cleaning device must have at least num jets that direct water horizontally at the slabbase interface .
do not inject grout whenever the atmospheric or subgrade temperature is below num degrees f or during inclement weather .
if water is present in the holes obtain authorization before injecting grout .
do not inject grout until at least num consecutive slabs requiring subsealing are drilled ahead of the grouting activities .
section num existing concrete pavement num the grout plant must have a positive displacement cement injection pump and a highspeed colloidal mixer capable of operating from num to num rpm .
the injection pump must sustain num psi if pumping grout with a numsecond efflux time .
a pressure gauge must be located immediately adjacent to the grout hose supply valve and positioned for easy monitoring .
if using bulk dry cement and fly ash weigh each item before mixing them .
if the materials are packaged each container must weigh the same .
introduce water to the mixer through a meter or scale .
inject grout under pressure until the voids under the pavement slab are filled .
the injection nozzle must not leak .
do not inject grout if the nozzle is below the bottom of the slab .
inject grout num hole at a time .
stop injecting grout in a hole if either of the following occurs num .
grout does not flow under a sustained pump gauge pressure of num psi after num seconds and there is no indication the slab is moving num .
injected grout rises to the surface at a joint or crack or flows into an adjacent hole dispose of unused grout within num hour of mixing .
numbnum subsealing if a slab raises more than num inch due to grout injection during subsealing work stop injecting grout in that hole .
numbnum jacking the positive displacement pump used for grout injection for jacking work must be able to provide a sustained gauge pressure of num psi .
gauge pressures may be from num to num psi for brief periods to start slab movement .
you may add additional water to initiate pressure injection of grout .
do not reduce the grout efflux time below num seconds .
raise the slabs uniformly .
use string lines to monitor the pavement movement .
do not move adjacent slabs not shown to be jacked .
if you move adjacent slabs correct the grade within the tolerances for final pavement elevation .
numc finishing immediately after removing the injection nozzle plug the hole with a round tapered wooden plug .
do not remove plugs until adjacent holes are injected with grout and no grout surfaces through the previously injected holes .
after grouting remove grout from drilled holes to at least num inches below the pavement surface .
clean the holes and fill with mortar .
finish filled holes flush with the pavement surface .
numd tolerances the final pavement elevation must be within num foot of the required grade .
if the final pavement elevation is from num to num foot higher than the required grade grind the noncompliant pavement surface under section num to within num foot of the required grade .
if the final pavement elevation is higher than num foot from the required grade remove and replace the noncompliant pavement under section num .
num payment the payment quantity for subsealing is the sum of the dry weights of cement and fly ash used in placed grout .
the payment quantity for jacking is the sum of the dry weights of cement and fly ash in the placed grout .
the department does not pay for wasted grout .
the department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the subsealing or jacking quantity .
section num existing concrete pavement num num crack treatment num general numa summary section num includes specifications for applying highmolecularweight methacrylate to partialdepth concrete pavement surface cracks .
section numdnum does not apply .
numb definitions partialdepth crack crack that does not extend the full concrete slab depth from one edge of the slab to the opposite or adjacent side of the slab .
numc submittals numcnum general submit hmwm samples num days before use .
submit the proposed removal method at least num days before sealant removal .
numcnum public safety and application plans before starting crack treatment submit a public safety plan and an application plan for applying hmwm as shop drawings .
the public safety and application plans must identify the materials equipment and methods to be used .
in the public safety plan include the sds for each component of hmwm and details for num .
shipping num .
storage num .
handling num .
disposal of residual hmwm and containers if the project is in an urban area adjacent to a school or residence the public safety plan must also include an airborne emissions monitoring plan prepared by a cih certified in comprehensive practice by the american board of industrial hygiene .
submit a copy of the cihs certification .
the cih must monitor the emissions at a minimum of num points including the mixing point the application point and the point of nearest public contact .
at work completion submit a report by the cih with results of the airborne emissions monitoring plan .
the application plan must include num .
crack treatment and coefficient of friction testing schedules num .
methods and materials including num .
description of equipment for applying hmwm num .
description of equipment for applying sand num .
gel time range and final cure time for resin revise and resubmit rejected plans .
with each plan rejection the engineer gives revision directions including detailed comments .
numcnum reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general use test tiles to evaluate the hmwm cure time .
coat at least one numby numinch smooth glazed tile for each batch of hmwm .
place the coated tile adjacent to the area being treated .
do not apply sand to the test tiles .
use the same type of crack treatment equipment for testing and production .
section num existing concrete pavement num numdnum test area before starting crack treatment treat a test area of at least num square feet within the project limits at a location authorized by the engineer .
use test areas outside the traveled way if available .
treat the test area under weather and pavement conditions similar to those expected during crack treatment production .
the engineer evaluates the test area based on the departments acceptance criteria .
do not begin crack treatment until the engineer authorizes the test area .
numdnum department acceptance the engineer accepts a treated area if num .
corresponding test tiles are dry to the touch num .
treated surface is tackfree and not oily num .
sand cover adheres enough to resist hand brushing num .
excess sand is removed num .
coefficient of friction is at least num when tested under california test num num materials hmwm consists of compatible resin promoter and initiator .
hwmw resin may be prepromoted by mixing promoter and resin together before filling containers .
identify prepromoted resin on the container label .
adjust the gel time to compensate for temperature changes throughout the application .
the quality characteristics of hmwm resin must comply with the requirements shown in the following table highmolecularweight methacrylate quality characteristics quality characteristic test method requirement viscosity a max cp brookfield rvt with ul adapter num rpm at num c astm dnum num specific gravitya min at num c astm dnum num flash point a min c astm dnum num vapor pressurea max mm hg at num c astm dnum num tackfree time max minutes at num f specimen prepared under california test num num volatile contenta max astm dnum num pcc saturated surfacedry bond strength min psi at num hours and num num f california test num num aperform the test before adding initiator .
sand must be commercial quality dry blast sand .
at least num percent of the sand must pass the no .
num sieve and at least num percent must be retained on the no .
num sieve when tested under california test num .
num construction before applying hmwm clean the pavement surface by abrasive blasting and blow loose material from visible cracks with highpressure air .
remove concrete curing seals from the pavement to be treated .
the pavement must be dry when blast cleaning is performed .
if the pavement surface becomes contaminated before applying the hmwm clean the pavement surface by abrasive blasting .
protect existing facilities from hmwm .
during pavement treatment protect pavement joints working cracks and surfaces not being treated .
repair or replace existing facilities contaminated with hmwm at your expense .
the equipment applying hmwm must combine the components by either static inline mixers or by external intersecting spray fans .
the pump pressure at the spray bars must not cause atomization .
do not use compressed air to produce the spray .
use a shroud to enclose the spray bar apparatus .
section num existing concrete pavement num you may apply hmwm manually to prevent overspray onto adjacent traffic .
if applying resin manually limit the batch quantity of hmwm to num gallons .
apply hmwm at a rate of num sq ftgal .
the prepared area must be dry and the surface temperature must be from num to num degrees f while applying hmwm .
do not apply hmwm if the ambient relative humidity is more than num percent .
flood the treatment area with hmwm to penetrate the pavement and cracks .
apply hmwm within num minutes after complete mixing .
mixed hmwm viscosity must not increase .
redistribute excess material with squeegees or brooms within num minutes of application .
remove excess material from tined grooves .
wait at least num minutes after applying hmwm before applying sand .
apply sand at a rate of approximately num pounds per square yard or until refusal .
remove excess sand by vacuuming or sweeping .
do not allow traffic on the treated surface until num .
treated surface is tackfree and not oily num .
sand cover adheres enough to resist hand brushing num .
excess sand is removed num .
coefficient of friction is at least num determined under california test num num payment not used num spall repair num general numa summary section num includes specifications for repairing spalls in concrete pavement .
section numdnum does not apply .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance the engineer accepts spall repairs based on authorized saw cut dimensions and visual inspection .
num materials bonding agent must comply with the requirements for hmwm in section num except the tackfree time requirements do not apply and the hmwm must not contain wax .
caulk must be at least num percent silicone designated as a concrete sealant and comply with astm cnum .
form board must be singlewall doubleface corrugated cardboard or paperboard covered with a bond breaker on each face .
for existing joints or cracks less than num mils wide use paperboard .
num construction numa general prepare spall repair areas by removing concrete and cleaning the underlying surface .
repair spalls using polyester concrete with a hmwm bonding agent .
after completing spall repairs do not allow traffic on the repairs for at least num hours after the time of final setting under astm cnumm .
section num existing concrete pavement num numb remove pavement the engineer determines the rectangular limits of unsound concrete pavement .
before removing pavement mark the saw cut lines and spall repair area on the pavement surface .
do not remove pavement until the engineer verbally authorizes the saw cut area .
use a powerdriven saw with a diamond blade .
remove pavement as shown and num .
from the center of the repair area towards the saw cut num .
to the full saw cut depth num .
at least num inches beyond the saw cut edge to produce a rough angled surface produce a rough surface by chipping or other removal methods that do not damage the pavement remaining inplace .
completely remove any saw overcuts .
pneumatic hammers used for concrete removal must weigh num pounds or less .
if you damage concrete pavement outside the removal area enlarge the area to remove the damaged pavement .
if dowel bars are exposed during removal remove concrete from the exposed surface and cover with duct tape .
numc cleaning clean the exposed faces of the concrete by num .
sand or water blasting .
water blasting equipment must be capable of producing a blast pressure from num to num psi .
num .
blowing the exposed concrete area with compressed air free of moisture and oil to remove debris .
air compressors must deliver air at a minimum of num cfm and develop num psi of nozzle pressure .
numd compression relief at joints and cracks numdnum general provide compression relief at joints and cracks by using a form board or saw cutting .
numdnum form board installation before placing concrete place the form board to match the existing joint or crack alignment and width .
extend the form board at least num inches beyond each end of the repair and at least num inch deeper than the repair .
after placing concrete remove the form board before sealing joints or cracks .
numdnum saw cut method after cleaning seal exposed joints or cracks with caulk at the bottom and sides of the repair area .
any surface receiving caulk must be clean and dry .
place caulk a minimum of num inch beyond the edges of the repair area into the existing joint or crack .
saw cut the polyester concrete to the full depth along the existing joint or crack alignment within num hours from time of final setting .
use a powerdriven saw with a diamond blade .
numenumh reserved num payment the payment quantity for spall repair is the authorized saw cut area .
the department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the spall repair quantity .
section num existing concrete pavement num num joint seals num general numa summary section num includes specifications for sealing concrete pavement joints or replacing concrete pavement joint seals .
pavement joints include isolation joints .
section numdnum does not apply .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals at least num days before delivery to the job site submit a certificate of compliance sds manufacturers recommendations and instructions for storage and installation of num .
liquid joint sealant .
num .
backer rods .
include the manufacturer data sheet verifying compatibility with the liquid joint sealant .
num .
preformed compression joint seal .
include the manufacturer data sheet used to verify the seal for the joint dimensions shown .
num .
lubricant adhesive .
upon delivery of asphalt rubber joint sealant to the job site submit a certified test report for each lot based on testing performed within num year .
submit a work plan for removing pavement and joint materials .
allow num days for review .
include descriptions of the equipment and methods for removal of existing pavement and joint material .
numd quality assurance numdnum general before sealing joints arrange for a representative from the manufacturer to provide training on cleaning and preparing the joint and installing the liquid joint sealant or preformed compression joint seal .
do not seal joints until your personnel and the departments personnel have been trained .
numdnum department acceptance the engineer accepts joint seals based on constructed dimensions and visual inspection of completed seals for voids .
num materials numa general joint seal materials must be either silicone joint sealant asphalt rubber joint sealant or preformed compression joint seal .
silicone or asphalt rubber joint sealant must not bond or react with the backer rod .
numb silicone joint sealant silicone joint sealant must be on the authorized material list for silicone joint sealant .
numc asphalt rubber joint sealant asphalt rubber joint sealant must num .
be asphalt binder mixed with not less than num percent ground rubber by weight .
ground rubber must be vulcanized or a combination of vulcanized and devulcanized materials that pass a no .
num sieve .
num .
comply with astm dnum for type ii .
num .
be capable of melting at a temperature below num degrees f and applied to cracks and joints .
num .
be delivered in containers complying with astm dnum .
numd backer rods backer rods must num .
comply with astm dnum section num existing concrete pavement num num .
type num for asphalt rubber joint sealant num .
type num or type num for silicone joint sealant num .
be expanded closedcell polyethylene foam num .
have a diameter at least num percent greater than the saw cut joint width nume preformed compression joint seals preformed compression joint seals must num .
comply with astm dnum num .
have num or num cells except seals num inch wide or less may have num cells lubricant adhesive used to install seals must comply with astm dnum .
numfnumk reserved num construction numa general if joint seals are shown for new concrete pavement seal new concrete pavement joints at least num days after the concrete pavement is placed .
before sealing joints complete pavement repairs and grinding and grooving .
remove existing pavement and joint material by sawing rectangular plowing cutting or manual labor .
saw cut the reservoir as shown before cleaning the joint .
use a powerdriven saw with a diamond blade .
numb joint cleaning numbnum general clean the joint after removing existing pavement and before installing joint seal material .
cleaning must be completed no more than num hours before installing backer rods liquid joint seal or preformed compression seals using the following sequence num .
removing debris num .
drying num .
sandblasting num .
air blasting num .
vacuuming clean in num direction to minimize contamination of surrounding areas .
numbnum removing debris remove debris including dust dirt and visible traces of old sealant from the joint after sawing plowing cutting or manual removal .
do not use chemical solvents to wash the joint .
numbnum drying after removing debris allow the reservoir surfaces to dry or remove moisture and dampness at the joint with compressed air that may be moderately hot .
numbnum sandblasting after the joint is dry sandblast the reservoir to remove remaining residue using a numinch diameter nozzle and num psi minimum pressure .
do not sandblast straight into the reservoir .
angle the sandblasting nozzle between num to num inches from the concrete and make at least num pass to clean each reservoir face .
numbnum air blasting after sandblasting air blast the reservoir to remove sand dirt and dust num hour before sealing the joint .
use compressed air free of oil and moisture delivered at a minimum rate of num cfm and num psi nozzle pressure .
numbnum vacuuming after air blasting use a vacuum sweeper to remove debris and contaminants from the pavement surfaces surrounding the joint .
section num existing concrete pavement num numbnum reserved numc installing liquid joint sealant before installing liquid joint sealant the pavement and reservoir surfaces must be dry and the ambient air temperature must be at least num degrees f and above the dew point .
before installing asphalt rubber joint sealant the pavement surface temperature must be at least num degrees f. where backer rods are shown place the rods before installing liquid joint sealant .
place backer rods under the manufacturers instructions unless otherwise specified .
the reservoir surface must be free of residue or film .
do not puncture the backer rod .
immediately after placing the backer rod install liquid joint sealant under the manufacturers instructions unless otherwise specified .
before installing demonstrate that fresh liquid sealant is ejected from the nozzle free of cooled or cured material .
pump liquid joint sealant through a nozzle sized for the width of the reservoir so that liquid joint sealant is placed directly onto the backer rod .
the installer must draw the nozzle toward his body and extrude liquid joint sealant evenly .
liquid joint sealant must maintain continuous contact with the reservoir walls during extrusion .
within num minutes of placing liquid joint sealant recess it to the depth shown before a skin begins to form .
after each joint is sealed remove excess liquid joint sealant on the pavement surface .
do not allow traffic over the sealed joints until the liquid joint sealant is set tack free and firm enough to prevent embedment of roadway debris .
numd installing preformed compression joint seals install preformed compression joint seals as shown and under the manufacturers instructions .
use lubricant adhesive .
install longitudinal seals before transverse seals .
longitudinal seals must be continuous except splicing is allowed at intersections with transverse seals .
transverse seals must be continuous for the entire transverse length of concrete pavement except splices are allowed for widening and staged construction .
with a sharp instrument cut across the longitudinal seal at the intersection with transverse construction joints .
if the longitudinal seal does not relax enough to properly install the transverse seal trim the longitudinal seal to form a tight seal between the num joints .
any authorized splicing must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
use a machine specifically designed for preformed compression joint seal installation .
the machine must install the seal num .
to the specified depth num .
to make continuous contact with the joint walls num .
without cutting nicking or twisting the seal num .
without stretching the seal more than num percent cut preformed compression joint seal material to the exact length of the pavement joint to be sealed .
the engineer measures this length .
after you install the preformed compression joint seal the engineer measures the excess length of material at the joint end .
the engineer divides the excess length by the measured cut length to determine the stretch percentage .
seals must be compressed from num to num percent of the joint width when complete in place .
nume reserved num payment not used num reserved num transition tapers num general section num includes specifications for constructing transition tapers in existing concrete pavement .
section num existing concrete pavement num section numdnum does not apply .
num materials not used num construction construct transition tapers by either grinding or removing and replacing the existing concrete .
do not allow flying debris during the construction of tapers .
grinding must comply with section num .
if you replace the existing concrete comply with section num except taper the surface to the level shown and finish it with a coarse broom .
if the transition taper will be overlaid with hma that is not placed before opening to traffic and there is a grade difference of more than num foot construct a temporary taper by placing hma that complies with section num .
remove the temporary hma taper before constructing the transition taper .
num payment the payment quantity for pavement transition taper is determined from the dimensions shown .
the department does not pay for temporary hma tapers .
num dowel bar retrofit reserved num individual slab replacement with rapid strength concrete num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing individual slab replacement with rapid strength concrete .
numb definitions concrete raveling disintegration of the concrete surface layer from aggregate loss .
early age any age less than num times the time of final setting for concrete determined under astm cnumcnumm .
fulldepth crack crack that runs from one edge of the concrete slab to the opposite or adjacent side of the slab .
opening age age when the minimum modulus of rupture specified for opening to traffic and equipment is attained .
time of final setting elapsed time required to develop a concrete penetration resistance that is at least num psi under astm cnumcnumm .
numc submittals numcnum general at least num days before delivery to the job site submit the sds and manufacturers instructions for storage and installation of joint filler material .
you may request to use surface finish additives .
submit the surface finish additive manufacturers instructions with your request .
allow num days for review .
at least num days before starting individual slab replacement work submit a sample of cement from each proposed lot and samples of proposed admixtures in the quantities ordered .
during individual slab replacement operations submit uniformity reports for hydraulic cement at least once every num days to the engineer and mets attention cement laboratory .
uniformity reports must comply with astm cnum except testing age and water content may be modified to suit the particular material .
section num existing concrete pavement num except for modulus of rupture tests submit qc test result forms within num hours of the paving shift .
submit modulus of rupture results within num .
num minutes of completing the opening age test completion num .
num hours of completing numday test completion numcnum quality control plan if the quantity of rsc is at least num cu yd submit a qc plan at least num days before placing trial slabs .
if the quantity of rsc is less than num cu yd submit proposed forms for inspection sampling and testing .
the qc plan must describe the organization and procedures used to num .
control the production process num .
determine whether a change to the production process is needed num .
implement a change the qc plan must include num .
names qualifications and certifications of qc personnel including num .
qc manager num .
assistant qc managers num .
samplers and testers num .
outline of procedure for the production transportation placement and finishing of rsc num .
outline of procedure and forms for rsc qc sampling and testing to be performed during and after rsc placement including the testing frequencies for modulus of rupture of rsc num .
contingency plan for identifying and correcting problems in production transportation placement or finishing rsc including num .
action limits num .
suspension limits that do not exceed specified material requirements num .
detailed corrective action if limits are exceeded num .
temporary pavement structure provisions including num .
quantity and location of standby material num .
determination of need num .
location of your qc testing laboratory and testing equipment during and after paving operations num .
list of testing equipment to be used including the date of last calibration num .
production target values for material properties that impact concrete quality or strength including cleanness value and sand equivalent num .
outline of procedure for placing and testing trial slabs including num .
locations and times num .
production procedures num .
placing and finishing methods num .
sampling methods sample curing and sample transportation num .
testing and test result reporting num .
name of source plant with an approved material plant quality program num .
procedures or methods for controlling pavement quality including num .
materials quality num .
constructing contraction and construction joints num .
protecting pavement before opening to traffic numcnum mix design at least num days before constructing a trial slab submit a mix design .
the maximum ambient temperature range for a mix design is num degrees f. submit more than num mix design based on ambient temperature variations anticipated during rsc placement .
each mix design must include num .
mix design identification number num .
aggregate source num .
opening age num .
aggregate gradation num .
types of cement and chemical admixtures num .
mix proportions section num existing concrete pavement num num .
maximum time allowed between batching and placing num .
range of effective ambient temperatures num .
time of final setting num .
data for the modulus of rupture development from laboratoryprepared samples including test results at num .
num hour before opening age num .
opening age num .
num hour after opening age num .
num day num .
num days num .
num days num .
num days num .
shrinkage test data num .
any special instructions or conditions such as water temperature requirements numcnum reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general provide a qc manager and assistant qc managers to administer the qc plan .
each qc manager must hold current aci certification as a concrete field testing techniciangrade i and a concrete laboratory testing techniciangrade ii except the assistant qc managers may hold a certification as a concrete laboratory testing techniciangrade i instead of grade ii .
the qc manager responsible for the production period involved must review and sign the sampling inspection and test reports before submitting them .
the qc manager must be present for num .
each stage of mix design num .
trial slab construction num .
rsc production and placement num .
meetings with the engineer relating to production placement or testing the qc manager must not be a member of this projects production or paving crews an inspector or a tester .
the qc manager must have no duties during the production and placement of rsc except those specified .
testing laboratories and equipment must comply with the departments independent assurance program .
at the time of the qc plan submittal the department evaluates the qc samplers and testers .
numdnum justintime training reserved numdnum preconstruction meeting the following additional personnel must attend the preconstruction meeting num .
concrete plant inspectors num .
personnel performing saw cutting and joint sealing discuss the pavement structure removal as an additional topic during the preconstruction meeting .
numdnum trial slabs before starting individual slab replacement work complete num trial slab for each mix design .
place trial slabs near the job site at a mutuallyagreed location that is neither on the roadway nor within the project limits .
trial slabs must be num by num feet and at least num inches thick .
during trial slab construction sample and split the aggregate for gradation cleanness value and sand equivalent testing .
fabricate and test beams under california test num to determine the modulus of rupture values .
section num existing concrete pavement num cure beams fabricated for early age testing such that the monitored temperatures in the beams and the slab are always within num degrees f of each other .
monitor and record the internal temperatures of trial slabs and early age beams at intervals of at least num minutes .
install thermocouples or thermistors connected to stripchart recorders or digital data loggers to monitor the temperatures .
temperature recording devices must be accurate to within num degrees f. measure the internal temperatures at num inch from the top num inch from the bottom and no closer than num inches from any edge until early age testing is completed .
cure beams fabricated for numday testing under california test num except place them into sand num at a time that is from num to num times the time of final setting measured under astm cnumm or num at num hours whichever is earlier .
trial slabs must have an opening age modulus of rupture of not less than num psi and a numday modulus of rupture of not less than num psi .
after authorization remove and dispose of trial slabs and testing materials .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general provide continuous process control and qc sampling and testing throughout rsc production and placement .
notify the engineer at least num business days before any sampling and testing .
establish a testing facility at the job site or at an authorized location .
sample rsc under california test num .
numdnumb rapid strength concrete test rsc under the test methods and at the frequencies shown in the following table rsc testing frequencies quality characteristics test method minimum testing frequencya cleanness value california test num num cu yd or num per shift sand equivalent california test num num cu yd or num per shift aggregate gradation california test num num cu yd or num per shift air content california test num num cu yd or num per shift yield california test num num per shift slump or penetration astm cnum or california test num num per num hours of paving unit weight california test num num cu yd or num per shift aggregate moisture meter calibrationb california test num or california test num num per shift modulus of rupture california test num comply with section num numdnumc atest at the most frequent interval .
bcheck plant moisture meter calibration by comparing moisture meter readings with california test num or california test num test results maintain control charts to identify potential problems and causes .
post a copy of each control chart at a location determined by the engineer .
use the mix proportion target values as indicators of central tendency in the control charts .
develop linear control charts for num .
cleanness value num .
sand equivalent num .
fine and coarse aggregate gradation num .
air content num .
penetration control charts must include section num existing concrete pavement num num .
contract number num .
mix proportions num .
test number num .
each test parameter num .
action and suspension limits num .
for air content the action limit is num percent and the suspension limit is num percent of the specified values .
if no value is specified apply the air content value used in the approved mix design .
num .
specification limits num .
for fine and coarse aggregate gradation record the running average of the previous num consecutive gradation tests for each sieve and superimpose the specification limits .
num .
qc test results a process requires corrective action if any of the following occurs num .
for fine and coarse aggregate gradation num consecutive running averages of num tests are outside the specification limits num .
for individual penetration or air content measurements if either num .
num point falls outside the suspension limit line num .
num points in a row fall outside the action limit line stop production and take corrective action for out of control processes or the engineer rejects subsequent rsc .
use a tachometer to test and record the vibration frequency of the concrete vibrators num before placing rsc each day and num at least every num hours during production .
numdnumc modulus of rupture during rsc placement sample and fabricate beams for testing the modulus of rupture testing within the first num cu yd at least once every num cu yd and within the final truckload .
submit split samples and fabricate test beams for the departments testing unless ordered otherwise .
determine the modulus of rupture at opening age under california test num except beam specimens may be fabricated using an internal vibrator under astm cnum .
cure the beams under the same conditions as the pavement until num hour before testing .
test num beam specimens in the presence of the engineer and average the results .
a single test represents no more than that days production or num cu yd whichever is less .
determine the modulus of rupture at other ages using beams cured and tested under california test num except place them in sand num at a time from num to num times the time of final setting under astm cnumcnumm or num at num hours whichever is earlier .
numdnum department acceptance numdnuma general the final surface texture of the individual slab replacement must pass visual inspection and have a coefficient of friction of at least num determined under california test num .
allow at least num days for the department to schedule for coefficient of friction testing .
notify the engineer when the pavement is scheduled to be opened to traffic .
numdnumb modulus of rupture the department accepts rsc based on your test results for modulus of rupture at opening age and the departments test results for modulus of rupture at num days .
rsc must have a modulus of rupture at opening age that is at least num psi and a modulus of rupture at num days that is at least num psi .
modulus of rupture is calculated based on the test result average from testing num beams for each sample .
section num existing concrete pavement num for rsc with a modulus of rupture at opening age that is at least num psi and a modulus of rupture at num days that is greater than or equal to num psi but less than num psi the department deducts num percent of the payment for individual slab replacementrsc .
for rsc with a modulus of rupture at opening age that is at least num psi and a modulus of rupture at num days that is greater than or equal to num psi but less than num psi the department deducts num percent of the payment for individual slab replacementrsc .
numdnumc concrete pavement smoothness the department tests for concrete pavement smoothness using a numfoot straightedge .
straightedge smoothness specifications do not apply to the pavement surface placed within num inches of existing concrete pavement except parallel to the centerline at the midpoint of a transverse construction joint .
the concrete pavement surface must not vary from the lower edge of a numfoot straightedge by more than num .
num feet when parallel to the centerline num .
num feet when perpendicular to the centerline extending from edge to edge of a traffic lane numdnumd cracking and raveling the department rejects an rsc slab within num year of contract acceptance if there is either of the following num .
partial or fulldepth cracking num .
concrete raveling consisting of either num .
combined raveled areas more than num percent of each rsc slab area num .
any single raveled area of more than num sq ft numdnume reserved num materials numa general reserved numb rapid strength concrete use either the num inch maximum or the numinch maximum combined gradation specified in section num numcnumd .
air content must comply with the minimum requirements in section numbnum .
numc dowel bars dowel bars must comply with section num .
numdnume reserved num construction numa general complete individual slab replacement adjacent to new pavement or existing pavement shown for construction before constructing the other pavement work .
replace individual slabs damaged during construction before placing final pavement delineation .
numb removing existing pavement remove pavement under section num .
the engineer determines the exact individual slab replacement limits after overlying layers are removed .
after removing pavement to the depth shown grade the subgrade to a uniform plane .
water as needed and compact the material remaining in place to a firm and stable base .
the finished surface of the remaining material must not extend above the grade established by the engineer .
numc placing dowel bars drill existing concrete and bond dowel bars under section num for type num individual slab replacement .
do not install dowel bars in contraction joints .
section num existing concrete pavement num numd placing rapid strength concrete do not place rsc whenever the ambient air temperature is forecast by the national weather service to be less than num degrees f within num hours of final finishing .
before placing rsc against existing concrete place numinch thick commercial quality polyethylene flexible foam expansion joint filler across the original transverse and longitudinal joints .
place the top of the joint filler flush with the top of the pavement and extend to the top of the base layer .
secure joint filler to the joint face of the existing pavement to prevent the joint filler from moving during the placement of rsc .
use metal or wood side forms .
wood side forms must not be less than num inches thick .
side forms and connections must be of sufficient rigidity that movement will not occur under forces from equipment or rsc .
clean and oil side forms before each use .
side forms must remain in place until the pavement edge no longer requires the protection of forms .
after you place rsc consolidate it using highfrequency internal vibrators adjacent to forms and across the full paving width .
place rsc as nearly as possible to its final position .
do not use vibrators for extensive shifting of concrete pavement .
spread and shape rsc with powered finishing machines supplemented by hand finishing .
after you mix and place rsc do not add water to the surface to facilitate finishing .
you may request authorization to use surface finishing additives .
place consecutive concrete loads without interruption .
do not allow cold joints where a visible lineation forms after concrete is placed sets and hardens before additional concrete is placed .
nume joints numenum general joints must be vertical .
numenum construction joints before placing fresh concrete against hardened concrete existing concrete pavement or structures apply curing compound no .
num or num to the vertical surface of the hardened concrete existing concrete pavement or structures and allow it to dry .
at joints between concrete pavement and hma apply tack coat between the concrete pavement and hma .
numenum contraction joints saw contraction joints before cracking occurs and after the rsc is hard enough to saw without spalling raveling or tearing .
cut contraction joints to a minimum of num the slab depth .
use a powerdriven saw with a diamond blade .
match transverse contraction joints with existing joint spacing and skew unless otherwise described .
where the existing transverse joint spacing in an adjacent lane exceeds num feet construct an additional transverse contraction joint midway between the existing joints .
cut transverse contraction joints across the full slab replacement width .
after cutting immediately wash slurry from the joint with water at less than num psi pressure .
longitudinal contraction joints must be parallel with the concrete pavement centerline except when lanes converge or diverge .
transverse and longitudinal contraction joints must not deviate by more than num foot from either side of a numfoot straight line .
for longitudinal joints parallel to a curved centerline radius less than num feet compensate for curvature .
keep joints free from foreign material including soil gravel concrete and asphalt .
numf final finishing after preliminary finishing round the edges of the initial paving width to a numfoot radius .
round transverse and longitudinal construction joints to a numfoot radius .
mark each individual slab replacement area with a stamp .
the stamp must show the month day and year of placement and section num existing concrete pavement num contract number .
level the location of the stamp with a steel trowel below the pavement texture .
orient the stamp mark so it can be read from the outside edge of the individual slab replacement area .
before curing texture the pavement .
perform initial texturing with a burlap drag or broom device that produces striations parallel to the centerline .
perform final texturing with a steeltined device that produces grooves parallel with the centerline .
tines must be from num to num inch wide on numinch centers and have enough length thickness and resilience to form grooves from num to num inch deep after the concrete has hardened .
grooves must extend over the entire pavement width except do not construct grooves num inches from longitudinal pavement edges or joints .
final texture must be uniform and smooth .
grooves must be parallel and aligned to the pavement edge across the pavement width .
the groove alignment must not vary more than num foot for every num feet of length .
numg temporary pavement structure temporary pavement structure must be rsc or numinchthick hma over ab .
numh noncompliant individual slab replacement replace an individual slab replacement slab that has any of the following defects num .
one or more fulldepth cracks .
num .
concrete raveling .
num .
noncompliant smoothness except you may request authorization for grinding under section num and retesting .
grinding that causes a depression will not be authorized .
smoothness must be corrected within num hours of placing rsc .
num .
noncompliant modulus of rupture .
if the modulus of rupture at opening age is at least num psi and the modulus of rupture at num days is at least num psi but less than num psi you may request authorization to leave the rsc in place and accept the specified deduction .
if pavement is noncompliant for coefficient of friction groove or grind the pavement under section num .
comply with section numn and groove or grind before the installation of any required joint seal or edge drains adjacent to the areas to the noncompliant area .
treat an individualslabreplacement slab with partialdepth cracking using hmwm under section num .
numi replace pavement delineation replace traffic stripes pavement markings and markers that are removed obliterated or damaged by individual slab replacement under sections num and num .
numj reserved num payment payment for replacing base is not included in the payment for individual slab replacementrapid strength concrete .
payment for placing dowel bars is not included in the payment for individual slab replacementrapid strength concrete .
num drill and bond bars num general numa summary section num includes specifications for drilling installing and bonding tie bars and dowel bars in concrete pavement .
section numdnum does not apply .
numb definitions reserved section num existing concrete pavement num numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for num .
tie bars num .
dowel bars num .
dowel bar lubricant num .
chemical adhesive num .
epoxy powder coating at least num days before delivery to the job site submit the manufacturers instructions for storage handling and use of chemical adhesive .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control reserved numdnum department acceptance the department accepts drill and bond bars based on the engineers inspection before placing concrete .
numdnum reserved num materials numa general dowel bar lubricant must comply with section numd .
chemical adhesive for drilling and bonding bars must be on the authorized material list for chemical adhesives that indicates the appropriate chemical adhesive system for concrete temperature and installation conditions .
each chemical adhesive system container must clearly and permanently show the num .
manufacturers name num .
model number of the system num .
manufacture date num .
batch number num .
expiration date num .
current international conference of building officials evaluation report number num .
directions for use num .
storage requirement num .
warnings or precautions required by state and federal laws and regulations numb reserved num construction numa general drill holes for bars .
clean drilled holes under the chemical adhesive manufacturers instructions .
holes must be dry at the time of placing the chemical adhesive and bars .
use a grout retention ring when drilling and bonding dowel bars .
immediately after inserting the bar into the chemical adhesive support the bar to prevent movement until chemical adhesive has cured the minimum time recommended by the manufacturer .
apply dowel bar lubricant to the entire exposed portion of the dowel bar .
if the engineer rejects a bar installation stop paving drilling and bonding activities .
adjust your procedures and obtain the verbal authorization before resuming paving drilling and bonding .
cut the rejected bar flush with the pavement joint surface and coat the exposed end of the bar with chemical adhesive .
offset the new hole num inches horizontally from the rejected holes center .
section num existing concrete pavement num numb tie bar tolerance place tie bars within the tolerances shown in the following table tie bar tolerances dimension tolerance horizontal skew horizontal skew bar length num vertical skew vertical skew bar length num longitudinal translation inch num horizontal offset embedment inch num height relative to the adjacent bar num vertical depth clearance from the pavement surface or bottom inches min num numc dowel bar tolerance place dowel bars within the tolerances specified in section numd .
numd reserved num payment not used num removing concrete pavement and base num general section num includes general specifications for removing concrete pavement and base .
remove concrete pavement or concrete pavement and base to the depth shown .
before placing subsequent layers of subbase base pavement or other material the subgrade must comply with section numc .
section numdnum does not apply .
num materials not used num construction numa general reserved numb remove concrete pavement if there is overlying material on the concrete pavement remove it with the pavement .
saw cut using a diamond blade and make cuts perpendicular to the pavement surface .
saw cutting is not required where concrete pavement is adjacent to asphalt concrete pavement .
saw cut no more than num days before removing pavement such that traffic will not dislodge any pavement piece or segment .
saw cut perpendicular to the traveled way except you may cut parallel or diagonal to the traveled way when saw cutting and removing the pavement during the same closure .
you may make additional saw cuts within the sawed outline .
saw cuts must be the full pavement depth unless otherwise shown .
saw cut at longitudinal and transverse joints to remove entire slabs .
for partialslab areas the engineer determines the exact sawcut locations .
do not impact the surface within num inches of pavement remaining in place .
slablifting equipment must attach to the pavement .
section num existing concrete pavement num numc remove base before removing any type of asphalt treated cement treated or concrete base sawcut the outline of the base removal area using a powerdriven saw with a diamond blade .
cut asphalt treated base at least num inches deep on a neat line perpendicular to the base surface .
cut cement treated or concrete base full depth .
remove unbonded granular base material by means that will not disturb base to remain in place .
num payment not used num reserved num num groove and grind concrete num general num general section num includes general specifications for grooving and grinding concrete roadway surfaces .
section numdnum does not apply .
num materials not used num construction reserved num payment not used num grooving num general numa summary section num includes specifications for grooving concrete roadway surfaces .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum department acceptance the department accepts grooved areas if at least num percent of any num by num foot longitudinal pavement area is grooved except where prevented by irregularities in the pavement surface .
num materials not used num construction at the start of each work shift grooving machines must be equipped with a full complement of functioning grooving blades .
grooving blades must be num num inch wide and spaced on numinch centers .
set blades and cut to depth at the locations shown in the following table location groove depth inches pavement num to num bridge decks num to num inductive loop detectors num to num begin and end grooving at lines perpendicular to the roadway centerline .
center grooving within the lane width .
for new pavement or bridge decks groove the full lane width .
if a single blade on a grooving machine fails to cut an acceptable groove you may continue to groove for the remainder of the work shift .
do not regroove because of a single failed blade .
if more than a single blade fails perform either of the following num .
discontinue work within num feet of the failure .
cutting omitted grooves is not required .
section num groove and grind concrete num num .
continue grooving until the end of the work shift .
you must cut omitted grooves by other means .
num payment not used num grinding num general numa summary section num includes specifications for grinding concrete roadway surfaces .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control test for pavement smoothness under sections num and num except num .
at the midpoint of a joint or crack test smoothness with a straightedge .
num .
straightedge and inertial profiler requirements do not apply to areas abnormally depressed from subsidence or other localized causes .
end smoothness testing num feet before and resume num feet after these areas .
after grinding the existing pavement must comply with specifications for smoothness and coefficient of friction in section num except num .
at the midpoint of a joint or crack both sides must have uniform texture .
num .
crossslope must be uniform and have positive drainage across the traveled way and shoulder .
numdnum department acceptance the department accepts pavement for smoothness and coefficient of friction under section numd .
for department acceptance the following ground areas must comply with the specifications for smoothness and concrete cover over reinforcing steel in section numdnumbii num .
bridge decks num .
approach slabs num .
adjacent num feet of approach pavement after grinding bridge decks approach slabs and the adjacent num feet of approach pavement the coefficient of friction must comply with section numdnumbiii .
num materials not used num construction numa general grind surfaces in the longitudinal direction of the traveled way and grind the full lane width .
begin and end grinding at lines perpendicular to the roadway centerline .
grinding must result in a parallel corduroy texture with grooves from num to num inch wide and from num to num grooves per foot of width .
grooves must be from num to num inch from the top of the ridge to the bottom of the groove .
section num groove and grind concrete num grinding equipment must have diamond cutting blades mounted on a selfpropelled machine designed for grinding and texturing concrete pavements .
at joints or cracks both sides must have a uniform texture .
numb pavement grind existing concrete pavement that is adjacent to an individual slab replacement .
grind the replaced individual slab and all the existing slabs immediately surrounding it .
grind after the individual slab is replaced .
grind existing concrete pavement that is adjacent to new lanes of concrete pavement before paving .
as an alternative to grinding existing concrete pavement you may replace the existing pavement .
the new concrete pavement must be the same thickness as the removed pavement .
replace existing pavement between longitudinal joints or pavement edges and transverse joints .
do not remove portions of slabs .
replacement of existing concrete pavement must comply with specifications for individual slab replacement in section num .
numc bridge decks approach slabs and approach pavement grind bridge decks approach slabs and approach pavement if described .
num payment grinding an existing approach slab and the adjacent num feet of approach pavement is paid for as grind existing bridge deck .
num reserved num reserved num division vi structures num general num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing structures .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num reserved num num ground anchors and soil nails num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for constructing ground anchors and soil nails .
numb definitions not used numc submittals numcnum general submit a certified calibration chart for each jack and its gauge as an informational submittal .
numcnum shop drawings numcnuma general submit num copies of shop drawings to osd documents unit .
notify the engineer of the submittal .
include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
allow num days for the departments review .
after review submit from num to num copies as requested for authorization and use during construction .
shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
shop drawings for ground anchors and soil nails must include num .
your name address and telephone and fax numbers .
num .
construction schedule and sequence of installing and grouting .
num .
encapsulation details .
num .
repair procedure for damaged sheathing .
num .
drilling methods and equipment including num .
drilled hole diameter .
num .
equipment space requirements .
num .
grout mix design and testing procedures .
num .
grout placement equipment and procedures including minimum required cure time .
num .
details for providing the bonded and unbonded length .
if packers or other similar devices are to be used include the type .
num .
testing equipment including num .
jacking frame and appurtenant bracing .
num .
method and equipment for measuring movement during testing .
numcnumb ground anchor shop drawings ground anchor shop drawings must include the following additional information num .
details and specifications for the anchorage system and ground anchors .
num .
details for the transition between the corrugated plastic sheathing and the anchorage assembly .
num .
if shims are used during lockoff shim thickness and supporting calculations .
num .
calculations for determining the bonded length .
do not rely on any capacity from the grouttoground bond within the unbonded length .
numcnumc soil nail shop drawings soil nail shop drawings must include the following additional information num .
details and specifications for num .
anchorage system num .
production soil nails num .
test soil nails num .
drilling methods and equipment including num .
supporting calculations num .
assumed bond strength section num ground anchors and soil nails num num .
details for isolating installed proof test soil nails during shotcrete application num .
procedure for extracting grouted soil nails numcnum test data submit the following data for each ground anchor or soil nail test num .
key personnel num .
test loading equipment num .
anchor or nail location num .
time and date of num .
drilling num .
installation num .
grouting num .
testing num .
hole diameter and depth num .
drilling method num .
soil or rock classification and description num .
bonded and unbonded length num .
quantity of groundwater encountered within the bonded length num .
grout quantity and pressure used within the bonded length num .
anchor end or nail head movement at each load increment or at each time increment during the load hold period submit the test data when ground anchor or soil nail testing is complete or when requested .
numd quality assurance numdnum general not used numdnum quality control numdnuma general stability testing and wall zones must comply with section num .
numdnumb load testing numdnumbi general the jacking equipment and the movement measuring system must be stable during all phases of loading .
do not unload or reposition the test equipment during load testing .
numdnumbii jacking equipment and calibration apply the test loads using a hydraulic jack supported by a reaction frame that can support the test equipment without excessive deformation .
use a calibrated pressure gauge or a load cell to determine the magnitude of applied test loads .
the pressure gauge must have an accurately reading clearly visible dial or display .
dial gauges must be graduated in num psi increments or less .
each jack and its gauge must be calibrated as a unit under the specifications for jacks used to tension prestressing steel permanently anchored at num percent or more of its specified minimum ultimate tensile strength in section numdnumb .
the load cell must be calibrated and have an indicator capable of measuring the maximum test load .
the load cell range must be such that the lower num percent of the manufacturers rated capacity is not used in determining the jacking force .
numdnumbiii measuring movements the equipment for measuring the movement at the anchor end or nail head must be accurate to num inch and have enough capacity to complete the test without being reset .
section num ground anchors and soil nails num numdnumbiv procedure at each load increment including the ending alignment load measure the movement at the anchor end or nail head relative to an independent fixed reference point .
record the movements to the nearest num inch .
maintain each test load within num percent of the specified load throughout each hold period .
numdnum department acceptance the department may verify the test loads using the departments load cells .
if requested install and support the departments testing equipment during testing and remove the equipment after testing is complete .
num materials numa general not used numb sheathing pvc sheathing must comply with astm dnum class numb .
hdpe sheathing must have a density of from num to num kgmnum when measured under astm dnum .
smooth and corrugated sheathing including joints must be num .
strong enough to prevent damage during construction num .
watertight num .
chemically stable without embrittlement or softening num .
nonreactive with num .
concrete num .
steel num .
corrosioninhibiting grease if used the corrugation width the distance between corrugations and the corrugation height of corrugated plastic sheathing must be approximately equal .
numc grout grout must consist of cement and water and may contain an admixture if authorized .
cement must comply with section numbnum .
water must comply with section numd .
do not exceed num gallons of water per num lb of cement .
admixtures must comply with section num except they must not contain chloride ions in excess of num percent by weight .
num construction numa general water or grout from ground anchor or soil nail construction must not num .
fall on traffic num .
flow across shoulders or lanes occupied by traffic num .
flow into landscaping gutters or other drainage facilities do not use an excessive quantity of water when drilling and installing ground anchors .
numb drilling drilled holes must not extend beyond the rightofway or easement limits .
drilling equipment must produce straight clean holes .
use the rotary or rotary percussion drilling method to drill ground anchor or soil nail holes in the foundation material .
section num ground anchors and soil nails num at locations where caving is anticipated keep enough casing and auger lengths on the job site to maintain uninterrupted anchor or nail installation .
at locations where hard drilling conditions such as rock cobbles boulders or obstructions are anticipated keep a downhole pneumatic hammer drill rig and drill bit available on the job site for drilling holes .
clean the holes to remove material from drilling activities .
do not use water to clean soil nail holes unless authorized .
dispose of drill cuttings under section numb .
numc installation before you insert each ground anchor or soil nail into a drilled hole clean the anchor or nail of oil grease dirt and other extraneous substances and repair or replace any damaged sheathing .
there must be no evidence of distress in the plastic sheathing or crushing of the grout within the pregrouted sheathing .
do not insert an anchor or nail into a hole until the hole has been inspected by the engineer .
install the anchor or nail in the drilled hole promptly so that caving or deterioration of the hole does not occur .
if you can not insert an anchor or nail into a drilled hole to the required depth without difficulty remove the anchor or nail and clean or redrill the hole .
do not force or drive a partially inserted anchor or nail into a drilled hole .
partially inserted anchors or nails are rejected .
for openhole drilling methods keep holecleaning tools on the job site .
the tools must be suitable for cleaning drilled holes along their full length just before inserting the anchor or nail .
numd grouting mix the grout as follows num .
add water to the mixer followed by cement and any admixtures or fine aggregate .
num .
mix the grout with mechanical mixing equipment that produces a uniform and thoroughly mixed grout .
num .
agitate the grout continuously until the grout is pumped .
num .
do not add water after the initial mixing .
grouting equipment must be num .
capable of grouting at a pressure of at least num psi num .
equipped with a pressure gauge having a fullscale reading of not more than num psi nume research investigation reserved num payment not used num ground anchors num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing ground anchors .
a ground anchor consists of a steel bar or strand tendon with an anchorage assembly that is placed in a cored formed or drilled hole and then grouted and stressed .
numb definitions lockoff load load maintained on the jacks while the anchor head or anchor nuts on the ground anchor are permanently set .
section num ground anchors and soil nails num numc submittals submittals for strand tendons bar tendons bar couplers and anchorage assemblies must comply with section numc .
at least num days before using the corrosioninhibiting grease submit a test sample from the lot to be used and test data showing compliance with the specifications for strand coating and encapsulation .
numd quality assurance numdnum general not used numdnum quality control numdnuma general strand tendons bar tendons bar couplers and anchorage assemblies must comply with section num numd .
numdnumb load testing numdnumbi general performance test ground anchors as described .
proof test all ground anchors that are not performance tested .
perform load testing against the completed structural element shown .
do not test directly against the soil .
do not stress against the concrete until it has attained a compressive strength of at least num psi or has cured for at least num days .
bearing pads must be a minimum of num foot away from the edges of the drilled hole .
if a ground anchor fails to comply with the acceptance criteria redesign or replace the ground anchor .
do not retest a ground anchor unless you postgrout the anchor bonded length after the unacceptable test .
numdnumbii test procedure conduct the performance and proof tests as follows num .
incrementally load and unload the anchor as shown in the following table section num ground anchors and soil nails num loading schedules performance test proof test load increment hold time minutes load increment hold time minutes al until stable al until stable numftl num numftl num al until stable numftl num numftl num numftl num numftl num numftl num al until stable numftla num or num numftl num al until stable numftl num numftl num al until stable numftl num numftl num numftl num numftl num al until stable numftl num numftl num numftl num numftl num numftla num or num al until stable note ftl factored test load shown al alignment load numftl amaximum test load num .
apply each load increment in less than num minute and hold it for the length of time shown in the table titled loading schedules .
num .
measure and record the applied test load and the anchor end movement at each load increment .
num .
when applying the maximum test load num .
hold the load constant for num minutes .
num .
start the observation period for the load hold when the pump starts to apply the last load increment .
num .
measure and record the anchor end movement at num num num num num num and num minutes .
num .
if the movement measured from num to num minutes is greater than num inch num .
hold the load constant for an additional num minutes .
num .
measure and record the anchor end movement at num num num num num and num minutes .
num .
plot a creep curve as a function of the logarithm of time showing the anchor end movement from num to num minutes .
num .
reduce the load to the ending alignment load and record the residual movement .
numdnum department acceptance numdnuma general the department tests the efflux time of the grout under california test num .
numdnumb load testing numdnumbi general not used numdnumbii acceptance criteria ground anchors that are performance or prooftested must comply with the following section num ground anchors and soil nails num num .
total measured movement at the maximum test load minus the measured residual movement at the ending alignment load exceeds num percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the sum of the unbonded length and the jacking length .
num .
creep movement complies with one of the following num .
for a numminute load hold the creep movement measured from num to num minutes is less than num inch .
num .
for a numminute load hold the creep movement measured from num to num minutes is less than num inch and the creep rate is linear or decreasing in time logarithmic scale from the num to the numminute reading .
num materials numa general if a bond breaker is shown near the bearing plate use a numinch premolded joint filler that complies with section numbnum .
numb steel strand tendons bar tendons and bar couplers must comply with section numb .
the anchorage enclosure and the steel tube and bearing plate of the anchorage assembly must be galvanized steel complying with section num .
section num does not apply to the anchorage enclosure welds or to the weld between the steel tube and the bearing plate .
the permanent bearing plate must effectively distribute the factored test load uniformly to the concrete such that num .
concrete bearing stress does not exceed num psi num .
bending stress of the plate does not exceed num .
num of the yield strength for steel num .
num of the yield strength for cast steel or cast iron numc sheathing numcnum general polypropylene sheathing must have a density of from num to num kgmnum when measured under astm dnum .
numcnum smooth plastic sheathing smooth sheathing for bar tendons must be pvc or hdpe .
smooth sheathing for encapsulating individual strands of strand tendons must be hdpe or polypropylene and must have a minimum wall thickness of num mils .
numcnum corrugated plastic sheathing corrugated plastic sheathing must be pvc or hdpe .
pvc corrugated sheathing must have a nominal wall thickness of num mils .
hdpe corrugated sheathing with an outside diameter of num inches or greater must have a nominal wall thickness of num mils .
hdpe corrugated sheathing with an outside diameter of less than num inches must have a nominal wall thickness of num mils .
numd strand coating and encapsulation within the unbonded length of strand tendons fully coat each individual strand with corrosioninhibiting grease and encapsulate it with a smooth hdpe or polypropylene sheath .
hot melt extrude or shop apply the sheath onto the strand using a method that ensures all spaces between the sheath strand and strand wires are filled with corrosioninhibiting grease .
the corrosioninhibiting grease must num .
fill all space between the strand wires section num ground anchors and soil nails num num .
encapsulate the strand giving an encasement diameter at least num mils greater than the diameter of the bare strand num .
provide a continuous nonbrittle film of corrosion protection to the prestressing steel num .
provide lubrication between the strand and the sheathing num .
resist flow from the sheathing num .
be chemically stable and nonreactive with the prestressing steel sheathing material and concrete num .
be organic num .
have appropriate polar moisturedisplacing and corrosioninhibiting additives num .
have the physical properties shown in table num of specification for unbonded single strand tendons published by the posttensioning institute nume grout the efflux time of the grout immediately after mixing must be at least num seconds .
for drilled holes num inches or larger in diameter you may add fine aggregate to the grout used outside of the corrugated sheathing .
the fine aggregate must comply with section numc .
grout with fine aggregate must contain at least num pounds of cement per cubic yard .
num construction numa general ground anchor installation must comply with the manufacturers instructions unless otherwise specified .
determine the bonded length necessary to comply with the specified acceptance criteria .
sheathe the tendons in the unbonded length with smooth plastic sheathing that extends into the steel tube of the permanent anchorage assembly .
sheathe the tendons full length with corrugated plastic sheathing .
the transition between the corrugated plastic sheathing and the anchorage assembly must allow stressing to the maximum test load without evidence of distress in the corrugated plastic sheathing .
select a ground anchor installation method that achieves the loadings specified .
do not drill for ground anchors in a wall zone until any required stability testing is complete and the test results are authorized .
drill the holes for ground anchors in the foundation material deep enough to provide the necessary bonded length beyond the minimum unbonded length shown .
if coring through concrete structures core the holes using methods that do not shatter or damage the concrete adjacent to the hole .
the diameter of the drilled hole must be large enough to provide a minimum grout cover of num inch over the corrugated sheathing for the full length of the tendon .
before installing a ground anchor repair or replace any damaged portions of the sheathing .
place centralizers at numfoot maximum intervals for the full length of the tendon with the uppermost centralizer located num feet from the end of the steel tube and the deepest centralizer located num feet from the end of the anchor .
pregrout each tendon at least num hours before you place the tendon in the drilled hole .
at each grouting stage inject the grout at the low end of the void to be filled .
place the grout using grout tubes .
do not place grout in the unbonded length under pressure .
record the quantity of grout and the grout pressures .
if hot weather conditions will contribute to quick stiffening of the grout cool the grout by authorized methods as necessary to prevent blockages during pumping activities .
after initial grouting the anchor must remain undisturbed until the grout is strong enough to provide anchorage during load testing .
section num ground anchors and soil nails num protect the anchorage assembly against rust corrosion and physical damage until the enclosure is grouted or the assembly is encased in concrete .
for ground anchors installed inside driven structural elements such as pipe casing shells and pipe piles construct the drilled hole in the foundation material as follows num .
use construction methods that do not reduce the compression or tension capacity of the driven element .
num .
after the driven element is installed advance the anchor hole with a drill casing using rotary methods to at least num feet beyond the tip of the driven element .
do not use percussion drilling until the casing is in place .
num .
do not extract the casing until the tendon is installed and the portion of the initial grout outside the corrugated sheathing and within the bonded length has been placed .
numb bar tendons for bar tendons provide a seal between the smooth sheathing and the corrugated sheathing at the top and bottom of the length of smooth sheathing .
center the bar in the corrugated sheathing and pregrout the annular space between the bar and the sheathing before placing the tendon in the drilled hole .
you may place the initial grout in the drilled hole before or after inserting the bar tendon .
stress the bars for multiplebar tendons simultaneously .
numc strand tendons separate the individual strands of strand tendons within the bonded length using spacers such that the entire surface of each strand is bonded in the grout .
the spacers must be num .
spaced at num feet maximum num .
made of plastic num .
strong enough to support the individual strands during construction activities pregrout the corrugated sheathing a minimum length of num feet before inserting the strand tendon in the hole .
after inserting the strand tendon and before placing the initial grout in the hole inject grout into the corrugated sheathing to the limits shown .
numd lockoff after a successful ground anchor test tension the anchor and lock it off at the lockoff load shown .
secure the ends of strand tendons with a permanenttype anchorage system that num .
holds the prestressing steel at a force producing a stress of at least num percent of the specified ultimate tensile strength of the steel num .
permanently secures the ends of the prestressing steel lock off strand tendons as follows num .
stress the tendon to the maximum test load .
num .
fully set the permanent wedges in the anchor head .
num .
remove the shims or use other appropriate means to achieve the lockoff load shown .
immediately after lockoff perform a liftoff test to verify that the lockoff load has been attained .
if necessary adjust the shim thickness to achieve the lockoff load .
after lockoff place grout to the secondary grout level shown .
at least num hours after the secondary grout has set fill the remaining void in the steel tube and bearing plate with grout .
maintain a minimum grout head of num feet until the grout has set .
if a grouted anchorage enclosure is shown install the enclosure as follows section num ground anchors and soil nails num num .
grout the steel tube .
num .
clean the bearing plate surface .
num .
place the sealant .
num .
bolt the anchorage enclosure in place .
num .
fill the void in the anchorage enclosure with grout .
num .
clean and seal any holes in the top of the anchorage enclosure used for grout placement .
use a nonsag polysulfide or polyurethane sealing compound that complies with astm cnum .
num payment not used num soil nails num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing soil nails .
a soil nail consists of steel bar reinforcement with an anchorage assembly that is placed in a drilled hole and then grouted .
numb definitions pullout failure occurrence in which attempts to increase the test load result in nail head movement relative to a fixed reference point without an increase in load .
numc submittals numcnum general if a pullout failure occurs submit the pullout failure load as part of the test data .
if production soil nails are rejected under section numdnumbiinum submit revised shop drawings .
if additional verification soil nails are required under section numdnumbiinum submit revised shop drawings .
numcnum test boring report if additional verification soil nails are required under section numdnumbiinum submit a test boring report for the additional verification soil nails .
the test boring report must include num .
summary of drilling methods drilling equipment drill platforms and drilling difficulties encountered num .
location map of the surveyed position of the new test borings relative to existing and proposed facilities in the california coordinate system and bridge stationing num .
bore hole surveying notes num .
depth increments of borings num .
soil and rock classifications and descriptions num .
photographs of cuttings num .
copies of original daily drilling notes including dates and weather conditions classify soil and rock under the soil and rock logging classification and presentation manual .
for the manual go to the geotechnical services web site .
the test boring report must be sealed and signed by a geologist or engineer registered as a geologist or civil engineer in the state .
numd quality assurance numdnum general not used numdnum quality control numdnuma general not used section num ground anchors and soil nails num numdnumb load testing numdnumbi general perform load testing of verification and proof test soil nails to verify the installation methods and pullout resistance .
load testing must include incrementally loading the soil nail until the maximum test load is held for the specified duration or a pullout failure occurs .
if a pullout failure occurs record the pullout failure load .
numdnumbii test procedure numdnumbiinum general determine the test load using the following equation t lb x qd where t test load pounds lb soil nail bonded length feet num feet minimum qd design pullout resistance shown poundsfoot numdnumbiinum verification test perform verification testing in the engineers presence .
install and test num verification test soil nails for each wall zone .
you may install and test the nails during stability testing .
conduct the verification test as follows num .
incrementally load the test soil nail as shown in the following table verification test loading schedule load increment hold time minutes al until stable numt num numt num numt num numt num numta num numt num numtb num al until stable note t test load al alignment load numt acreep test bmaximum test load num .
apply each load increment in less than num minute and hold it for the length of time shown in the table titled verification test loading schedule .
num .
measure and record the applied test load and the nail head movement at each load increment .
num .
during the creep test num .
hold the load constant for num minutes .
num .
start the observation period for the load hold when the pump starts to apply the load increment from numt to numt .
num .
measure and record the nail head movement at num num num num num num num num num num num and num minutes .
num .
plot a creep curve as a function of the logarithm of time showing the nail head movement from num to num minutes .
num .
if the movement measured from num to num minutes is less than num inch num .
increase the load incrementally to numt .
section num ground anchors and soil nails num num .
hold the load constant for num minutes .
num .
start the observation period for the load hold when the pump starts to apply the load increment from numt to numt .
num .
measure and record the nail head movement at num num num num num num and num minutes .
num .
reduce the load to the ending alignment load and record the residual movement .
num .
if the movement measured from num to num minutes is num inch or greater reduce the load to the ending alignment load .
verification test soil nails that fail to comply with the acceptance criteria are rejected .
submit revised shop drawings for additional verification test soil nails .
the engineer determines the cause of failure for each rejected verification test soil nail .
if the engineer determines that the installation methods are the cause of failure the installation methods are rejected .
show alternative installation methods on the revised shop drawings .
if the engineer revises soil nail lengths or design pullout resistance values any additional verification test soil nails are change order work .
install and test additional verification test soil nails until they comply with the acceptance criteria .
log horizontal borings for additional verification test soil nails and submit a test boring report under section numc .
the logging of horizontal test borings and the submittal of the test boring report is change order work .
numdnumbiinum proof test production soil nails must be represented by proof test soil nails within a given wall zone .
perform proof testing in the engineers presence at the locations shown .
test against a temporary yoke that bears directly on the shotcrete facing .
test loads transmitted through the temporary yoke must not fracture the shotcrete or cause displacement or sloughing of the soil surrounding the drilled hole .
conduct the proof test as follows num .
incrementally load the test soil nail as shown in the following table proof test loading schedule load increment hold time minutes al until stable numt num numt num numt num numt num numtab num or num numtc num numtc num al until stable note t test load al alignment load numt acreep test bmaximum test load for proof test cloads for supplemental testing only num .
apply each load increment in less than num minute and hold it for the length of time shown in the table titled proof test loading schedule .
num .
measure and record the applied test load and the nail head movement at each load increment .
num .
during the creep test num .
hold the load constant for num minutes .
section num ground anchors and soil nails num num .
start the observation period for the load hold when the pump starts to apply the load increment from numt to numt .
num .
measure and record the nail head movement at num num num num num num and num minutes .
num .
if the movement measured from num to num minutes is greater than num inch num .
hold the load constant for an additional num minutes .
num .
measure and record the nail head movement at num num num num and num minutes .
num .
plot a creep curve as a function of the logarithm of time showing the nail head movement from num to num minutes .
num .
reduce the load to the ending alignment load and record the residual movement .
production soil nails represented by proof test soil nails that fail to comply with the acceptance criteria except those represented by proof test soil nails selected for supplemental testing are rejected .
submit revised shop drawings for replacement soil nails that show alternative installation methods revised production soil nails or a modified soil nail plan .
numdnumbiinum supplemental test the engineer selects up to num of proof test soil nails for supplemental testing .
only proof test soil nails with a creep movement less than num inch measured from num to num minutes are considered for supplemental testing .
perform supplemental testing immediately following creep testing .
incrementally load the soil nails as shown in the table titled proof test loading schedule .
record the test load and nail head movement as part of the test data .
for proof test soil nails that fail supplemental testing the department deducts num per linear foot of proof test soil nail .
numdnumc grout before using grout with fine aggregate produce a test batch to verify the consistency .
produce and deliver the test batch under conditions and in time periods similar to those expected during the grouting of soil nails .
place the test batch grout in an excavated hole or a container of suitable size to allow testing under california test num .
the test batch must comply with the specified nominal penetration .
dispose of the grout after testing .
numdnum department acceptance numdnuma general the department tests grout with fine aggregate under california test num before use .
numdnumb load testing numdnumbi general not used numdnumbii acceptance criteria soil nails that are verification or prooftested must comply with the following num .
for verification tests num .
creep movement measured from num to num minutes is less than num inch .
num .
creep rate is linear or decreasing in time logarithmic scale from the num to the numminute reading .
num .
for proof tests the creep movement complies with one of the following num .
creep movement measured from num to num minutes is no more than num inch .
num .
creep movement measured from num to num minutes is less than num inch and the creep rate is linear or decreasing in time logarithmic scale from the num to the numminute reading .
num .
total measured movement at the maximum test load minus the measured residual movement at the ending alignment load exceeds num percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the unbonded length .
num .
pullout failure does not occur .
section num ground anchors and soil nails num num materials numa general each production soil nail must be either a reinforcing bar encapsulated full length in a grouted corrugated plastic sheathing or an epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcing bar partially encapsulated in a grouted corrugated plastic sheathing .
the epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcing bar must comply with section num except the epoxy thickness must be from num to num mils .
bar reinforcement for test soil nails is not required to be epoxy coated or encapsulated in grouted plastic sheathing .
numb steel soil nail anchorage assemblies must comply with section num except galvanizing is not required for nuts washers wedges and bearing plates if they are fully encased in concrete grout or shotcrete .
concrete anchors on bearing plates must comply with the specifications for studs in clause num of aws dnum .
numc bar reinforcement bar reinforcement must comply with section num .
for bar reinforcement for production soil nails num .
grade num bar reinforcement must comply with astm anumanumm or anumanumm .
num .
grade num bar reinforcement must comply with astm anumanumm .
num .
reinforcement must have at least a numinch length of thread on the anchorage end .
threading must be either continuous spiral deformed ribbing provided by the bar deformations or cut into the bar .
for bars with cut threads use the next larger bar size from that shown and use coarse threads .
num .
epoxy coating at the anchorage end of epoxycoated bars may be omitted for no more than num inches .
num .
metal surfaces of assembled splices of epoxycoated bars must be epoxy coated .
choose the bar reinforcement size and grade for test soil nails .
test soil nail bars must not be smaller than the production soil nails they represent .
numd sheathing corrugated plastic sheathing must be pvc or hdpe and must have a minimum thickness of num mils .
nume grout for drilled holes num inches or larger in diameter you may add fine aggregate to the grout .
grout with fine aggregate must num .
contain at least num pounds of cement per cubic yard of grout num .
use fine aggregate that complies with section numc num .
have a nominal penetration of at least num inches when measured under california test num num .
have an air content of no more than num percent when measured under california test num num .
not contain airentraining admixtures num construction numa general determine the drilled hole diameter and installation method required to achieve the soil nail pullout resistance values shown .
do not drill for proof test or production soil nails in a wall zone until stability testing if required and verification soil nail testing are complete in the wall zone and the test results are authorized .
if you are ordered to lengthen verification or proof test soil nails the lengthening of test soil nails is change order work .
if you are ordered to lengthen production soil nails or install additional production soil nails the section num ground anchors and soil nails num lengthening or addition of production soil nails is change order work .
numb test soil nails construct verification and proof test soil nails using the same equipment methods nail inclination and drilled hole diameter as to be used for production soil nails .
drill install and grout verification test soil nails in the engineers presence .
you may install verification test soil nails by any of the following means num .
through the existing slope face .
num .
through the drill platform work bench .
num .
through the stabilization berm .
num .
through the stability test exposed face .
num .
into slot cuts made for the lift in which verification test soil nails are located .
a slot cut must be no larger than is needed to accommodate the drill and test setup equipment .
install the verification test soil nails within the limits of each wall zone or within the limits of the excavated stability test face .
space the verification test soil nails at least num feet apart .
grout only the bonded length of verification and proof test soil nails .
do not splice a test soil nail within the bonded length .
remove each verification and proof test soil nail to num inches behind the front face of the shotcrete after testing is complete .
fill the void with grout .
if requested extract the verification and proof test soil nails and fill the voids with grout .
numc installation install and grout the soil nails in the same work shift that the holes are drilled .
use centralizers to support the soil nail in the center of the drilled hole .
space the centralizers at num feet maximum along the bar length and num feet from the bar ends .
you may use plastic centralizers .
splice the bar reinforcement only where shown on the authorized shop drawings or at the end of a soil nail that is ordered to be lengthened .
verify and record the drilled hole length before grouting .
grout the drilled hole after installing the soil nail .
inject the grout at the low end of the drilled hole .
fill the drilled hole with a dense grout free of voids and foreign material .
grout the hole in num continuous operation .
do not use cold joints in the grout placement .
fill any void remaining at the open end of the drilled hole of a production soil nail with shotcrete .
secure the soil nail at the face of the shotcrete .
the bearing plate must have full bearing on the shotcrete surface .
hand tighten the nut on the end of the production soil nail bar before the initial set of the shotcrete .
make the nut wrench tight after the shotcrete has set for num hours unless a shorter time is authorized .
after placing the grout the soil nails must remain undisturbed for the minimum cure time shown on the authorized shop drawings .
num payment the payment quantity for soil nails is the length measured along the bar centerline from the back face of shotcrete to the tip end shown or ordered .
verification and proof test soil nails are paid for as soil nails .
num reserved num num earth retaining systems num general num general section num includes specifications for constructing earth retaining systems .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num mechanically stabilized embankment num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing mechanically stabilized embankments .
concrete panels must comply with section num .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
geosynthetic reinforcement must comply with section num .
earthwork must comply with section num .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit results from the proposed buttonhead wire coupler test .
submit results from each production buttonhead wire coupler test .
numd quality assurance numdnum general coupler test samples must comply with the minimum tensile specifications for plain wire in astm anumanumm .
total wire slip must be at most num inch when tested as specified for tension testing of round wire test samples under astm anum .
if any test samples fail revise the connection and retest .
do not start face panel installation until tension and slip test results are accepted .
perform tension and slip tests on the proposed buttonhead wire soil reinforcement and coupler connection .
test num connection test samples .
test samples must consist of two numinches long button head wires connected by a swaged coupler .
testing must be performed by an authorized laboratory .
numdnum quality control perform tension and slip testing on production buttonhead wire and coupler connections during wall construction .
test num connection test samples for each lot of num mat wire connections installed .
if num or more test samples fail the entire represented lot is rejected .
if num test sample fails to comply with specified criteria test an additional num test samples .
if any of these additional samples fail the entire represented lot is rejected .
num material numa general concrete leveling pads must be constructed with minor concrete .
section num earth retaining systems num soil reinforcement connecting elements and other steel components in contact with the earth must be galvanized under section numb .
threaded ends of inspection wires for metallic soil reinforcement may be formed before or after galvanizing .
coat the final num inches of the wire with num applications of organic zincrich primer .
encase the threaded end with a waterproof vinyl enclosure secured with a nylon tie .
if the threaded end is galvanized after threading clean the threads before painting .
corrugated steel pipe must comply with section num .
perforated pipe underdrains and underdrain outlets and risers must comply with section num .
perforated pipe must be steel unless perforated plastic pipe is shown .
rock for rock slope protection at drain pipe outlets must be no .
num backing and must comply with section num .
filter fabric must be class a. adhesive for bonding filter fabric to concrete panels must be commercial grade .
resin bonded cork for horizontal joints must comply with astm dnum type ii with a compressive load of at least num psi .
pipe pins must comply with astm anumanumm except the zinc coating of actual surface must average at least num ozsq ft and no individual specimen may be less than num ozsq ft. numb face panels in freezethaw areas concrete panels must comply with section numi and must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
if architectural treatment is not required finish exposed surfaces of concrete members as specified for class num surface finish under section numfnum .
numc structure backfill structure backfill for mechanically stabilized embankment must num .
be free of organic material and substantially free of shale and other soft material of poor durability num .
not contain slag aggregate or recycled materials such as num .
glass num .
shredded tires num .
portland cement concrete rubble including asphaltic dust sand rock grindings slabs and boulders num .
asphaltic concrete rubble including asphaltic dust sand rock grindings slabs and boulders num .
other unsuitable material as determined by the engineer for an embankment with metallic soil reinforcement structure backfill must comply with the requirements shown in the following tables section num earth retaining systems num gradation requirements sieve size test method requirement percent passing num inch california test num num num inch california test num num no .
num california test num num no .
num california test num num quality characteristic requirements quality characteristic test method requirement sand equivalenta min california test num num plasticity indexa max california test num num minimum resistivity ohmcm california test num num chlorides ppm california test num num sulfates ppm california test num num ph california test num num adoes not apply if num percent or less passes the no .
num sieve and num percent or less passes the no .
num sieve .
for an embankment with geosynthetic soil reinforcement structure backfill must comply with the requirements shown in the following tables gradation requirements sieve size test method requirement percent passing num inch california test num num no .
num california test num num no .
num california test num num no .
num california test num num quality characteristic requirements quality characteristic test method requirement sand equivalent min california test num num plasticity indexa max california test num num durability index min california test num num ph california test num num numd permeable material permeable material must be class num type b complying with section numf .
permeable material for an embenkment with metallic soil reinforcement must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num earth retaining systems num quality characteristic requirements quality characteristic test method requirement minimum resistivity ohmcm california test num num chlorides max ppm california test num num sulfates max ppm california test num num ph california test num num permeable material for an embankment with geosynthetic soil reinforcement must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic requirements quality characteristic test method requirement ph california test num num nume soil reinforcement steel wire must comply with the specifications for plain wire reinforcement in astm anumanumm .
welded wire reinforcement must comply with the specifications for plain wire welded wire reinforcement in astm anumm .
for buttonheaded wires num .
buttons must be cold formed symmetrically about the axes of the wires num .
buttons must develop the minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the wire num .
do not use a coldforming process that causes indentations in the wire num .
button heads must not contain wide open splits more than num splits per head or splits nonparallel to the axis of the wire steel wire reinforcement hooks and bends must comply with the building code requirements for structural concrete published by aci .
couplers at wire reinforcement connections must be seamless steel sleeves applied over the buttonhead wires .
couplers must develop the wire minimum tensile strength with a total slip of at most num inch .
splice welded wire reinforcement along its length with mechanical couplers that develop the minimum tensile strength of the wire .
identification storage and handling of geosynthetic reinforcement must comply with astm dnum and any alternative system details .
protect the geosynthetic reinforcement from chemicals flames welding sparks and temperatures less than num degrees f or greater than num degrees f. do not allow foreign materials to come into contact with or become affixed to the geosynthetic reinforcement .
num construction numa general water for earthwork or for dust control within num feet of structures with metallic soil reinforcement must comply with the specifications for water in reinforced concrete in section numd .
protect the unthreaded portion of the galvanized inspection wire from damage .
numb earthwork numbnum general grade the foundation level for a width equal to the length of soil reinforcement elements plus num foot or as shown .
compact foundation material to a relative compaction of at least num percent .
start wall construction activities after the engineer accepts the compacted foundation area .
section num earth retaining systems num if ordered remove unsuitable material .
this work is change order work .
place structure backfill simultaneously with erection of facing panels .
place and compact material without distorting soil reinforcement or displacing facing panels .
place structure backfill at the front of the wall before backfilling more than num feet above the bottom of the lowermost face element .
if a mechanically stabilized embankment with soil reinforcement is to be constructed on an embankment compact embankment material to a relative compaction of at least num percent within the limits established by inclined planes sloping num horizontalvertical from lines num foot outside the bottom limits of the mechanically stabilized embankment including any permeable material .
start placing and compacting structure backfill num foot from the back face of wall panels and progress toward the free end of the soil reinforcement .
operate compaction equipment parallel to the wall facing .
place and compact the remaining width of backfill behind wall panels after covering the soil reinforcement to a depth of num inches .
do not use sheepsfoot or gridtype rollers within the limits of soil reinforcement .
use handheld or hand guided compacting equipment within num feet of facing panels .
place structure backfill at each level of soil reinforcement to a plane num inches above the elevation of the soil reinforcement connection starting num feet from the back of the face panel and extending for at least the remaining length of soil reinforcement .
complete this grading before placing the next layer of soil reinforcement .
place permeable material and filter fabric when placing structure backfill .
place permeable material in layers less than num feet thick .
compaction of permeable material for the drainage system outside the limits of soil reinforcement is not required .
do not operate equipment directly on the permeable material or filter fabric .
if a sloped layer of permeable material is placed to facilitate the work or to satisfy safety considerations num the vertical limits of the permeable material must remain unchanged and num the thickness of the layer of permeable material is measured normal to the slope .
grade backfill to drain away from the wall face at the end of each work shift .
use berms or ditches to direct runoff away from the wall site .
do not allow surface runoff from adjacent areas to enter the wall site .
numbnum soil reinforcement tension soil reinforcement in the direction perpendicular to the wall face .
remove slack in the connection and the soil reinforcement .
secure soil reinforcement in place before and during compaction .
swage wire reinforcement couplers with a hydraulic press .
cover soil reinforcement with structure backfill during the same work shift that it is placed .
do not operate construction equipment directly on soil reinforcement .
maintain a layer of structure backfill at least num inches thick between soil reinforcement and any construction equipment .
place geosynthetic soil reinforcement in fulllength sections .
place structure backfill over geosynthetic soil reinforcement in lifts of at most num inches if using hand operated compaction equipment and num inches if using heavy compaction equipment .
numbnum face panels vertical and horizontal panel alignment offset must not exceed num inch when measured along a numfoot straightedge .
the offset in any panel joint must not exceed num inch .
after placing backfill num feet above inspection elements dry pack voids in face panels with mortar under section numenum .
mortar must comply with section numf except the proportion of cementitious material to sand must be such that the mortar achieves a num day compressive strength of num to num psi .
numc filter fabric immediately before placing filter fabric the subgrade to receive filter fabric must be free of loose or extraneous material and sharp objects that may damage the filter fabric .
section num earth retaining systems num concrete panel surfaces to receive filter fabric must be dry and thoroughly cleaned .
handle and place filter fabric under the manufacturers instructions .
stretch align and place fabric without wrinkling .
adjacent borders of filter fabric must be stitched or overlapped .
overlap rolls num to num inches .
place the preceding roll over the following roll in the direction the material is being spread .
stitch fabric using yarn of a contrasting color .
yarn size and composition must comply with the filter fabric manufacturers instructions .
use num to num stitches per inch of seam .
repair damaged filter fabric by placing a piece of filter fabric large enough to cover the damaged area and provide at least a numinch overlap .
do not operate equipment including vehicles directly on filter fabric .
maintain at least num inches of permeable material between filter fabric and equipment during spreading of permeable material .
where structure backfill is to be placed on filter fabric maintain at least num inches of structure backfill material between filter fabric and equipment during placement .
numd leveling pads place concrete for leveling pads at least num hours before erecting face panels .
num payment the vertical height of each section is the difference in elevation on the outer face from the bottom of the lowermost face element to the top of wall profile .
num reinforced concrete crib walls num general section num includes specifications for constructing reinforced concrete crib walls .
reinforced concrete crib walls must comply with section num .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
concrete crib walls consist of a series of rectangular cells composed of interlocking precast reinforced concrete headers stretchers and blocks .
num materials numa general pads shown to be placed between bearing surfaces must either be num neoprene complying with the specifications for strip waterstops in section num or num commercial quality no .
num asphalt felt .
the protective board is not required for neoprene pads .
numb crib members numbnum general all members must be manufactured to no more than an num inch greater in thickness than the dimensions shown .
the thickness of the lowest step must not be less than the dimension shown .
stretchers must be manufactured to no less than a num inch in length than the dimensions shown .
if an opening is shown in the face of the wall special length stretchers and additional headers may be necessary .
for nontangent wall alignments special length stretchers may be required .
for nontangent wall alignments and at locations where filler blocks are required special length front face closure members may be required .
numbnum reinforcement reinforcing wire must comply with the specifications for deformed wire reinforcement in astm anumanumm .
section num earth retaining systems num for hoops or stirrups use either num reinforcing wire or num deformed steel welded wire reinforcement .
the cross sectional area must be equivalent to that of the reinforcing steel shown .
deformed steel welded wire reinforcement must comply with the specifications for deformed wire welded wire reinforcement in astm anumanumm .
numbnum concrete external vibration resulting in adequate consolidation may be used .
cure crib members under section num .
when removed from forms the members must present a true surface of even texture free from honeycombs and voids larger than num inch in diameter and num inch in depth .
clean and fill other pockets with mortar under sections numf and numenum .
if the engineer determines that rock pockets are of the extent or character as to affect the strength of the member or to endanger the life of the steel reinforcement replace the member .
concrete test cylinders must comply with section numdnum except if the penetration of fresh concrete is less than num inch the concrete in the test mold must be consolidated by vibrating the mold equivalent to that of the consolidating effort being used to consolidate the concrete in the member .
finish concretetoconcrete bearing surfaces to a smooth plane .
section numf does not apply to concrete crib members .
num construction construct reinforced concrete crib walls to the lines and grades established by the engineer .
the foundation must be accepted by the engineer before any crib members are placed .
the gap between bearing surfaces must not exceed num inch .
where a gap of num inch to num inch exists or where shown place a numinch pad of asphalt felt or sheet neoprene between the bearing surfaces .
num payment the payment quantity for reinforced concrete crib wall is the area measured on the batter at the outer face .
the height is measured from the bottom of the bottom stretcher to the top of the top stretcher .
the length is measured from end to end of each section of wall .
num reserved num type num retaining walls num general section num includes specifications for constructing type num retaining walls .
reinforced concrete footings and stems must comply with section num .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
cmu stems must comply with section num .
num materials hollow cmus must comply with the specifications for normal weight cmus in astm cnum and must be of uniform color and size .
caulking for sealing expansion joints must be a nonsag polysulfide or polyurethane type complying with astm cnum .
grout must comply with section numd and contain at least num lbcu yd of cementitious material .
num construction you may construct wall stems of reinforced concrete or reinforced cmus .
use only num stem type for each wall .
cmu construction must be true and plumb .
section num earth retaining systems num provide recesses in the units for horizontal reinforcement .
provide cleanout openings at the bottom of cells where the wall height is over num feet .
seal cleanouts after inspection and before filling cells with grout .
lay units with full mortar coverage of the face in both vertical and horizontal joints except at weep holes .
shove vertical joints tight .
exposed joints must be concave and tooled smooth .
fill cells in hollow unit masonry with grout .
consolidate grout while pouring by puddling or vibrating .
place the top lift of grout approximately num inch below the top of units .
place a mortar cap above the top lift .
do not place backfill against the back of type num retaining walls until grout compressive strength has reached num psi or until the grout has cured for num days .
num payment the payment quantity for retaining wall stem type num is the area determined from the dimensions shown .
the height is the difference in elevation from the top of the footing to the top of the wall .
num alternative earth retaining systems num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing alternative earth retaining systems .
you may use an alternative earth retaining system when specified in the special provisions .
use only one type of system at any one location .
the alternative earth retaining system must comply with the specifications for the type of wall being constructed .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general for asbuilt drawings common to more than one structure submit the asbuilt drawings for each structure .
numcnum shop drawings submit shop drawings for the alternative system to osd documents unit .
submit num copies for initial review .
submit from num to num copies as requested of final shop drawings for final authorization .
include the following num .
all information required for construction of the system at each location num .
existing ground line at the wall face num .
design parameters material notes and wall construction procedures verify existing ground elevations before submitting drawings .
shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
allow num days for the departments review .
numcnum certificates submit certificates of compliance for the alternative system stating the supplied materials comply with the authorization criteria for the system on the authorized material list for alternative earth retaining systems .
numd quality assurance a qualified representative of the alternative system manufacturer must be present during erection and backfill of the first num vertical feet of the entire length of the wall .
the representative must be available during the remaining installation .
the representative must not be your employee .
section num earth retaining systems num num materials the alternative systems specified are taken from the authorized material list .
only systems having characteristics suitable for this project are specified .
some systems may be proprietary .
alternative systems are selected based on data previously furnished by suppliers or manufacturers of each system .
num construction the structure must comply with the system details authorized on the authorized material list .
check vertical and horizontal alignment at each course during erection .
include a drainage system where shown .
where shown construct the alternative system to accommodate num wallmounted lighting and drainpipes and num panels for future drainage inlets .
the top of wall profile must conform to the profile shown .
the bottom of wall elevations must be at or below the elevations shown .
use a minimum height and length of wall adequate for the loading and site conditions described .
the length of soil reinforcement for any system must not be less than that shown .
the coping lip or barrier slab lip must cover the top of face panels at least num inches .
place the top level of soil reinforcement num .
parallel to the top of the concrete panel num .
at least num inches below the bottom of either the barrier slab lip or the concrete gutter behind the coping num .
at least num inches below the top edge of the concrete panel num payment not used num num temporary structures num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing temporary structures .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment full compensation for work specified in section num is included in the payment for the bid items involved unless num .
bid item for the work is shown on the bid item list num .
work is specified as change order work num falsework num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing falsework .
you must design construct and maintain falsework that num .
is safe and adequate num .
provides the necessary rigidity num .
supports the imposed loads num .
produces a completed structure that conforms to the lines and grades shown numb definitions previously welded splice splice made in a falsework member in compliance with aws dnum or other recognized welding standard before contract award .
independent support system support system that is in addition to the falsework removal system employing methods of holding falsework from above by winches hydraulic jacks with prestressing steel hs rods or cranes .
numc submittals numcnum general submit a certificate of compliance for each delivery of structural composite lumber used in falsework .
submit a letter of certification that certifies all components of manufactured assemblies are used in compliance with the manufacturers instructions .
if requested num submit manufacturers data for manufactured assemblies to verify manufacturers instructions or num perform tests demonstrating adequacy of the proposed assemblies .
submit field acceptance criteria for falsework piles with a calculated nominal resistance greater than num tons .
base acceptance criteria on a wave equation analysis performed on dynamic monitoring of falsework pile driving .
analyses must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
submit acceptance criteria before falsework erection is complete .
submit a letter of certification for all falsework members with welded splices .
the letter must certify that all welding and ndt including visual inspection comply with the contract and the welding standard shown on the shop drawings .
the letter must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
submit the letter before placing any concrete on the falsework being certified .
submit a welding certification for falsework members with previously welded splices .
the certification must section num temporary structures num num .
itemize the testing inspection methods and acceptance criteria used num .
include tracking and identifying documents for previously welded members num .
be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state num .
be submitted before erecting the members submit a falsework lighting plan before starting construction on falsework containing openings for vehicular traffic pedestrians or railroad .
you may propose a lighting plan that fulfills the light intensity specified using alternative methods .
supply data to allow evaluation of the alternative methods .
numcnum shop drawings submit shop drawings with supporting calculations for falsework .
shop drawings and calculations must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state if any of the following conditions apply num .
height of any portion of the falsework measured from the ground line to the soffit of the superstructure is more than num feet num .
any individual falsework clear span is more than num feet num .
provisions for vehicular pedestrian or railroad traffic through the falsework are made shop drawings and calculations for falsework piles with a calculated loading capacity greater than num tons must be designed by an engineer who is registered as a civil or geotechnical engineer in the state .
submit num copies of falsework shop drawings and num copies of design calculations .
include with the submittal num .
details of erection and removal activities .
num .
methods and sequences of erection and removal including equipment .
num .
details for the stability of falsework during all stages of erection and removal activities .
num .
superstructure placing diagram showing concrete placing sequence and construction joint locations .
if a schedule for placing concrete is shown no deviation is allowed .
num .
assumed soil bearing values for falsework footings .
num .
maximum horizontal distance falsework piles may be pulled for placement under caps .
num .
maximum deviation of falsework piles from vertical .
num .
anticipated total falsework and form settlements including footing settlement and joint takeup .
num .
grade evalue species and type of any structural composite lumber .
include manufacturers tabulated working stress values for the lumber .
num .
design calculations including stresses and deflections in load carrying members .
num .
provisions for complying with temporary bracing requirements .
num .
welding standard used for welded members .
submit separate drawings and calculations for each single bridge or portion of bridge .
you may revise authorized falsework shop drawings if you submit it before the start of the affected work to allow review and corrections without work delays .
the additional time will not be more than that originally allowed .
for falsework over railways comply with any additional requirements of the railway company involved .
the licensed engineer signing the falsework drawings must certify that the falsework is constructed as shown in the authorized shop drawings before concrete is placed .
the certification must include any necessary testing to verify the ability of the falsework members to sustain the stresses required by the falsework design .
the licensed engineer may assign a representative to perform this certification as follows num .
where falsework contains openings for railroads vehicular traffic or pedestrians the assigned representative must num have at least num years of combined experience in falsework design or supervising falsework construction and num be registered as a civil engineer in the state .
num .
for other falsework the assigned representative must have at least num years of combined experience in falsework design or supervising falsework construction .
section num temporary structures num num .
the engineer may request you certify the experience of the assigned representative and submit supporting documentation demonstrating the required experience .
for shop drawings and calculations for falsework removal systems employing methods of holding falsework from above by winches hydraulic jacks with prestressing steel hs rods or cranes include the following information num .
design code used for the analysis of the structural members of the independent support system num .
provisions for complying with current calosha requirements num .
load tests and ratings within num year of intended use of hydraulic jacks and winches num .
location of the winches hydraulic jacks with prestressing steel hs rods or cranes num .
analysis showing that the bridge deck and overhang are capable of supporting all loads at all time num .
analysis showing that winches will not overturn or slide during all stages of loading num .
location of deck and soffit openings if needed num .
details of repair for the deck and soffit openings after falsework removal numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum welding and nondestructive testing welding must comply with aws dnum or other recognized welding standard except for fillet welds if the load demands are num lb or less per inch for each num inch of fillet weld .
perform ndt on welded splices using ut or rt .
each weld and any repair made to a previously welded splice must be tested .
you must select locations for testing .
the length of a splice weld where ndt is to be performed must be a cumulative weld length equal to num percent of the original splice weld length .
the cover pass must be ground smooth at test locations .
acceptance criteria must comply with the specifications for cyclically loaded nontubular connections subject to tensile stress in clause num of aws dnum .
if repairs are required in a portion of the weld perform additional ndt on the repaired sections .
the ndt method chosen must be used for an entire splice evaluation including any repairs .
for previously welded splices perform and document all necessary testing and inspection required to certify the ability of the falsework members to sustain the design stresses .
num materials numa general reserved numb design criteria numbnum general design falsework to resist the sum of the dead and live vertical loads and an assumed horizontal load .
anticipated falsework settlement must not exceed num inch .
design footings to carry the imposed loads without exceeding estimated soil bearing values or anticipated settlements .
falsework spans for tbeam girders must not exceed num feet plus num times the tbeam girder depth .
design falsework supporting deck slabs and overhangs on girder bridges such that there is no differential settlement between the girders and the deck forms during deck concrete placement .
for individual steel towers with maximum leg loads exceeding num kips design foundations to provide uniform settlement under all legs of each tower .
design support systems for form panels supporting concrete deck slabs and overhangs on girder bridges as falsework .
temporary bracing must be designed to withstand all imposed loads during erection construction and removal of any falsework .
wind loads must be included in the design of the bracing .
section num temporary structures num falsework removal systems employing methods of holding falsework from above and members of the independent support system must support the sum of the actual vertical and horizontal loads due to falsework materials equipment construction sequence or other causes and wind loading .
identifiable mechanical devices used in the falsework removal plan must comply with applicable industry standards and manufacturer instructions for safe load carrying capacity .
unidentifiable winches must be capable of carrying twice the design load .
the load used for the analysis of overturning moment and sliding of the winch system must be num percent of the design load .
numbnum loads the design load for falsework must consist of dead and live vertical loads and an assumed horizontal load .
the minimum total design load for any falsework is num psf including members that support walkways for the combined live and dead load .
dead loads must include the weight of concrete reinforcing steel forms and falsework .
loads due to concrete reinforcing steel and forms must be assumed to be at least num .
num pcf for normal concrete num .
num pcf for lightweight concrete live loads must include num .
actual weight of any equipment to be supported by the falsework applied as concentrated loads at the points of contact num .
uniform load of at least num psf applied over the area supported by the falsework num .
load of num lbft applied at the outside edge of deck overhangs the assumed horizontal load the falsework bracing system must resist must be the sum of the actual horizontal loads due to equipment construction sequence or other causes and a wind loading .
the horizontal load in any direction must be at least num percent of the total dead load .
if the concrete is to be prestressed design the falsework to support any increased or readjusted loads caused by the prestressing forces .
design the falsework with sufficient rigidity to resist the assumed horizontal load without considering the concrete load .
for heavyduty steel shoring or steel pipe column falsework with a vertical load capacity greater than num kips per leg or column the minimum horizontal wind loading must be the sum of the products of the wind impact area shape factor and wind pressure value for each height zone .
the wind impact area is the total projected area of all elements in the tower face or falsework bent normal to the direction of the applied wind .
use a shape factor of num for heavyduty steel shoring and num for pipe column falsework .
use the wind pressure values shown in the following table height zone feet above ground wind pressure value shores or columns adjacent to traffic psf at other locations psf num num num num num num num num num over num num num for all other falsework the minimum horizontal wind loading must be the sum of the products of the wind impact area and the wind pressure value for each height zone .
the wind impact area is the gross projected area of the falsework and any unrestrained portion of the permanent structure except for the areas between falsework bents or towers where diagonal bracing is not used .
use the wind pressure values shown in the following table section num temporary structures num height zone feet above ground wind pressure value for members over and bents adjacent to traffic opening psf at other locations psf num num q num q num num q num q num num q num q over num num q num q note q num numw but not more than num where w width of the falsework system in feet measured in the direction of the wind force design falsework to support placement of the entire superstructure crosssection except railing at one time .
you may consider girder stems and connected bottom slabs selfsupporting between falsework posts if num .
girder stems and connected bottom slabs are placed more than num days before the top slab num .
distance between falsework posts is at most num times the depth of the portion of the girder stem placed in the numst pour falsework for box girder structures with internal falsework bracing systems that use flexible members capable of withstanding only tensile forces must be designed to include num the vertical effects caused by elongation of the flexible member and num the design horizontal load combined with the dead and live loads imposed by concrete placement for girder stems and connected bottom slabs .
this requirement does not apply to falsework composed of individual steel towers that use flexible members capable of withstanding only tensile forces to resist overturning .
numbnum stresses loadings and deflections numbnuma general maximum allowable stresses and loadings specified in section numbnum are based on the use of undamaged highquality materials .
reduce stresses and loadings for materials of lesser quality .
numbnumb timber design timber connections under the departments falsework manual .
the maximum allowable stresses loadings and deflections for timber are as shown in the following table quality characteristic requirement compression perpendicular to the grain psi num compression parallel to the grain psi numld num maximum flexural stress num psi num psi maximum for members with a nominal depth of num inches or less .
horizontal shear psi num axial tension psi num deflection due to concrete loading only num of span lengtha modulus of elasticity e psi num x num timber piles tons num notes l unsupported length inches d least dimension of a square or rectangular column or the width of a square of equivalent cross sectional area for round columns inches airrespective of deflection compensated for in camber strips section num temporary structures num numbnumc steel except for flexural compressive stresses design stresses for identified grades of steel must not exceed stresses specified in the aisc steel manual .
except for flexural compressive stresses the design stresses for unidentified steel must not exceed those specified for steel complying with astm anumanumm in the aisc steel manual or as shown in the following table quality characteristic requirement tension axial and flexural psi num compression axial psi num numlrnuma shear on gross section of web of rolled shapes psi num web yielding for rolled shapes psi num modulus of elasticity e psi num x num notes l unsupported length inches r radius of gyration of the member inches alr must not exceed num design stresses and deflections for all grades of steel must not exceed the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic requirement compression flexural psi numl x db x ta deflection due to concrete loading only num of the spanb modulus of elasticity e psi num x num notes l unsupported length inches d least dimension of rectangular columns or the width of a square of equivalent crosssectional area for round columns or the depth of beams inches b width of the compression flange inches t thickness of the compression flange inches fy specified minimum yield stress in psi anot to exceed num num psi for unidentified steel num num psi for steel complying with astm anumanumm or num numfy for other identified steel birrespective of deflection compensated for in camber strips numbnumd manufactured assemblies do not exceed the manufacturers instructions for loadings and deflections on jacks brackets columns joists and other manufactured devices except the dead load deflection of joists at locations other than under deck slabs between girders must not exceed num of their spans .
numbnum special locations design and construct falsework over or adjacent to roadways or railroads that are open to traffic such that the falsework is stable if subjected to impact by vehicles .
falsework posts at the following locations are considered adjacent to roadways or railroads num .
posts supporting members that cross over a roadway or railroad num .
posts located in the row of falsework posts nearest to the roadway or railroad and where the horizontal distance from the traffic side of the falsework to the edge of pavement or to a point num feet from the centerline of track is less than the total height of the falsework and forms the falsework design at the above locations must comply with section numb and the following requirements num .
the vertical load used for the design of falsework posts and towers that support the portion of the falsework over openings must be the greater of section num temporary structures num num num percent of the design load calculated under section numbnum not including any increased or readjusted loads caused by prestressing forces num increased or readjusted loads caused by prestressing forces num .
falsework posts must be steel with a minimum section modulus about each axis of num cubic inches or sound timbers with a minimum section modulus about each axis of num cubic inches .
num .
each falsework post must be mechanically connected to the support footing at its base or laterally restrained to withstand a force of at least num lb applied at the base of the post in any direction except toward the roadway or railroad track .
posts must be mechanically connected to the falsework cap or stringer .
the mechanical connection must resist a load in any horizontal direction of at least num lb .
num .
mechanically connect num exterior falsework stringers num stringers adjacent to the ends of discontinuous caps num stringers over points of minimum vertical clearance and num every numth remaining stringer to the falsework cap or framing .
for falsework over railroads mechanically connect all stringers to caps .
mechanical connections must resist at least a num lb load in any direction including uplift on the stringer .
install connections before traffic passes under the span .
num .
connect timber bracing to falsework using at least numinchdiameter bolts or coil rod with a root diameter equal to that of the shank of a numinchdiameter bolt .
num .
falsework member clearances must be at least those shown in the following table falsework member clearance to railing members barriers and anchored temporary railings to unanchored temporary railings footings num num piles num num other members num num num .
falsework bents within num feet of the centerline of a railroad track must be sheathed solid from num to num feet above the track on the side facing the track .
sheathing must be plywood at least num inch thick or lumber at least num inch thick .
brace these bents to resist the required assumed horizontal load or num lb whichever is larger .
num .
provide clear openings through falsework as described .
num construction numa general install temporary bracing as necessary to withstand all imposed loads during erection construction and removal of any falsework .
the materials used in the falsework construction must be of the quality necessary to sustain the stresses required by the falsework design .
where falsework for multiple level bridges is supported on the deck of a structure num .
falsework must bear either directly on girder stems or bent caps of the supporting structure or on falsework sills that transmit the load to the stems or cap without stress to the deck slab .
num .
additional falsework must be in place beneath the supporting structure when construction loads are imposed on the supporting structure .
design and construct additional falsework to support all construction loads imposed on the supporting structure from the upper structure .
numb foundations construct falsework on solid footings capable of supporting falsework loads .
protect footings from softening and undermining .
the engineer determines if you must verify that the design soil bearing values do not exceed the soil capacity using load testing .
you may place falsework foundation pads and piles before shop drawings are authorized .
falsework piles must be driven and the actual nominal pile resistance assessed under section num .
section num temporary structures num numc erection construct falsework to support the loads imposed without settlement or takeup beyond that shown on the falsework drawings .
install the final bracing system before placing falsework members above stringers .
if falsework is over or adjacent to roadways or railroads all details of the falsework system that contribute to horizontal stability and resistance to impact except for bolts in bracing must num be installed when each element of the falsework is erected and num remain in place until the falsework is removed .
if ordered use camber strips to compensate for falsework deflection vertical alignment and anticipated structure deflection .
the engineer furnishes the amount of camber to be used in constructing falsework .
install telltales that num are attached to the soffit forms and num can be read from the ground .
provide sufficient telltales to allow the total settlement where concrete is being placed to be determined .
construct deck slab forms between girders with no allowance for settlement relative to the girders .
do not apply dead loads other than forms and reinforcing steel to falsework until authorized .
if num events occur that the engineer determines will result in a structure that does not comply with the structure as described or num settlements occur that are more than num inch greater than those shown on the falsework drawings stop concrete placement and apply corrective measures .
if the measures are not provided before initial concrete set occurs stop concrete placement at the location ordered .
numd removal remove falsework such that portions of falsework not yet removed remain stable at all times .
falsework removal includes lowering the falsework blowing sand from sand jacks turning screws on screw jacks and removing wedges .
except for concrete above the deck do not release falsework supporting any span of a num .
simple span bridge before num days after the last concrete has been placed num .
continuous or rigid frame bridge before num days after the last concrete has been placed num .
in that span num .
in adjacent portions of each adjoining span for a length equal to onehalf of the span where falsework is to be released num .
simple span continuous or rigid frame bridge until the supported concrete has attained a compressive strength of num psi or num percent of the specified strength whichever is greater do not release falsework for prestressed portions of structures until prestressing steel has been tensioned .
do not remove falsework supporting any span of a continuous or rigid frame bridge until all required prestressing is complete num in that span and num in adjacent portions of each adjoining span for a length equal to at least one half of the span where falsework is to be released .
release falsework supporting spans of cip girders slab bridges or culverts before constructing or installing railings or barriers on the spans unless authorized .
remove falsework for arch bridges uniformly and gradually .
start at the crown and work toward the springing .
remove falsework for adjacent arch spans concurrently .
do not release falsework that supports overhangs deck slabs between girders or girder stems that slope num degrees or more from vertical before num days after deck concrete has been placed .
you may release falsework supporting the sides of girder stems that slope less than num degrees from vertical before placing deck concrete if you install lateral supports .
lateral supports must be num .
designed to resist rotational forces on the girder stem including forces due to concrete deck placement num .
installed immediately after each form panel is removed num .
installed before releasing supports for the adjacent form panel section num temporary structures num do not release falsework for bent caps supporting steel or pc concrete girders before num days after placing bent cap concrete .
do not erect girders onto bent caps until bent cap concrete has attained a compressive strength of num psi or num percent of the specified strength whichever is greater .
remove falsework for structural members subject to bending as specified for simple span bridges .
do not release falsework for box culverts and other structures with decks lower than the roadway pavement and span lengths of num feet or less until the last placed concrete has attained a compressive strength of num psi .
curing of the concrete must not be interrupted .
falsework removal for other box culverts must comply with the specifications for the release of bridge falsework .
do not release falsework for arch culverts sooner than num hours after concrete has been placed .
remove falsework piling to at least num feet below the original ground or streambed .
remove falsework piling driven within ditch or channel excavation limits to at least num feet below the bottom and side slopes of the excavated areas .
dispose of falsework materials and work debris .
falsework removal system employing methods of holding falsework by winches hydraulic jacks with prestressing steel hs rods or cranes must also be supported by an independent support system when the falsework removal system is not actively lowering the falsework at vehicular pedestrian or railroad traffic openings .
bridge deck openings used to facilitate falsework removal activities must be formed and located away from the wheel path .
the formed openings must be wedge shaped with a numinch maximum diameter at the top and a numinch maximum diameter at the bottom .
anchor numinchsquare aluminum or galvanized steel wire numinchmesh hardware cloth with a num inch minimum wire diameter firmly to the inside of the soffit openings .
construct a numinch drip groove to the outside of soffit openings .
clean and roughen openings made in the bridge deck .
fill the deck openings with rapid setting concrete complying with section numbnum .
nume falsework lighting numenum general falsework lighting includes lighting to illuminate the pavement portals and pedestrian walkways at or under openings in the falsework required for traffic .
falsework lighting components must comply with section num .
lighting for pedestrian walkway illumination must be installed at all pedestrian openings through or under the falsework .
design falsework lighting so that required maintenance can be performed with a minimum of inconvenience to traffic .
closing of traffic lanes for routine maintenance is not allowed on roadways with posted speed limits greater than num mph .
illuminate the following only during hours of darkness as provided in division num section num of the california vehicle code num falsework portals and num pavement under falsework with portals less than num feet apart .
photoelectric switches must be used to control falsework lighting systems .
pavement under falsework with portals num feet or more apart and all pedestrian openings through falsework must be illuminated num hours per day .
lighting fixtures must be aimed to avoid glare to oncoming motorists .
type nmc cable with no .
num minimum conductors with ground wire must be used .
fasten cable to the supporting structure at sufficient intervals to adequately support the cable and within num inches from every box or fitting .
conductors within num feet of ground must be enclosed in a numinch or larger type num conduit .
each illumination system must be on a minimum of num separate branch circuit at each bridge location .
each branch circuit must be fused not to exceed num a .
section num temporary structures num for falsework lighting arrange with the service utility to complete service connections .
you pay for energy line extension service and service hookup costs .
numenum pavement illumination illumination of pavement at vehicular openings through falsework must comply with the following requirements num .
fixture must include rfl commercialtype flood lamp holder with protective covers .
num .
fixture must be fully adjustable with brackets and locking screws and allow mounting directly to a standard metal junction box .
num .
lamp must be mediumbase num vac num w minimum parnum quartzhalogen flood lamp .
num .
a continuous row of fixture types required must be installed at locations and spacing specified .
fixtures must be installed beneath falsework structure with the end fixtures not further than num feet inside portal faces .
fixtures must be installed and energized immediately after the members supporting them have been erected .
num .
fixtures along the sides of the opening must be placed not more than num feet behind or num feet in front of the roadway face of the temporary railing .
mounting heights of fixtures must be between num and num feet above the roadway surface and must present an unobstructed light pattern on the pavement .
numenum portal illumination illumination of falsework portals must comply with the following requirements num .
on each side of each entrance portal plywood sheet clearance guides must num .
be num feet wide by num feet high .
num .
be fastened vertically facing traffic with the bottom of the panel num to num feet above the roadway .
num .
have the center of the panel located approximately num feet horizontally behind the roadway face of the railing .
num .
have freshly painted panels for each installation with not less than num applications of flat white paint .
paint testing will not be required .
num .
if ordered repaint the designated areas to improve the general appearance of the painted surfaces .
repainting is change order work .
num .
falsework portals must be illuminated on the side facing traffic with num w minimum par floodlamps mounted on the structure directly over each vertical support adjacent to the traveled way as needed to uniformly illuminate the exterior falsework beam the clearance guides and the overhead clearance sign .
each lamp must be supported approximately num feet above the pavement and approximately num feet in front of the portal face .
num .
portal lighting and clearance guides must be installed on the day the vertical members are erected .
numenum pedestrian walkway illumination illumination of pedestrian openings through or under the falsework must comply with the following requirements num .
fixtures must be flush mounted in the overhead protection shield and equipped with a damage resistant clear polycarbonate diffuser lens .
lamps must be standard incandescent num w num vac .
num .
fixtures must be centered over the passageway at intervals of not more than num feet with the end fixtures not more than num feet inside the end of the pedestrian openings .
num .
pedestrian passageway light systems must be installed immediately after the overhead protection shield is erected .
num payment not used num temporary supports num general numa summary section num includes specifications for providing temporary supports for existing structures during retrofit reconstruction and removal activities .
section num temporary structures num temporary supports include jacking assemblies and accessories required to jack and support structures .
numb definitions frame portion of a bridge between expansion joints .
numc submittals numcnum general submit num copies of the initial location survey of the existing structure signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
submit a copy of the displacement monitoring record after completing reconstruction of each bent .
numcnum shop drawings submit shop drawings with design calculations for the temporary support system .
submit num copies of shop drawings and num copies of design calculations .
include with the submittal num .
descriptions and values of all loads including construction equipment loads .
num .
descriptions of equipment to be used .
num .
details and calculations for jacking and supporting the existing structure .
num .
stress sheets anchor bolt layouts shop details and erection and removal plans for the temporary supports .
num .
assumed soil bearing values and design stresses for temporary support footings including anticipated foundation settlement .
num .
maximum distance temporary support piles may be pulled for placement under footing caps .
num .
maximum deviation of temporary support piles from a vertical line through the point of fixity .
num .
details for use of permanent piles .
include any additional loads imposed on the piles .
num .
details for additional bracing required during erection and removal of temporary supports .
num .
details of the displacement monitoring system including equipment location of control points and methods and schedule for taking measurements .
num .
details for jacking the structure if settlement occurs in the temporary supports .
calculations must show a summary of computed stresses in num temporary supports num connections between temporary supports and the existing structure and num existing loadsupporting members .
the computed stresses must include the effect of the jacking sequence .
calculations must include a lateral stiffness assessment of the temporary support system .
shop drawings and calculations must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
for temporary supports over railways comply with any additional requirements of the railway company involved .
numd quality assurance numdnum general welding welder qualification and welding inspection for temporary supports must comply with aws dnum .
calibrate each jack within num months of use and after each repair .
each jack and its gauge must num be calibrated as a unit with the cylinder extension in the approximate position that it will be at the final jacking force and num accompanied by a certified calibration chart .
each load cell must be calibrated .
calibration must be performed by an authorized laboratory .
before starting bridge removal activities an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state must inspect and certify that num the temporary supports jacking system and displacement monitoring system comply with the authorized shop drawings and num the materials and workmanship are satisfactory for the work .
a copy of this certification must be available at the job site at all times .
an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state must num .
be present during jacking activities or adjustments and during bridge removal activities .
section num temporary structures num num .
inspect jacking and removal activities and report daily on the progress of the operation and the status of the remaining structure .
the daily report must be available at the job site at all times .
num .
immediately submit proposed procedures to correct or remedy unplanned occurrences .
numdnum displacement monitoring perform an initial survey to record the location of the existing structure before starting work .
monitor and record vertical and horizontal displacements of the temporary supports and the existing structure .
use vandalresistant displacement monitoring equipment .
perform monitoring continuously during jacking activities and at least weekly during removal and reconstruction activities .
make monitoring records available at the job site during normal work hours .
monitoring records must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
as a minimum monitor the existing structure at the supported bent and at the midspan of both adjoining spans .
locate control points at each location near the center and at both edges of the superstructure .
as a minimum record elevations at the following times num .
before starting jacking activities num .
immediately after completing jacking num .
after completing bridge removal num .
before connecting the reconstructed or retrofitted superstructure to the substructure num .
after removing temporary supports num materials numa general manufactured assemblies must comply with section numbnumd .
numb design criteria the engineer does not authorize temporary support designs based on allowable stresses greater than those specified in section numbnum .
if falsework loads are imposed on temporary supports the temporary supports must also satisfy the deflection criteria in section numbnum .
the temporary support system must support the initial jacking loads and the minimum temporary support design loads and forces shown .
adjust vertical design loads for the weight of the temporary supports and jacking system construction equipment loads and additional loads imposed by jacking activities .
construction equipment loads must be at least num psf of deck surface area of the frame involved .
temporary supports must resist the described lateral design forces applied at the point where the column to be removed meets the superstructure .
if the temporary support lateral stiffness exceeds the described minimum stiffness increase the lateral design forces to be compatible with the temporary support stiffness .
place temporary supports resisting transverse lateral loads within num of the span length from the existing bent .
place temporary supports resisting longitudinal lateral loads within the frame where columns are to be removed .
you may use the permanent piles as part of the temporary support foundation .
do not move or adjust permanent piles from the locations shown .
if you install permanent piles longer than described to support the temporary supports above the top of the footing and later cut off the piles at their final elevation you must use shear devices adequate to transfer all pile reactions into the footing .
design temporary support footings to carry the loads imposed without exceeding the estimated soil bearing values or anticipated settlements .
you must determine soil bearing values .
where temporary supports are placed on the deck of an existing structure num .
temporary supports must bear either num .
directly on girder stems or bent caps of the supporting structure num .
on falsework sills that transmit the load to the stems or cap without overstressing any member of the new or existing structure section num temporary structures num num .
temporary supports must not induce permanent forces into the completed structure or produce cracking .
num .
place additional temporary supports beneath the existing structure where temporary support loads are imposed on the existing structure .
design and construct the additional temporary supports to support all loads from the upper structure and construction activities .
provide additional bracing as required to withstand all imposed loads during each phase of temporary support erection and removal .
include wind loads complying with section numbnum in the design of additional bracing .
mechanically connect num the existing structure to the temporary supports and num the temporary supports to their foundations .
mechanical connections must be capable of resisting the lateral design forces .
friction forces developed between the existing structure and temporary supports num are not considered an effective mechanical connection and num must not be used to reduce lateral forces .
design mechanical connections to accommodate adjustments to the temporary support frame during use .
if the concrete is to be prestressed design temporary supports to support changes to the loads caused by prestressing forces .
temporary supports must comply with the specifications for falsework in section numbnum .
num construction where described install temporary crash cushion modules under section num before starting temporary support activities .
remove crash cushion modules when authorized .
construct temporary supports under the specifications for falsework in section numc .
equip each jack with a pressure gauge or load cell for determining the jacking force .
each pressure gauge must have an accurately reading dial at least num inches in diameter .
each load cell must be provided with an indicator to determine the jacking force .
provide a redundant system of supports during jacking activities .
the redundant system must include stacks of steel plates added as necessary to maintain the redundant supports at each jack location within num inch of the jacking sill or corbels .
before starting bridge removal work at a location being supported the temporary support system must num apply a force to the structure that is equal to the initial jacking load or the dead load shown and num hold that load until all initial compression and settlement of the system is completed .
apply jacking loads simultaneously .
control and monitor jacking operations to prevent distortion and stresses that would damage the structure .
maintain total vertical displacements at control points to less than num inch from elevations recorded before jacking or as authorized .
stop jacking activities if unanticipated displacements cracking or other damage occurs .
apply corrective measures before resuming jacking activities .
after reconstruction activities the monitored control points must not deviate by more than num inch from the initial vertical survey elevations or other authorized elevations .
remove temporary supports under the specifications for falsework in section numd .
if traffic is carried on the structure on temporary supports do not release temporary supports until the supported concrete has attained num percent of the described strength .
remove attachments from the existing structure .
restore concrete surfaces to original conditions except where permanent alterations are shown .
num payment payment for crash cushion modules is not included in the payment for temporary support .
section num temporary structures num num temporary decking num general numa summary section num includes specifications for temporary decking for joint or deck reconstruction .
if you are unable to complete bridge reconstruction activities before the bridge is to be opened to traffic furnish and maintain temporary decking until that portion of the work is complete .
temporary decking must comply with the specifications for existing structures in section num and the falsework specifications in section num .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit shop drawings for temporary decking .
include the following num .
description location and value of all loads num .
details of the connection between the temporary decking and the existing structure num .
storage location of equipment and materials that allows for num shift of work and placement of temporary decking within the time allowed num .
construction sequence and schedule details num .
cure time for concrete to be placed under a steel plate system num .
details for removing temporary decking and restoring the existing structure shop drawings must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
numd quality assurance temporary decking must comply with the falsework specifications in section numbnum section num numbnum and the following num .
for the design loading shown deflection must not exceed num of the temporary decking span .
num .
temporary decking must have a uniform surface with a coefficient of friction of at least num when measured under california test num .
num .
steel plate systems must be mechanically connected to the existing structure and adjacent approaches .
if a steel plate spans a joint the mechanical connection must accommodate at least num percent of the movement rating shown for that joint .
num .
temporary decking must not overstress induce permanent forces into or produce cracking in the existing structure .
num materials not used num construction temporary decking must consist of one of the following num .
steel plate system that spans the incomplete work .
num .
falsework with an asphalt concrete surface that spans the incomplete work .
do not use falsework with an asphalt concrete surface to cover deck concrete that has not cured or to cover partially installed joint materials .
construct temporary decking under the specifications for falsework in section num except the first paragraph of section numd does not apply .
if there is a horizontal gap of more than num inch or an elevation difference of more than num inch between the temporary decking and the adjacent deck install tapers up to and away from the temporary decking .
use the ratio for tapers specified in the special provisions .
if the temporary decking does not extend the entire width of the roadway taper the sides of the temporary decking at a num horizontal vertical ratio .
material for tapers must comply with section numbnum .
cure tapers at least num hours before allowing traffic on the temporary decking .
section num temporary structures num for ramp locations tapers may be installed at num horizontal vertical up to and away from the temporary decking .
if the temporary decking does not extend the entire width of the roadway taper the sides of the temporary decking at num horizontal vertical .
material used at these locations must be sufficiently rigid to support traffic .
if unanticipated displacements cracking or other damage occurs to the existing structure or to any new components installed in or adjacent to the deck stop work on the deck and perform corrective measures .
edges of steel plate systems must be in full contact with the existing deck and the adjacent approach slab .
if used shims must be securely attached to the plate .
for falsework with an asphalt concrete cover asphalt concrete must be at least num inches thick and compacted in place .
do not allow traffic on deck concrete until it has attained the design compressive strength shown .
for rsc do not allow traffic on deck concrete until it has cured at least num hours .
when temporary decking is no longer needed remove temporary decking materials and connections from the existing structure as soon as possible .
restore modifications to the existing structure except where permanent alterations are shown .
num payment not used num jacking superstructure num general numa summary section num includes specifications for lowering the bridge superstructure using a jacking support system .
you must num design and construct the temporary jacking support system for the superstructure and num determine the methods and equipment for lowering the superstructure .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit shop drawings with design calculations for the jacking support system .
submit num copies of shop drawings and num copies of design calculations .
include with the submittal num .
descriptions and values of all loads including construction equipment loads num .
descriptions of equipment to be used num .
details and calculations for jacking and supporting the structure num .
stress sheets anchor bolt layouts shop details and erection and removal plans for the temporary supports num .
assumed soil bearing values and design stresses for support footings including anticipated foundation settlement num .
details for bracing required during erection and removal num .
details of the displacement monitoring system including equipment location of control points and methods and schedule of taking measurements num .
details for jacking the structure if settlement occurs calculations must show a summary of computed stresses in the jacking support system and the connections between the support system and the bridge superstructure .
the computed stresses must include the effect of the jacking sequence .
calculations must include a lateral stiffness assessment of the jacking support system .
shop drawings and calculations must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
for jacking support systems over railways comply with any additional requirements of the railway company involved .
section num temporary structures num numd quality assurance numdnum general calibrate each jack within num months of use and after each repair .
each jack and its gauge must num be calibrated as a unit with the cylinder extension in the approximate position that it will be at the final jacking force and num accompanied by a certified calibration chart .
each load cell must be calibrated .
calibration must be performed by an authorized laboratory .
numdnum displacement monitoring monitor and record vertical and horizontal displacements of the jacking support system and the existing structure .
use vandalresistant displacement monitoring equipment .
perform monitoring continuously during jacking activities .
make monitoring records available at the job site during normal work hours .
monitoring records must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
as a minimum monitor the existing structure at the supported bent and at the midspan of both adjoining spans .
locate control points at each location near the center and at both edges of the superstructure .
as a minimum record elevations at the following times num .
before starting jacking activities num .
immediately after completing jacking num .
before connecting the superstructure to the substructure num .
after removing jacking support system num materials numa general reserved numb design criteria the jacking support system must resist the structure dead load and lateral design forces shown plus any additional loads from jacking equipment and activities .
you must determine soil bearing values for support footings .
if the jacking support stiffness exceeds the specified minimum stiffness increase the lateral design forces to be compatible with the jacking support lateral stiffness .
systems involving modifications to the bridge that impair the structural integrity intended serviceability or design capacity of the bridge are not allowed .
num construction construct the jacking support system under the specifications for falsework in section numc .
equip each jack with a pressure gauge or load cell for determining the jacking force .
each pressure gauge must have an accurately reading dial at least num inches in diameter .
each load cell must be provided with an indicator to determine the jacking force .
provide a redundant system of supports during jacking activities .
the redundant system must include stacks of steel plates added as necessary to maintain the redundant supports within num inch of the jacking sill or corbels .
before removing falsework the jacking support system must num apply a force to the structure that is equal to the initial jacking load or the dead load shown and num hold that load until all initial compression and settlement of the system is completed .
lower the superstructure uniformly to the position shown .
lower the superstructure such that no distortion occurs that would damage the superstructure .
distribute the load uniformly across each hinge abutment or bent .
if authorized place galvanized shims as necessary to provide uniform loading at bearing pads .
stop jacking activities if unanticipated displacements cracking or other damage occurs .
corrective measures must be authorized before use .
after lowering remove the jacking support system under the specifications for falsework in section num numd .
remove attachments required for lowering from the superstructure and apply the specified finish to concrete surfaces .
section num temporary structures num num payment not used num reserved num num piling num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for constructing piles .
earthwork for reinforced concrete extensions must comply with section num .
numb definitions control zone zone that has the same subsurface profile and engineering properties as a corresponding support location .
nominal driving resistance sum of num nominal resistance required to resist the factored axial loads and num driving resistance from unsuitable or scourable penetrated soil layers that do not contribute to the design resistance .
nominal resistance design capacity required to resist the factored axial loads .
numc submittals numcnum general before handling or installing piles at a location closer than the length of the pile being handled or installed to the edge of a traveled way open to public use submit a work plan of the measures to be used to provide for the safety of traffic and the public .
submit a vecp for revisions to specified tip elevations shown or installation methods .
numcnum test borings if test borings are specified in the special provisions submit the log of test borings and the test boring report upon completion of all test borings .
submit num copies of the test boring report and the log of test borings to osd documents unit .
the submittal must comply with the specifications for shop drawings .
notify the engineer of the submittal .
include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
if corrections to the submittal are required submit num copy of the corrected test boring report and the log of test borings to osd documents unit .
the test boring report must include num .
summary of drilling methods drilling equipment drill platforms and drilling difficulties encountered num .
location map of the surveyed position of the test borings relative to the new pile locations in the california coordinate system and bridge stationing num .
bore hole surveying notes num .
photographs of rock cores num .
copies of original daily drilling notes numd quality assurance numdnum general piling must have sufficient length to attain the specified tip elevation shown and extend into the pile cap or footing .
numdnum determination of length you may conduct additional foundation investigation including installing and axial load testing of additional nonproduction indicator piling and performing test borings .
locations of additional foundation testing must be authorized .
notify the engineer at least num business days before starting additional foundation testing .
complete additional foundation investigation before requesting revised specified pile tip elevations or revisions to the described installation methods .
the following revisions are not authorized section num piling num num .
specified installation methods if settlement or lateral loads control the design tip elevation num .
specified pile tip elevation above the design tip elevation shown for settlement or lateral loads num .
specified pile tip elevation if the tip elevation is controlled by liquefaction or scour the pile structural capacity design is based on the nominal strength as defined in article num of the caltrans bridge design specifications or the nominal resistance as defined in article num of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications .
indicator compression pile load testing must comply with astm dnumdnumm .
the pile must sustain the numst compression test load applied that is equal to the nominal driving resistance with no more than numinch total vertical movement at the top of the pile measured relative to the top of the pile before the start of compression load testing .
indicator tension pile load testing must comply with astm dnum except do not use the loading apparatus described as tensile load applied by hydraulic jacks acting upward at one end of test beams .
the pile must sustain the numst tension test load applied that is equal to the nominal resistance in tension shown with no more than numinch total vertical movement at the top of the pile measured relative to the top of the pile before the start of tension load testing .
remove indicator piling as specified for removing portions of bridges .
numdnum load test piles if load test piles are shown complete load testing of each load test pile before drilling holes casting piling cutting piling to length driving piling and fabricating reinforcing steel cages for any piles represented by the load test pile .
notify the engineer at least num days before drilling or driving piles to be load tested .
except in cofferdams the bottom of the footing excavation must be level and dewatered before pile load testing .
the excavation must be kept dewatered during load testing .
install load test piles with the same type of equipment to be used for installation of production piles .
load test piles must comply with the specifications for piling as described .
locate load test piles such that they may be cut off and become a part of the completed structure .
remove load test and anchor piles not incorporated in the completed structure as specified for removing portions of bridges .
for load test anchorages in piles used as anchor piles num .
hs threaded steel rods must comply with astm anumanumm for uncoated deformed type ii hs steel bars including the supplementary requirements except the maximum weight requirement does not apply num .
steel plates must comply with astm anumanumm grade num num .
anchor nuts must hold the hs steel rods at a load producing a stress of not less than num percent of the specified ultimate tensile strength of the hs steel rod num .
pipe couplings and fittings must be commercially available materials of the types and ratings shown you may use additional cementitious material in load test and anchor piles .
you may use type iii cement in any load test and anchor pile not used as a part of the completed structure .
furnish labor materials tools equipment and incidentals as required to assist the department in the installation operation and removal of departmentfurnished steel load test beams jacks bearing plates drills and other test equipment .
this is change order work .
the department performs testing of load test piles when the concrete in the load test and anchor piles has developed a compressive strength of at least num psi .
allow the department num days to perform pile load tests at each test location .
allow an additional num days for the department to revise the specified tip elevations .
section num piling num numdnum dynamic monitoring section numdnum applies if dynamic monitoring of driven piling is specified in the special provisions .
the department determines which piles from a control zone or support location receive dynamic monitoring .
the department dynamically monitors driven piles using departmentfurnished dynamic pile analyzer monitoring instruments .
section numanumc does not apply to driven piles if dynamic monitoring is required .
the department conducts penetration and bearing analyses of dynamically monitored piles and develops bearing acceptance criteria curves for these piles .
penetration and bearing analyses are based on a wave equation analysis .
except for load test and anchor piles do not install production piles until the engineer provides you with the bearing acceptance criteria curves for any piles represented by the dynamically monitored piles .
piles to be dynamically monitored must be num .
available to the department at least num business days before driving .
num .
safely supported at least num inches off the ground in a horizontal position on at least num support blocks .
if requested rotate the piles on the blocks .
num .
positioned such that the department has safe access to the entire pile length and circumference for the installation of anchorages and control marks for monitoring .
prepare and drive piles to be dynamically monitored in the following sequence num .
before driving rotate and align the pile in the driving leads as ordered by the department .
num .
temporarily suspend driving operations for approximately num minutes when the pile tip is num feet above the specified tip elevation shown .
num .
during the num minute suspension bolt the numpound instrument package securely to plugs or expansion anchors previously installed in the pile by the department .
connect electrical cables to the instrument package as ordered by the department .
num .
resume driving operations as ordered by the department .
suspend driving operations approximately num foot above the specified tip elevation .
num .
remove the cables and instrument package from the pile and deliver them to the engineer .
num .
the following business day install the instrument package on the pile and attach the cables and resume driving the pile to the specified tip elevation .
num .
remove the cables and instruments from the monitored pile and deliver them to the engineer .
replace in kind any cables or instruments that are damaged by your activities .
after the pile has been dynamically monitored num .
allow num days for the department to revise the specified tip elevations and to provide bearing acceptance criteria curves num .
if pile load testing is performed in addition to dynamic monitoring allow num days for the department to revise the specified tip elevations and to provide bearing acceptance criteria curves numdnum test borings section numdnum applies if test borings are specified in the special provisions .
notify the engineer at least num days before drilling test borings .
drill test borings under the job site supervision of with the log of test borings stamped by and with the test boring submittal signed by a geologist or civil engineer who is registered in the state and has at least num years of geotechnical engineering experience with deep foundations in both soil and rock .
drill test borings at the center of each pile location shown .
drill test borings by rotary drilling methods to a depth of at least num feet below the specified tip elevation shown .
test borings must be at least num inches in diameter .
section num piling num perform standard penetration tests in all soil types under astm dnum for each test boring at numfoot maximum intervals until num bedrock is encountered num num blows with no discernible sampler advancement is observed or num ordered .
core the bedrock num .
continuously with at least num percent core recovery .
rock must not be logged from drill cuttings .
rock quality designation must be made at numfoot maximum intervals .
num .
using an outer and inner core barrel drilling system .
the outer core barrel must be fitted with a diamond impregnated or polycrystalline drill bit and have an outside diameter of at least num inches .
the split inner tube core barrel must have an inside diameter of at least num inches .
photograph the rock cores num .
before removal from the split inner tube barrels and placement into core boxes num .
after core boxes are filled and before boxes are removed from the drilling platform rock core photographs must be in color num by num inches and labeled with the borehole number sample elevation scale and date and time of photograph .
place the rock cores in rock core boxes labeled as specified in the soil and rock logging classification and presentation manual .
include the support or pile location .
store rock core boxes on or near the job site at an authorized location .
preserve and secure the rock core samples in a weatherprotected facility until notified by the engineer .
dispose of rock cores or transport them to geotechnical services as ordered .
the log of test borings and the classification and description of soils and rock must comply with the soil and rock logging classification and presentation manual available at the geotechnical services website .
use the same version of the soil and rock logging classification and presentation manual shown .
if no version is shown use the most current version of the manual .
after the test boring report and the log of test borings have been authorized allow num days for the engineer to notify you of confirmation of or revisions to the specified pile tip elevations .
do not fabricate or manufacture to length steel pipe piling permanent steel casing micropiling and filled and unfilled steel casing until you have been notified .
num materials not used num construction if the contract allows the use of more than num pile type use the same type of pile for all piles within each individual footing .
dispose of drill cuttings under section numb .
reinforced concrete extensions must comply with section num .
num payment load test piles and adjacent anchor piles are paid for as the type or class of piling shown in the bid item list .
the payment quantity is the length used in the load testing .
reinforced concrete extensions are paid for as furnish piling or cidh concrete piling of the type of piling on which it is constructed .
the payment quantity is the length measured from the plane of pile cutoff to the top of the extension .
num driven piling num general numa general numanum summary section num includes general specifications for installing driven piles .
section num piling num epoxycoated bar reinforcing steel used for pile anchors must comply with section num .
furnish piling includes num .
furnishing piles to the job site num .
splicing piles num .
furnishing and installing pile anchors and lugs driving piles includes num .
driving and cutting the piles off at the elevations shown num .
furnishing special driving tips or heavier sections of steel piles num .
drilling holes or predrilling holes through embankments num .
disposing of material resulting from drilling holes or predrilling holes numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals numanuma general for pile driving hammers with no way of visually observing the ram stroke submit a printed readout as an informational submittal showing hammer energy during driving operations .
numanumb driving system submittal section numanumb applies if a driving system submittal is specified in the special provisions .
the driving system submittal must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
allow num days for the departments review .
allow an additional num days for the review of any resubmittals .
submit a revised driving system submittal if the hammers change from those shown in the submittal .
for the driving system submittal perform driveability studies as follows num .
model the proposed driving system including hammers cap blocks and pile cushions based on a wave equation analysis .
num .
use an authorized computer program .
num .
if the driveability analysis hammers indicate that openended pipe pile and steel shell penetration rates are less than num foot per num blows and the driving stresses exceed num percent of the yield strength of the pipe and steel shell include assumptions for drilling through the center of the piles and shells .
num .
if a follower is used include num an analysis of the driving system with the follower and num an analysis of the driving system without the follower .
include in the driving system submittal num .
results of the driveability analysis showing that the proposed driving systems will install piles to the specified tip elevation and nominal driving resistance shown .
driving systems must generate sufficient energy to drive the piles with compressive and tensile stresses not more than num percent of the yield strength of the pile as driven .
results must include num .
pile compressive stress versus blows per foot .
num .
pile tensile stress versus blows per foot .
num .
nominal driving resistance versus blows per foot .
num .
complete description of num .
soil parameters used including soil quake and damping coefficients skin friction distribution and ratio of shaft resistance to total resistance .
num .
assumptions made regarding the formation of soil plugs drilling through the center of open ended steel shells and the use of closure plates shoes and other tip treatment .
num .
list of the hammer operation parameters assumed in the analysis including fuel settings stroke limitations and hammer efficiency .
section num piling num num .
copies of the test results from any previous pile load tests dynamic monitoring and all driving records used in the analyses .
num .
completed pile and driving data form .
numanum quality assurance numanuma general reserved numanumb quality control reserved numanumc department acceptance for pile acceptance the required number of hammer blows in the last foot of driving is determined using the following formula ru num x ernum x lognum num x n num where ru nominal driving resistance kips er manufacturers rating for footpounds of energy developed by the hammer at the observed field drop height n number of hammer blows in the last foot maximum value allowed for n is num numb materials not used numc construction numcnum general if the engineer revises the pile tip elevation for driven piles the work involved in furnishing splicing and driving the additional length of pile is change order work .
if you are ordered to place additional lugs on steel piles furnishing and placing these lugs is change order work .
numcnum driving equipment install driven piles using an authorized impact hammer .
the impact hammer must be num .
steam hydraulic air or diesel num .
able to develop sufficient energy to drive the pile at a penetration rate of not less than num inch per blow at the nominal driving resistance shown do not use vibratory hammers oscillators or rotators to install driven piles .
hammers with an external combustion engine that are not single action must have a transducer that records ram velocity .
double acting diesel hammers with internal combustion engines must have a transducer that records bounce chamber pressure .
steam or air hammers must have boiler or air capacity of at least that specified by the manufacturer .
the boiler or air compressor must be equipped with an accurate pressure gauge .
maintain the valve mechanism and other parts of steam air or diesel hammers such that the length of stroke and number of blows per minute for which the hammer is designed is attained .
do not use inefficient steam air or diesel hammers .
you may use followers or underwater hammers for driving piles if authorized .
if using a follower or underwater hammer verify its efficiency by furnishing the numst pile in each bent or footing sufficiently long and drive the pile without the use of a follower or underwater hammer .
section num piling num numcnum drilling if necessary to attain the specified tip elevation shown and if authorized you may drill holes with a diameter not greater than the least dimension of the pile to the specified depth before driving the piles .
numcnum predrilled holes for piles to be driven through embankments constructed under the contract drive piles through predrilled holes where the depth of the new embankment at the pile location is in excess of num feet .
the hole diameter must be at least num inches larger than the greatest dimension of the pile cross section .
after driving the pile fill the space around the pile to the ground surface with dry sand or pea gravel .
numcnum driving use driving heads or driving blocks that hold the pile in position directly under the hammer when driving .
protect the heads of driven piles from direct impact of the hammer with a cushion driving block .
maintain the cushion in good condition during the entire driving operation .
arrange the cushion driving block such that any reinforcing bars projecting above the pile are not displaced or damaged during driving .
provide special driving tips or heavier pile sections or take other authorized measures to prevent damage to steel piles steel shells or steel casings during installation .
if you encounter obstructions to driving provide special driving tips or heavier pile sections subexcavate below the bottom of footing or take other measures to prevent damage to the pile during driving .
this is change order work .
drive piles to the position and line shown .
the engineer rejects piles materially out of line .
dispose of rejected piles that interfere with the work .
you must remove or cut off and abandon in place any rejected piles that do not interfere with the work .
except for piles to be load tested and sheet piles drive piles to at least the nominal driving resistance and the specified tip elevation shown .
drive piles to be load tested and sheet piles to the specified tip elevation shown .
if the pile nominal driving resistance is not shown drive the pile to the nominal resistance shown .
numcnum pile cutoff cut off driven piles at the elevations shown and anchor them to the structure .
do not damage the pile below cutoff .
dispose of the cutoff lengths of piles .
numd payment driven piling is paid for as furnish piling and drive pile of the class type size or alternative shown in the bid item list .
if you are ordered to place additional lugs on steel piles the department does not pay for the additional work involved in driving piles due to these additional lugs .
the payment quantity for furnish piling is the length measured along the longest side of the pile from the specified tip elevation shown to the plane of pile cutoff .
num steel pipe piling numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for installing steel pipe piles .
numanum definitions shop welding welding performed at a plant on the departments authorized facility audit list .
field welding welding not performed at a plant on the departments authorized facility audit list .
section num piling num numanum submittals numanuma general reserved numanumb shop drawings submit shop drawings for attaching handling devices to steel pipe piles .
shop drawings must include the locations handling and fitting device details and connection details .
allow num days for review of the shop drawings .
numanumc inspection request form submit an inspection request form at least num days before performing any welding of class n steel pipe piles .
numanumd certificate of compliance submit a certificate of compliance for steel pipe piles .
the certificate of compliance must be signed by the plants qc representative .
the qc representative must be on record with the departments office of structural materials .
include with the certificate of compliance num .
statement that the materials and workmanship comply with the contract and the required tests and inspections have been performed as described .
num .
certified mill test reports for each heat number of steel used in pipe piles being furnished .
num .
test reports for tensile chemical and any specified ndt .
test reports must be based on test samples taken from the base metal steel coil or from the manufactured or fabricated piles .
num .
calculated carbon equivalent .
the carbon equivalent may be shown on the mill test report .
numanum quality assurance numanuma general reserved numanumb quality control numanumbi general reserved numanumbii plant audit fabricate steel pipe piles at a plant on the departments authorized facility audit list .
numanumbiii nondestructive testing numanumbiiia general section numanumbiii applies to ndt of class n steel pipe piles .
except for welding performed under api numl the acceptance criteria for rt and ut must comply with aws dnum for cyclically loaded nontubular connections for welds subject to tensile stress .
perform ndt on backing ring welds using rt or ut for a material thickness of num inch or greater or using rt for a material thickness less than num inch .
numanumbiiib shop welds section numanumbiiib applies to ndt of shop welds .
for welding performed under api numl num .
submit a dvd or vhs videocassette recording of the actual material testing if radiological testing is used or the actual radiographic film if film radiography is used .
submit the recording before shipping the material from the plant .
num .
if film radiography is used to inspect pipe ends or repairs the transmitted film density must be from num to num in the area of interest weld base metal and image quality indicators .
num .
reinspect repaired defects using the ndt method that originally detected the defect except you may use film radiography for the inspection of repairs if the defect was originally detected using radiological testing .
section num piling num for welding performed under aws dnum num .
perform ndt on num percent of each longitudinal circumferential or spiral weld using rt or ut .
num .
if repairs are required in a portion of the tested weld num .
perform ndt on the repaired portion .
num .
perform additional ndt on untested areas on each side of the repaired portion .
the length of additional ndt on each side of the repaired portion must equal num percent of the pipes outside circumference .
num .
after this additional num percent of ndt is performed and if additional repairs are required determine and record the total cumulative repair lengths from all ndt .
if the cumulative weld repair length is equal to or more than num percent of the pipes outside circumference then perform ndt on the entire weld .
numanumbiiic field welds section numanumbiiic applies to ndt of field welds .
perform ndt on num percent of each field weld by rt or ut at locations selected by the engineer .
the engineer may select several locations on a given splice .
the cover pass must be ground smooth at locations to be tested .
personnel performing ut for field welds must have their qualifications verified before performing ndt by both written and practical exams .
for ut qualification procedures go to the mets website .
if repairs are required in a portion of the tested weld num .
perform ndt on the repaired portion .
num .
perform additional ndt on untested areas on each side of the repaired portion .
the length of additional ndt on each side of the repaired portion must equal num percent of the pipes outside circumference .
num .
after this additional num percent of ndt is performed and if additional repairs are required determine and record the total cumulative repair lengths from all ndt .
if the cumulative weld repair length is equal to or more than num percent of the pipes outside circumference then perform ndt on the entire weld .
numanumc department acceptance reserved numb materials numbnum general numbnuma general piles not specified as class n in the special provisions must comply with the specifications for class r. the carbon equivalent of steel in steel pipe piles must not exceed num percent .
use the following formula to calculate the carbon equivalent ce c mn sinum cr mo vnum ni cunum where ce carbon equivalent percent sulfur content of steel in steel pipe piles must not exceed num percent .
seams in steel pipe piles must be cjp welds .
for welding and prequalifying base metal under table num of aws dnum treat steel pipe piles complying with astm anum as either astm anumm grade num or astm anumm grade num .
section num does not apply to shop welds in steel pipe piles fabricated at a plant on the departments authorized facility audit list .
section num piling num for groove welds using submerged arc welding from both sides without backgouging qualify the wps under table num of aws dnum .
butt welded seams subsequently formed including skelp end welds must be num percent ultrasonically tested in the final formed and welded condition .
the acceptance criteria for ut must comply with one of the following num .
api numl for apilicensed facilities num .
aws dnum for cyclically loaded nontubular connections for welds subject to tensile stress except for tack welding do not use gas metal arc welding for welding of steel pipe piles .
if gas metal arc welding is used for tack welding do not deposit filler metal by short circuiting transfer .
numbnumb circumferential welds welds must comply with aws dnum .
circumferential welds must be cjp welds .
locate circumferential welds at least num inches away from a skelp end weld .
backing rings must comply with the following num .
minimum thickness of the backing ring must be num inch and the backing ring must be continuous .
num .
splices in the backing ring must be made by cjp welds .
these welds must be completed and inspected including performing any required ndt before final insertion into a pipe end .
num .
attach backing rings to pipe ends using the minimum size and spacing of tack welds that will securely hold the backing ring in place .
tack weld in the root area of the weld splice .
remove and replace cracked tack welds before subsequent weld passes .
num .
gap between the backing ring and the steel pipe wall must not be greater than num inch .
you may offset num localized portion of the backing ring fitup by a gap equal to or less than num inch if the localized portion is num equal to or less than num percent of the outside circumference of the pipe num first seal welded using shielded metal arc enum or enum electrodes and num marked such that it can be referenced during any required ndt .
num .
backing rings must have enough width such that the backing ring does not interfere with the interpretation of the ndt .
for steel pipe piles with an outside diameter greater than num inches and a wall thickness greater than num inch you may increase the root opening tolerances to a maximum of num inch .
if splicing steel pipe piles using a circumferential weld the piles must comply with the fitup requirements of clause num of aws dnum .
numbnumc tolerances dimensional tolerances of steel pipe piles must comply with the following num .
outside diameter num percent of the outside diameter shown num .
wall thickness num to num percent of the nominal wall thickness shown num .
straightness num percent over the length of the pipe numbnumd markings except for steel pipe piles marked with the api monogram mark each length of the steel pipe pile as follows num .
name and location of the piling manufacturer num .
state contract number for class n only num .
heat number num .
welding process num .
outer diameter nominal wall thickness minimum wall thickness and length num .
year piling was produced num .
markings specified for each class of steel pipe piling only department authorized audited facilities are authorized to mark piling for use on a contract .
section num piling num numbnume substitutions reserved numbnum class n steel pipe piling section numbnum applies to steel pipe piles specified as class n in the special provisions .
class n steel pipe piles must comply with one of the following num .
api numl minimum grade xnum pslnum and must be num .
manufactured welded tested and inspected at a plant licensed to apply the api monogram num .
marked with the api monogram on each length of steel pipe num .
astm anum grade num and the following num .
welding must comply with aws dnum .
num .
groove welds using submerged arc welding from both sides without backgouging require a procedure qualification record witnessed by the engineer .
num .
at the start of fabrication and for each thickness of the piling furnish num macroetch crosssection test specimens prepared under clause num of aws dnum .
remove specimens at locations selected by the engineer and in the presence of the engineer .
test specimens must indicate that the weld is free of cracks and has thorough fusion between adjacent layers of weld metal and between weld metal and base metal .
undercut must not exceed num inch .
num .
weighing of individual pipe is not required as specified in astm anum .
num .
each length of pipe must be marked caltrans class n anum .
numbnum class r steel pipe piling section numbnum applies to class r steel pipe piles .
class r steel pipe piles must comply with one of the following num .
api numl minimum grade xnum pslnum and must be num .
manufactured welded tested and inspected at a plant licensed to apply the api monogram except hydrostatic testing flattening tests and the api monogram are not required num .
marked caltrans class r api on each length of steel pipe num .
astm anum grade num and the following num .
arc welding processes must comply with aws dnum num .
groove welds using submerged arc welding from both sides without backgouging require a procedure qualification record witnessed by the engineer num .
underfill is not allowed num .
for electric resistance welded pipe remove the outer diameter flash to a maximum of num inch num .
weld reinforcement must not exceed num inch num .
weighing of individual pipe is not required as specified in astm anum num .
each length of pipe must be marked caltrans class r a num numc construction numcnum general you may retap steel pipe piles to prevent pile setup if the field welded splice remains at least num feet above the work platform until the splice has been authorized .
when attaching handling devices to steel pipe piles align the welds parallel to the axis of the pile .
welds must comply with the specifications for attaching backing rings in section numbnumb .
permanent bolted connections must be corrosion resistant .
numcnum field welds field welds must comply with section numbnumb .
field welds made in the horizontal position where the longitudinal pipe axis is vertical must be single bevel groove welds .
do not water quench field welds .
allow welds to cool unassisted to ambient temperature .
section num piling num remove ends of steel pipe piles to be spliced that have been damaged during driving to a sound and uniform section .
pipe ends must comply with the tolerances for diameter edge alignment and roundness in section numb .
pipe ends must be field cut using automated guided cutting equipment .
do not use manual flame cutting .
numd payment not used num structural shape steel piling numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for installing structural shape steel piling .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit a certified material test report and a certificate of compliance that includes a statement that the materials and workmanship comply with the contract and the required tests and inspections have been performed as described .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials structural shape steel piles must comply with astm anumanumm astm anumanumm astm anumanumm or astm anumanumm .
splices must be cjp groove welds complying with aws dnum .
numc construction field splices must be cjp groove welds complying with aws dnum .
numd payment not used num precast prestressed concrete piling numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for constructing pc ps concrete piles .
pc ps concrete piles must comply with sections num num and num .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals if requested submit num copies of shop drawings for pc ps concrete piles for use during construction .
include the following details in the shop drawings num .
pile dimensions num .
material type num .
prestressing methods num .
tendon arrangement and working stresses num .
any addition or rearrangement of reinforcement from that shown section numcnum does not apply to prestressing systems used for pc ps concrete piles .
authorization of the shop drawings is not required .
section num piling num numanum quality assurance the department inspects pc ps concrete piles at the fabrication site .
notify the department at least num days before fabricating any piles .
materials to be used must be available to the department for testing .
numb materials numbnum general threaded inserts and other fittings must comply with section num .
numbnum fabrication place concrete for pc ps concrete piles in smooth mortartight forms .
support the forms to prevent appreciable deformation or settlement during placing or curing .
finish unformed surfaces to a smooth surface .
piles in a corrosive environment must be steam or water cured under section num .
if piles in a corrosive environment are steam cured do one of the following num .
keep the piles continuously wet for at least num days .
the num days includes the holding and steam curing periods .
num .
apply curing compound under section numbnum immediately after steam curing .
if piles to be placed in a corrosive environment are water cured the piles must be kept continuously wet by the application of water as specified in section numbnum .
when removed from the form the pile must num .
have true smooth even surfaces free from honeycombs and voids num .
be straight such that a line stretched from butt to tip on any pile face is not more than num inch from the face of the pile at any point except for pc ps concrete piles to be placed in a corrosive environment remove lifting anchors and fill holes under section numfnum .
for pc ps concrete piles to be placed in a corrosive environment remove lifting anchors to a depth of at least num inch below the concrete surface .
fill holes with epoxy adhesive before delivering piles to the job site .
the epoxy adhesive must comply with section numc .
if using pile anchor dowels anchor the dowels in cast or drilled holes in the concrete pile with neat cement paste .
the diameter of the holes must be the minimum consistent with placing the neat cement paste and dowel .
use methods for drilling holes that do not damage the concrete reinforcement or prestressing steel .
the drilled hole must be free of dust and other deleterious material when placing the neat cement paste .
neat cement paste and dowel must completely fill the drilled hole .
the dowels must be left undisturbed until the paste has hardened .
numbnum substitutions reserved numc construction numcnum general pc ps concrete piles must not be driven until at least num days after casting .
numcnum handling when handling or transporting pc ps concrete piles provide slings or other equipment to avoid bending the pile or cracking the concrete .
replace piles materially damaged in handling or during driving .
numcnum splicing precast prestressed concrete piles reserved section num piling num numd payment not used num steel sheet piling numa general section num includes specifications for installing permanent steel sheet piles .
numb materials steel sheet piles must be interlocking steel sheet complying with astm anumanumm .
the minimum section modulus per linear foot of wall must be the section modulus shown .
you may install used sheet piles if the piles are in good condition and no alterations have been made to reduce the section modulus .
interlocks must be straight true and have no gouges or kinks .
furnish piles in lengths measured from the specified tip elevation shown to the cutoff elevation .
splices in steel sheet piles must be cjp welds complying with aws dnum .
numc construction drive steel sheet piles to the specified tip elevation shown .
remove and redrive or replace piles that are materially out of line .
numd payment not used num castinplace concrete piling num general numa general section num includes general specifications for constructing cip concrete piles .
cip concrete piles include num .
cidh concrete piles num .
cidh concrete pile rock sockets num .
driven steel shells filled with concrete and reinforcement concrete must comply with section num .
bar reinforcing steel must comply with section num .
numb materials numbnum general unless otherwise shown concrete must have a minimum numday compressive strength of num psi .
prequalify the concrete under section numdnumb .
the combined aggregate gradation must comply with the numinch numinch or numinch maximum gradation specified in section numcnum .
numbnum mass concrete section numbnum applies to cip concrete piles with a diameter greater than num feet .
the quantity of cementitious material must comply with the values shown in the following table pile diameter d feet maximum quantity of cementitious material lbcu yd num d num num num d num num section num piling num cementitious material must comply with section numbnum except at least num percent of the total cementitious material must be fly ash .
for piles with a diameter greater than num feet concrete must comply with the specifications for mass concrete in section num .
numc construction except for cidh concrete piles constructed under slurry construct cip concrete piles such that the excavation methods and the concrete placement procedures provide for placing the concrete against undisturbed material in a dry or dewatered hole .
place and secure reinforcement symmetrically about the axis of the pile .
securely block the reinforcement to provide the minimum clearance shown between the reinforcing steel cage and the sides of the drilled hole or steel shell .
steel shells and dewatered drilled holes must be clean and free of water and debris before reinforcement and concrete are placed .
provide a suitable light to the engineer for inspecting the entire length of the steel shell or dewatered hole before placing reinforcement and concrete .
the methods used to place the concrete must prevent segregation .
concrete must not be allowed to fall from a height greater than num feet without the use of adjustable length pipes or tubes unless the flow of concrete is directed into the center of the hole and the concrete is not allowed to strike the reinforcement reinforcement bracing and other objects in the hole .
vibrate concrete in the upper num feet of cip concrete piles .
after placing concrete cure the temporarily exposed surfaces of the cip concrete piles under section num numh .
numd payment bar reinforcing steel is not included in the payment for cip concrete piling unless the cip concrete piling is less than num inches in diameter or for overhead sign structures standards and poles .
num castindrilledhole concrete piling numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for constructing cidh concrete piles and cidh concrete pile rock sockets .
numanum definitions dry hole num .
except for cidh concrete piles specified as end bearing a drilled hole that num .
accumulates no more than num inches of water in the bottom of the drilled hole during a period of num hour without any pumping from the hole during the hour .
num .
has no more than num inches of water in the bottom of the drilled hole immediately before placing concrete .
num .
for cidh concrete piles specified as end bearing a drilled hole free of water without the use of pumps .
numanum submittals numanuma general reserved numanumb pile installation plan submit a pile installation plan .
include complete descriptions details and supporting calculations for num .
concrete mix design certified test data and trial batch reports section num piling num num .
drilling or coring methods and equipment num .
proposed method for casing installation and removal if necessary num .
methods for placing positioning and supporting bar reinforcement num .
methods and equipment for determining num .
depth of concrete num .
theoretical volume of concrete to be placed including the effects on volume if casings are withdrawn num .
actual volume of concrete placed num .
methods and equipment for verifying the bottom of the drilled hole is clean before placing concrete num .
methods and equipment for preventing upward movement of reinforcement including the means of detecting and measuring upward movement during concrete placement operations num .
drilling sequence and concrete placement plan for concrete placed under slurry include complete descriptions details and supporting calculations in the pile installation plan for num .
concrete batching delivery and placing systems including time schedules and capacities .
time schedules must include the time required for each concrete placing operation at each pile .
num .
concrete placing rate calculations .
if requested base calculations on the initial pump pressures or static head on the concrete and losses throughout the placing system including anticipated head of slurry and concrete to be displaced .
num .
suppliers test reports on the physical and chemical properties of the slurry and any proposed slurry chemical additives including sdss .
num .
slurry testing equipment and procedures .
num .
methods of removal and disposal of excavation slurry and contaminated concrete including removal rates .
num .
methods and equipment for slurry agitating recirculating and cleaning .
numanumc inspection pipe coupler log if inspection pipes are required submit a log of the locations of inspection pipe couplers as an informational submittal upon completion of concrete placement in the hole .
numanumd concrete placement log submit the concrete placement log as an informational submittal within num business day of completion of concrete placement in the hole .
numanume coring logs and concrete cores if coring is performed under section numcnum submit coring logs and concrete cores .
numanumf testing report if you perform testing on a rejected pile submit this additional information in a report .
the report must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
allow the department num days for review and analysis of this report .
numanumg mitigation plans for each rejected pile submit a mitigation plan for repair supplementation or replacement .
the mitigation plan must num .
comply with the specifications for shop drawings .
num .
be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
this requirement is waived for either of the following conditions num .
proposed mitigation will be performed under the current departmentpublished version of adsc standard mitigation plan a basic repair without exception or modification .
num .
engineer determines that the rejected pile does not require mitigation due to structural geotechnical or corrosion concerns and you elect to repair the pile using the current departmentpublished version of adsc standard mitigation plan b grouting repair without exception or modification .
for the most recent version of the adsc standard mitigation plan go to section num piling num httpwww.dot.ca.govhqescgeotechftadscmitplan.htm pile mitigation plans must include num .
designation and location of the rejected pile .
num. review of the structural geotechnical and corrosion design requirements of the rejected pile .
num .
step by step description of the mitigation work to be performed including drawings if necessary .
num .
assessment of how the proposed mitigation work addresses the structural geotechnical and corrosion design requirements of the rejected pile .
num .
methods for preservation or restoration of existing earthen materials .
num .
list of any affected facilities .
include methods and equipment to be used for the protection of these facilities during mitigation .
num .
your name and the names of any subcontractors on each sheet .
num .
list of materials with quantity estimates for the mitigation work and a list of personnel with their qualifications who will be performing the mitigation work .
for rejected piles to be repaired include the following in the pile mitigation plan num .
assessment of the nature and size of the anomalies in the rejected pile num .
provisions for access for additional pile testing if requested for rejected piles to be replaced or supplemented include the following in the pile mitigation plan num .
proposed location and size of additional piles num .
structural details and calculations for any modification to the structure to accommodate the replacement or supplemental piles replacement piles must comply with the contract for cidh concrete piles .
numanumh mitigation report if repairs are performed submit a mitigation report as an informational submittal within num days of completion of the repair .
the report must state exactly what repair work was performed and quantify the success of the repairs relative to the submitted mitigation plan .
the mitigation report must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
the mitigation report must include your name and the names of any subcontractors on each sheet .
numanumi plastic spacer manufacturers data and sample if plastic spacers are proposed for use submit the manufacturers data and a sample of the plastic spacer .
allow num days for review .
numanum quality assurance numanuma general reserved numanumb preconstruction meeting schedule and hold a preconstruction meeting for cidh concrete pile construction num at least num business days after submitting the pile installation plan and num at least num days before the start of cidh concrete pile construction .
you must provide a meeting facility .
the meeting must include the engineer your representatives and any subcontractors involved in cidh concrete pile construction .
the purpose of this meeting is to num .
establish contacts and communication protocol between you and your representatives any subcontractors and the engineer num. review the construction process acceptance testing and anomaly mitigation of cidh concrete piles the engineer conducts the meeting .
be prepared to discuss num .
pile placement plan dry and wet section num piling num num .
acceptance testing including gammagamma logging crosshole sonic logging and coring num .
pile design data form num .
mitigation process num .
timeline and critical path activities num .
structural geotechnical and corrosion design requirements num .
future meetings if necessary for pile mitigation and pile mitigation plan review num .
safety requirements including calosha and tunnel safety orders numanumc quality control section numanumc applies if concrete is placed under slurry .
before placing concrete under slurry produce a concrete test batch and transport it to the job site under the same conditions and in the same time frame anticipated during the placement of concrete in the piles .
at the job site place the test batch concrete in an excavated hole or suitable container to allow for testing .
placing concrete under slurry is not required .
the test batch must demonstrate that the proposed mix design will achieve the minimum required slump after the specified set period .
do not vibrate or agitate the concrete during the set period .
the engineer tests the concrete for slump under california test num .
in addition to meeting the specified nominal slump the slump of the concrete must comply with the requirements shown in the following table slump requirements time required to place concretea t hours minimum set period before testingb hours slump after set period inches t num numt num t num t num num aas described in the pile installation plan bthe set period starts at the start of concrete placement .
after testing dispose of the concrete test batch .
numanumd department acceptance numanumdi general section numanumd applies to cidh concrete piles except for piles num less than num inches in diameter or num constructed in dry holes or holes dewatered without the use of temporary casing to control groundwater .
the department performs acceptance testing using gammagamma logging to test the concrete density of the pile for homogeneity .
after notification by the engineer of pile acceptance dewater the inspection pipes and cored holes and fill them with grout .
grout must comply with section numc .
fill inspection pipes and holes using grout tubes that extend to the bottom of the pipe or hole or into the grout already placed .
numanumdii gammagamma logging the department performs gammagamma logging under california test num .
separate reinforcing steel as necessary to allow the department access to the inspection pipes .
after requesting testing and providing access to the piles allow num days for the department to perform the testing and to prepare and provide the pile acceptance test report .
during testing do not perform construction activities within num feet of any gammagamma logging operation .
if the department determines a pile is anomalous under california test num part numc the pile is rejected .
numanumdiii rejected piles if a pile is rejected section num piling num num .
suspend concrete placement in the remaining piles num .
submit a revised pile installation plan num .
do not resume concrete placement until the revised pile installation plan is authorized allow num days for the department to determine whether the rejected pile requires mitigation and to provide this information to you .
day num of the num days is the numst day after access has been provided to the department to perform acceptance testing .
the department may perform additional tests to further evaluate a rejected pile .
these tests may include crosshole sonic logging and other means of inspection selected by the department .
the pile acceptance test report will indicate if the department intends to perform any additional testing and when the testing will be performed .
allow the department num additional days for a total of num days to perform these tests and to provide supplemental results .
you may perform testing on the rejected pile .
the department determines whether the rejected pile requires mitigation due to structural geotechnical or corrosion concerns .
the department considers the estimated size and location of the anomaly and potential effects on the design .
the department provides you with the conclusions of this analysis for developing the mitigation plan .
if a rejected pile does not require mitigation you may repair the pile under an authorized mitigation plan or the amount shown in the table will be deducted for each anomaly up to the maximum total deduction anomaly location anomaly deduction d num feet num d num d num entirely or partially within the upper num of the pile length num num num entirely within the lower num of the pile length num num num maximum total deduction num num num note d nominal pile diameter if a rejected pile requires mitigation or you elect to repair a rejected pile that does not require mitigation submit a mitigation plan for the repair supplementation or replacement of the rejected pile .
if the engineer determines it is not feasible to repair the rejected pile submit a mitigation plan for replacement or supplementation of the rejected pile .
if the engineer determines it is not feasible to use one of adscs standard mitigation plans to mitigate the pile schedule a meeting and meet with the engineer before submitting a nonstandard mitigation plan .
the meeting attendees must include your representatives and the engineers representatives involved in the pile mitigation .
the purpose of the meeting is to discuss the type of pile mitigation acceptable to the department .
provide the meeting facility .
the engineer conducts the meeting .
numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum concrete concrete placed under slurry must num .
have a nominal slump equal to or greater than num inches .
the nominal and maximum slump and penetration specifications in section numgnum do not apply to concrete placed under slurry .
num .
contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard and be proportioned to prevent excessive bleed water and segregation .
section num piling num in a freezethaw area the formed portion of cidh concrete piles must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
numbnum aggregate gradation for concrete placed under slurry the combined aggregate gradation must comply with the numinch maximum gradation or the numinch maximum gradation specified in section numcnum .
numbnum permanent steel casings permanent steel casings must comply with section num .
numbnum grout grout must consist of cementitious material and water and may contain an admixture if authorized .
do not exceed num gallons of water per num lb of cement .
cementitious material must comply with section numb except scms are not required .
water must comply with section numd .
if municipally supplied potable water is used the testing specified in section numd is waived .
admixtures must comply with section num except admixtures must not contain chloride ions in excess of num percent by weight .
grout used to backfill casings must comply with the following num .
aggregate must be used to extend the grout .
num .
aggregate must consist of at least num percent fine aggregate and approximately num percent pea gravel by weight .
num .
fine aggregate must comply with section numcnum .
num .
size of pea gravel must be such that num percent passes the numinch sieve at least num percent passes the numinch sieve and not more than num percent passes the no .
num sieve .
num .
grout must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
mix the grout as follows num .
add water to the mixer followed by cementitious material aggregates and any admixtures .
num .
mix the grout with mechanical mixing equipment that produces a uniform and thoroughly mixed grout .
num .
agitate the grout continuously until the grout is pumped .
num .
do not add water after initial mixing .
numbnum slurry numbnuma general reserved numbnumb mineral slurry mineral slurry must be mixed and thoroughly hydrated in slurry tanks .
sample and test slurry from the slurry tanks before placement in the drilled hole .
recirculate or continuously agitate slurry in the drilled hole .
for recirculated slurry num .
remove drill cuttings from the slurry before discharging the slurry back into the drilled hole .
num .
sample and test slurry at least every num hours after starting its use until tests show that the samples taken from the slurry tank and from near the bottom of the hole have consistent specified properties .
once consistent properties have been achieved sample slurry at least twice per shift as long as the specified properties remain consistent .
for nonrecirculated slurry num .
sample and test slurry from the drilled hole at least every num hours after starting its use .
sample the slurry at midheight and near the bottom of the hole .
section num piling num num .
recirculate slurry if tests show samples taken from midheight and near the bottom of the hole do not have consistent specified properties .
sample and test slurry before final cleaning of the bottom of the hole and again just before placing concrete .
sample the slurry at midheight and near the bottom of the hole .
do not start cleaning the bottom of the hole or placing the concrete until tests show that the samples have consistent specified properties .
mineral slurry must comply with the requirements shown in the following table mineral slurry requirementsa quality characteristic test method requirement density mud weight density api rp numbnum section num before placement in the drilled hole and during drilling pcf numb before final cleaning and immediately before placing concrete pcf numb viscosity marsh funnel and cup .
api rp numbnum section num bentonite secqt num attapulgite secqt num ph glass electrode ph meter or ph paper num sand content sand api rp numbnum section num before final cleaning and immediately before placing concrete num aslurry temperature must be at least num f when tested .
bif authorized you may use slurry in salt water .
the allowable density of slurry in salt water may be increased up to num pcf .
remove any caked slurry on the sides or bottom of hole before placing reinforcement .
if concrete is not placed immediately after placing reinforcement the reinforcement must be removed and cleaned of slurry the sides of the drilled hole must be cleaned of caked slurry and the reinforcement again placed in the hole for concrete placement .
numbnumc synthetic slurry synthetic slurry material and quality characteristic requirements are specified in the special provisions .
do not use synthetic slurries in holes drilled in primarily soft or very soft cohesive soils as determined by the engineer .
a manufacturers representative must num .
provide technical assistance for the use of their material num .
be at the job site before introduction of the synthetic slurry into the drilled hole num .
remain at the job site until released by the engineer sample and test synthetic slurries num .
when the slurry temperature is at least num degrees f. num .
at midheight and near the bottom of the hole .
num .
during drilling to verify the slurry properties .
num .
when drilling is complete but before final cleaning of the bottom of the hole .
when samples comply with the requirements shown in the tables for the slurry material selected clean the bottom of the hole of any loose or settled material .
num .
after final cleaning and before placing concrete .
section num piling num numbnumd water slurry reserved numbnum reserved numbnum spacers spacers must comply with section numd except you may use plastic spacers .
plastic spacers must num .
comply with sections num and num of the concrete reinforcing steel institutes manual of standard practice num .
have at least num percent of their gross plane area perforated to compensate for the difference in the coefficient of thermal expansion between the plastic and concrete num .
be of commercial quality numbnumbnum reserved numc construction numcnum general except for cidh concrete piles for sound walls and retaining walls you may propose to increase the diameter and revise the pile tip elevation of cidh concrete piles with a diameter less than num feet .
for cidh concrete piles for sound walls and retaining walls you may propose to increase the diameter of cidh concrete piles with a diameter less than num feet except pile tip elevations must not be revised .
numcnum drilled holes the axis of the drilled hole must not deviate from plumb more than num inches per num feet of length .
for cidh concrete piles with a pile cap the horizontal tolerance at the center of each pile at pile cutoff is the larger of num of the pile diameter or num inches .
the horizontal tolerance for the centertocenter spacing of num adjacent piles is the larger of num of the pile diameter or num inches .
during excavation do not disturb the foundation material surrounding the pile .
equipment or methods used for excavating holes must not cause quick soil conditions or cause scouring or caving of the hole .
for rock sockets equipment and drill methods must not result in softened materials on the borehole walls .
if drilling slurry is used during excavation maintain the slurry level at least num feet above the piezometric head .
after excavation has started construct the pile expeditiously to prevent deterioration of the surrounding foundation material from air slaking or from the presence of water .
remove and dispose of deteriorated foundation material including material that has softened swollen or degraded from the sides and the bottom of the hole .
just before placing reinforcement or concrete clean the bottom of the hole to remove any loose sand gravel dirt and drill cuttings .
if caving occurs or deteriorated foundation material accumulates on the bottom of the hole clean the bottom of the hole after placing reinforcement and before placing concrete in the hole .
you must verify that the bottom of the hole is clean .
remove water that has infiltrated the hole before placing concrete .
do not allow fluvial or drainage water to enter the hole .
to control caving you may enlarge portions of the hole backfill the hole with slurry cement backfill concrete or other material and redrill the hole to the diameter shown .
backfill material at enlarged piles must be chemically compatible with concrete and steel be drillable and have the necessary strength required for the conditions .
dispose of material resulting from placing concrete .
section num piling num numcnum temporary steel casings furnish temporary steel casings where shown and where necessary to control water or to prevent quick soil conditions or caving of the hole .
place temporary casings tight in the hole .
section num does not apply to temporary steel casings .
temporary casings must be num .
watertight and of sufficient strength to withstand the loads from installation removal lateral concrete pressures and earth pressures num .
noncorrugated with smooth surfaces num .
clean and free of hardened concrete remove the temporary casing during concrete placement .
in a dewatered hole maintain the concrete in the casing num at a level of at least num feet above the bottom of the casing or num at a level above the bottom of the casing adequate to prevent displacement of the concrete by material from outside the casing whichever is greater .
if slurry is not used do not withdraw the temporary casing until the concrete head in the casing is greater than the groundwater head outside of the casing .
maintain this positive concrete head during withdrawal of the casing .
you may vibrate or hammer the temporary casing to num assist in removal of the casing from the hole num prevent lifting of the reinforcement and num prevent concrete contamination .
the withdrawal of casings must not leave voids or cause contamination of the concrete with soil or other materials .
numcnum reinforcement reinforcement for cidh concrete piles with increased diameters and revised tip elevations must comply with the following num .
size and number of the reinforcing bars and hoops the percentage of bars required to extend to the pile tip and the size and pitch of spiral reinforcement must be the same as shown for the original piles .
num .
required length of the spiral reinforcement and of any reinforcing bars that do not extend to the pile tip must be at least the length that would have been required for the original specified or ordered tip elevation .
num .
diameter of the spiral or hoop reinforcement must remain the same as required for the original pile or may be increased to provide not less than the concrete cover required for the original pile .
provide positive means to ensure that the reinforcement is centered in the pile .
unless otherwise shown the bar reinforcing steel cage must have at least num inches of clear cover measured from the outside of the cage to the sides of the hole or casing .
place spacers at least num inches clear from any inspection tubes .
place plastic spacers around the circumference of the cage and at intervals along the length of the cage under the manufacturers instructions .
for a single cidh concrete pile supporting a column num .
if the pile and the column share the same reinforcing cage diameter this cage must be accurately placed as shown num .
if the pile reinforcing cage is larger than the column cage and the concrete is placed under dry conditions maintain a clear horizontal distance of at least num inches between the two cages num .
if the pile reinforcing cage is larger than the column cage and the concrete is placed under slurry maintain a clear horizontal distance of at least num inches between the two cages numcnum vertical inspection pipes if the drilled hole is dry or dewatered without the use of temporary casing to control groundwater installation of inspection pipes is not required .
section num piling num install vertical inspection pipes for acceptance testing as follows num .
inspection pipes must be schedule num pvc pipe complying with astm dnum with a nominal pipe size of num inches .
watertight pvc couplers complying with astm dnum are allowed to facilitate pipe lengths in excess of those commercially available .
log the location of the inspection pipe couplers with respect to the plane of pile cutoff .
num .
cap each inspection pipe at the bottom .
extend the pipe from num feet above the pile cutoff to the bottom of the reinforcing cage .
provide a temporary top cap or similar means to keep the pipes clean before testing .
if pile cutoff is low the ground surface or working platform extend inspection pipes to num feet above the ground surface or working platform .
num .
if any changes are made to the pile tip extend the inspection pipes to the bottom of the reinforcing cage .
num .
install inspection pipes in a straight alignment parallel to the main reinforcement and securely fastened in place to prevent misalignment during installation of the reinforcement and placing of concrete in the hole .
construct cidh concrete piles such that the relative distance of inspection pipes to vertical steel reinforcement remains constant .
num .
fill inspection pipes with water upon completion of the concrete placement to prevent debonding of the pipe .
num .
inspection pipes must be completely clean dry and unobstructed when testing providing a numinch diameter clear opening .
num .
provide safe access to the tops of the tubes .
after placing concrete and before requesting acceptance testing test each inspection pipe in the engineers presence by passing a numinchdiameter by numfootlong rigid cylinder through the length of pipe .
if an inspection pipe fails to pass the rigid cylinder num .
immediately fill the inspection pipes in the pile with water num .
core a nominal numinch diameter hole through the concrete for the entire length of the pile for each inspection pipe that does not pass the rigid cylinder num .
locate cored holes as close as possible to the inspection pipes they are replacing and no more than num inches clear from the reinforcement coring must not damage the pile reinforcement .
core holes using a double wall core barrel system with a split tube type inner barrel .
coring with a solid type inner barrel is not allowed .
coring methods and equipment must provide intact cores for the entire length of the pile .
preserve cores and identify them with the exact location the core was recovered from the pile .
the coring operation must be logged by an engineering geologist or civil engineer licensed in the state and experienced in core logging .
coring logs must comply with the departments soil and rock logging classification and presentation manual .
coring logs must include core recovery rock quality designation locations of breaks and complete descriptions of inclusions and voids encountered during coring .
the department evaluates the portion of the pile represented by the cored hole based on the submitted core logs .
if the department determines a pile is anomalous based on the coring logs the pile is rejected .
numcnum permanent steel casing installation section numanumc and the numth through numth paragraphs of section numcnum do not apply to permanent steel casings .
for permanent steel casings placed in a drilled hole num .
casings must be watertight and of sufficient strength to prevent damage and to withstand the loads from installation drilling and tooling equipment lateral concrete pressures and earth pressures .
num .
use spacers to center the casing inside the drilled hole .
you may weld spacers to the outside of the casing .
num .
fill voids in the annular space between the casing and the soil with grout .
num .
place grout from the bottom of the casing using grout tubes .
place grout continuously until all voids have been filled and the grout reaches the top of the casing .
free fall of the grout from the top to the bottom of the casing is not allowed .
section num piling num num .
pump grout into the annular space such that the grout head is maintained uniformly around the casing and no visible evidence of water or air is ejected at the top of the grout .
num .
place grout tubes along the circumference of the casing with a minimum of num grout tubes per casing .
the spacing of the grout tubes must not exceed num feet .
num .
extend grout tubes to within num foot of the bottom of the casing .
if the engineer lowers the permanent steel casing tip elevation num .
cidh concrete pile including bar reinforcing steel and inspection pipes must extend to that same elevation num .
tip elevation of the rock socket must extend to maintain the length of the rock socket into rock as shown the additional work involved in lowering the permanent steel casing tip elevation is change order work .
numcnum construction joint section numcnum applies to cidh concrete piles if a construction joint is shown .
if a permanent steel casing is not shown you must furnish and install a permanent casing .
the permanent casing must num .
be watertight and of sufficient strength to prevent damage and to withstand the loads from installation procedures drilling and tooling equipment lateral concrete pressures and earth pressures .
num .
extend at least num feet below the construction joint .
if placing casing into rock the casing must extend at least num feet below the construction joint .
num .
not extend above the top of the drilled hole or final grade whichever is lower .
num .
not increase the diameter of the cidh concrete pile more than num feet .
num .
be installed by impact or vibratory hammers oscillators rotators or by placing in a drilled hole .
casings placed in a drilled hole must comply with section numcnum .
section numanumc and the numth through numth paragraphs of section numcnum do not apply to permanent casings specified in section numcnum .
numcnum placing concrete section numdnum does not apply to cidh concrete piles .
you may construct cidh concrete piles num inches in diameter or larger by excavating and depositing concrete under slurry .
form finish and cure portions of cidh concrete piles shown to be formed under section num .
numcnum placing concrete under slurry section numcnum applies if placing concrete under slurry .
if drill cuttings settle out of the slurry clean the bottom of the drilled hole after placing reinforcement and before placing concrete in the drilled hole .
verify that the bottom of the drilled hole is clean .
carefully place concrete in a compact monolithic mass using a method that prevents washing of the concrete .
vibrating of concrete is not required .
placing concrete must be a continuous operation lasting no longer than the time specified for each concrete placing operation at each pile in your pile installation plan .
the delivery tube system must consist of one of the following num .
tremie tube or tubes each of which is at least num inches in diameter fed by num or more concrete pumps num .
num or more concrete pump discharge tubes each fed by a single concrete pump the delivery tube system must consist of watertight tubes with sufficient rigidity to keep the tube ends always in the mass of concrete placed .
if only num delivery tube is used to place the concrete place the tube near the center of the hole .
multiple tubes must be uniformly spaced in the hole .
section num piling num internal bracing for the steel reinforcing cage must accommodate the delivery tube system .
do not use tremies for piles without space for a numinchdiameter tube .
during concrete placement provide a fully operational standby concrete pump at the job site that is adequate to complete the work in the time specified in the pile installation plan .
do not allow concrete to fall into the slurry during concrete placing operations .
cap the delivery tube with a watertight cap or plug the tube above the slurry level with a goodquality tightfitting moving plug that expels the slurry from the tube as the tube is charged with concrete .
the cap or plug must be designed to release as the tube is charged .
extend the pump discharge or tremie tube to the bottom of the hole before charging the tube with concrete .
after charging the tube with concrete induce the flow of concrete through the tube by slightly raising the discharge end .
during concrete placement num .
embed the tip of the delivery tube within num inches of the bottom of the hole until num feet of concrete has been placed .
maintain the embedment of the tip at least num feet below the top surface of the concrete .
num .
do not rapidly raise or lower the delivery tube .
num .
maintain the slurry level at least num feet above the piezometric head .
if the seal is lost or the delivery tube becomes plugged and must be removed num .
withdraw and clean the tube num .
cap the tip of the tube to prevent slurry from entering num .
restart the operation by pushing the capped tube num feet into the concrete and then reinitiating the flow of concrete maintain a log of concrete placement for each drilled hole .
the log must num .
show the pile location tip elevation dates of excavation and concrete placement total quantity of concrete placed length and tip elevation of any casing and details of any hole stabilization method and materials used .
num .
include an num by num inch graph of concrete placed versus depth of hole filled as follows num .
label the graph with the pile location tip elevation cutoff elevation and the dates of excavation and concrete placement .
num .
plot the graph continuously throughout concrete placement .
plot the depth of drilled hole filled vertically with the pile tip at the bottom and the quantity of concrete placed horizontally .
num .
take readings at each num feet of pile depth and indicate the time of the reading on the graph .
if a temporary casing is used maintain concrete placed under slurry at a level at least num feet above the bottom of the casing .
the withdrawal of the casing must not cause contamination of the concrete with slurry .
the equivalent hydrostatic pressure inside the casing must be greater than the hydrostatic pressure on the outside of the casing .
dispose of material resulting from using slurry .
numd payment not used num driven steel shells filled with concrete and reinforcement numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for constructing cip concrete piles consisting of driven steel shells filled with concrete and reinforcement .
furnish piling includes section num piling num num .
furnishing steel shells at the job site num .
furnishing concrete num .
furnishing reinforcement for piles with a diameter of less than num inches num .
splicing steel shells driving piles includes num .
driving and cutting off the steel shells at the elevations shown num .
furnishing special driving tips or heavier sections of steel shells num .
drilling holes or predrilling holes through embankments num .
cleaning out and disposing of material from openended steel shells num .
placing seal course concrete in openended steel shells num .
dewatering openended steel shells num .
placing reinforcement and concrete num .
disposing of material resulting from drilling holes predrilling holes or cleaning out openended steel shells numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit a cleanout method for openended steel shells as an informational submittal .
numanum quality assurance after the steel shell is driven and before placing reinforcement and concrete the engineer examines the steel shell for collapse or a reduced diameter at any point .
the engineer rejects any steel shell that is improperly driven broken or shows partial collapse to an extent as to materially decrease its nominal resistance .
numb materials steel shells must comply with the specifications for steel pipe piles in section num .
steel shells must be sufficiently watertight to exclude water during concrete placement .
numc construction numcnum general drive steel shells under section num .
remove and replace rejected steel shells or drive a new shell adjacent to the rejected shell .
fill rejected shells that can not be removed with concrete .
if a new shell is driven to replace a rejected shell enlarge the footing .
if the engineer revises the pile tip elevation the work involved in furnishing splicing and driving the additional length of pile is change order work .
numcnum openended steel shells section numcnum applies to openended steel shells .
internal plates must not be used .
after driving clean out the steel shell as follows num .
do not disturb the foundation material surrounding the pile when cleaning out the steel shell .
num .
equipment or methods used must not cause quick soil conditions or cause scouring or caving around or below the pile .
num .
steel shells must be free of soil rock or other material deleterious to the bond between concrete and steel before placing reinforcement and concrete .
num .
bottom num feet of the pile must not be cleaned out .
section num piling num after the steel shell has been cleaned out construct the pile expeditiously to prevent deterioration of the surrounding foundation material from the presence of water .
remove deteriorated foundation materials from the bottom of the steel shell including materials that have softened swollen or degraded .
dispose of material resulting from cleaning out the steel shells .
if conditions render it impossible or inadvisable in the engineers opinion to dewater the steel shells before placing reinforcement and concrete seal the bottom of the steel shell under section numdnum .
after sealing dewater and clean out the steel shell .
numcnum closeended steel shells reserved .
numd payment driven steel shells filled with concrete and reinforcement are paid for as furnish piling and drive pile .
num steel soldier piling num general section num includes specifications for drilling holes and installing steel soldier piles in the holes .
steel soldier piles must comply with section num .
num materials concrete anchors must comply with the specifications for studs in clause num of aws dnum .
num construction numa general clean and prepare piles in heat affected areas before splicing steel piles or welding concrete anchors .
numb drilled holes drill holes for steel soldier piles into natural foundation material .
drilled holes must be accurately located straight and true .
plumb and align the pile before placing concrete backfill and lean concrete backfill .
the pile must be at least num inch clear of the sides of the hole for the full length of the hole to be filled with concrete backfill and lean concrete backfill .
ream or enlarge holes that do not provide the clearance around steel piles .
furnish and place temporary casings or tremie seals where necessary to control water or to prevent caving of the hole .
before placing the steel soldier pile remove loose materials existing at the bottom of the hole after drilling operations have been completed .
do not allow surface water to enter the hole .
remove all water in the hole before placing concrete .
if temporary casings are used they must comply with section numcnum .
maintain alignment of the pile in the hole while placing backfill material .
num payment not used num micropiling reserved num alternative piling reserved num reserved num num prestressing concrete num general num general numa summary section num includes specifications for prestressing concrete .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general submit test samples to mets .
notify the engineer of each submittal .
include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
numcnum certifications submit the certifications specified in the following to mets num .
astm anumanumm for uncoated sevenwire steel strand num .
astm anumanumm for uncoated hssteel bars num .
astm anumanumm for filled epoxycoated sevenwire prestressing steel strand include with each certification num .
representative loadelongation curve for each size and grade of strand and for each size of bar num .
copy of the qc tests performed by the manufacturer numcnum shop drawings submit shop drawings for the proposed prestressing system to osd documents unit .
notify the engineer of the submittal .
include in the notification the date and list of contents of the submittal .
for initial review submit num .
num copies for railroad bridges unless the project includes a bnsf railway underpass num .
num copies for railroad bridges if the project includes a bnsf railway underpass num .
num copies for structures other than railroad bridges after initial review submit from num to num copies to osd documents unit if requested .
the shop drawings must show complete details and substantiating calculations of the method and materials proposed for use in the prestressing activities including the addition or rearrangement of reinforcing steel .
the details must outline the method and sequence of stressing and include num .
complete specifications and details of the prestressing steel and anchorage system .
num .
jacking stresses .
num .
type of ducts .
num .
proposed arrangement of the prestressing steel in the members .
num .
exact location of anchorage system components ducts and other related elements .
show duct location data including elevations at least every numth point of the span for each span .
num .
elongation calculations .
num .
all other data pertaining to the prestressing .
each shop drawing submittal must consist of drawings for a single bridge or portion of a bridge .
for multi frame bridges each frame must have a separate shop drawing submittal .
allow the following time for review of the shop drawings num .
num days for railroad bridges num .
num days for structures other than railroad bridges section num prestressing concrete num for railroad bridges comply with the requirements of the railroad company involved .
include a grouting plan with your shop drawing submittal .
if you propose an alternative prestressing system for a cip ps box girder bridge submit shop drawings including all details and checked calculations .
numcnum alternative prestressing systems for castinplace prestressed box girder bridges the details shown for cip ps box girder bridges are based on a bonded fulllength draped tendon prestressing system.you may submit a vecp for an alternative prestressing system using bonded partial length tendons .
the proposed system and associated details must comply with the following requirements num .
moment and shear resistances must be at least equal to those used for the design of the structure shown .
num .
concrete strength must be at least that shown .
num .
not less than num percent of the total prestressing force at any section must be provided by fulllength draped tendons .
num .
anchorage blocks for partiallength tendons must be located such that the blocks will not interfere with the placement of the utility facilities shown or any future utilities to be placed through openings shown .
num .
any temporary prestressing tendons must be detensioned and the temporary ducts must be filled with grout before completion of the work .
temporary tendons must be either removed or fully encased in grout before completion of the work .
at your request the department furnishes you with the demand moments and shears used in the design shown .
numcnum test samples submit test samples for the materials to be used in the work as shown in the following table material number of test samples test sample description uncoated stranda num numfootlong sample from each reel or pack epoxycoated strand uncoated stranda num numfootlong sample of uncoated strand removed from each reel or pack before coating coated stranda num numfootlong sample from each reel or pack of coated strand epoxy powder num numounce sample from each batchb epoxy patching material num numounce sample from each batchb bara num numfootlong sample of each size for each heat bar couplera num coupler from each lot of couplers with two numfootlong barsc anchorage assembliesa num anchorage assembly from each lot of anchorage assemblies arandomly selected by the engineer .
bpackaged in an airtight container and identified with the manufacturers name and batch number .
csubmit coupler and bar samples assembled .
the bars must be from the same bar heats to be used in the work .
sampling must comply with the requirements of the astm to be used for testing the sample .
with each bar or strand test sample include a certificate from the manufacturer stating the minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of each sample .
identify each test sample by location and contract number with weatherproof markings .
allow num days for the departments testing .
section num prestressing concrete num obtain the departments authorization of the material before incorporating it into the work .
numcnum grouting plan the grouting plan must include num .
detailed grouting procedures num .
type quantity and brand of materials to be used num .
type of equipment to be used and provisions for backup equipment num .
types and locations of grout inlets outlets and vents num .
methods to clean ducts before grouting num .
methods to control the rate of flow within ducts num .
theoretical grout volume calculations for each duct num .
duct repair procedures for an air pressure test failure num .
mixing and pumping procedures num .
direction of grouting num .
sequence of use of inlets and outlets num .
procedure for handling blockages num .
forms for recording grouting information num .
procedure for secondary grouting num .
names of people who will perform grouting activities and their relevant experience and certifications numcnum daily grouting report submit a daily grouting report for each day grouting is performed .
submit the report within num business days after grouting .
the report must be signed by the technician supervising the grouting activity .
the report must include num .
identification of each tendon num .
date the grouting occurred num .
time the grouting started and ended num .
date of placing the prestressing steel in each duct num .
date of stressing num .
type of grout used num .
injection end and applied grouting pressure num .
actual and theoretical quantities of grout used to fill each duct num .
ratio of actual to theoretical grout quantity num .
records of air grout and structure surface temperatures during grouting num .
summary of tests performed and the results num .
names of personnel performing the grouting activity num .
summary of problems encountered and corrective actions taken num .
summary of void investigation and repairs made numd quality assurance numdnum general for accurate identification assign an individual lot number and tag each lot of the following items to be shipped to the job site or casting site num .
bars of each size from each heat num .
strand from each reel or pack num .
anchorage assemblies num .
bar couplers the department rejects any unidentified prestressing steel anchorage assemblies or bar couplers received at the job site or casting site .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved section num prestressing concrete num numdnumb equipment and calibration equip each hydraulic jack used to tension prestressing steel with num pressure gauges or num pressure gauge and a load cell .
each jack body must be permanently marked with the ram area .
each pressure gauge must be fully functional and have an accurate reading clearly visible dial or display .
the dial must be at least num inches in diameter and graduated in num psi increments or less .
each load cell must be calibrated and have an indicator that can be used to determine the force in the prestressing steel .
the range of each load cell must be such that the lower num percent of the manufacturers rated capacity is not used in determining the jacking force .
each jack and its gauges must be calibrated as a unit .
each jack used to tension prestressing steel permanently anchored at num percent or more of its specified minimum ultimate tensile strength must be calibrated by mets within num year of use and after each repair .
you must num .
schedule the calibration of the jacking equipment with mets num .
mechanically calibrate the gauges with a dead weight tester or other authorized means before calibration of the jacking equipment by mets num .
verify that the jack and supporting systems are complete with proper components and are in good operating condition num .
provide labor equipment and material to num install and support the jacking and calibration equipment and num remove the equipment after the calibration is complete num .
plot the calibration results each jack used to tension prestressing steel permanently anchored at less than num percent of its specified minimum ultimate tensile strength must be calibrated by an authorized laboratory within num days of use and after each repair .
numdnumc pressure testing ducts for posttensioned concrete bridges pressure test each duct with compressed air after stressing .
to pressure test the ducts num .
seal all inlets outlets and grout caps .
num .
open all inlets and outlets on adjacent ducts .
num .
attach an air compressor to an inlet at num end of the duct .
the attachment must include a valve that separates the duct from the air source .
num .
attach a pressure gauge to the inlet at the end of the duct .
num .
pressurize the duct to num psi .
num .
lockoff the air source .
num .
record the pressure loss after num minute .
num .
repair the leaks with authorized methods and retest if a pressure loss exceeds num psi .
compressed air used to clear and test the ducts must be clean dry and free from oil or contaminants .
numdnumd duct demonstrations for posttensioned members before placing forms for deck slabs of box girder bridges demonstrate that any prestressing steel placed in the ducts is free and unbonded .
if no prestressing steel is in the ducts demonstrate that the ducts are unobstructed .
if prestressing steel is installed after the concrete is placed demonstrate that the ducts are free of water and debris immediately before installing the steel .
before posttensioning any member demonstrate that the prestressing steel is free and unbonded in the duct .
demonstrations must be performed in the presence of the engineer .
section num prestressing concrete num numdnume void investigation in the presence of the engineer investigate the ducts for voids between num and num hours after grouting .
as a minimum inspect the inlet and outlet ports at the anchorages and at high points in the tendons for voids after removal of the inlet and outlet pipes .
completely fill any voids found with secondary grout .
numdnumf personnel qualifications perform posttensioning field activities including grouting under the direct supervision of a technician certified as a level num bonded pt field specialist through the posttensioning institute .
grouting activities may be performed under the direct supervision of a technician certified as a grouting technician through the american segmental bridge institute .
perform vacuum grouting under the direct supervision of a person who has been trained and has experience in the use of vacuum grouting equipment and procedures .
numdnum department acceptance the department tests the prestressing steel test samples for compliance with section numb .
the department tests the efflux time of grout under california test num .
the department may verify the prestressing force using the departments load cells .
the department determines the reduction of area of each test sample bar with the deformations removed .
the deformations are removed by machining the bar no more than necessary to remove the deformations over a length of num inches .
if couplers are used to extend bars the department rejects the heat of bars and lot of couplers represented by the assembled unit test sample if the sample does not have a tensile strength of at least the manufacturers minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the bars .
prestressing steel that sustained physical damage is rejected .
prestressing steel is rejected if surface rust either num can not be removed by handcleaning with a fine steel wool pad or num leaves pits visible to the unaided eye after handcleaning .
if nonepoxycoated prestressing steel is installed in the ducts of posttensioned members after completion of concrete curing and if tensioning and grouting are completed within num days after the installation then num rust that may form during this period is not cause for rejection of the steel and num the use of a corrosion inhibitor in the duct is not required after installation .
num materials numa general posttensioning prestressing systems must be on the authorized material list for posttensioning systems .
organic zincrich primer must be on the authorized material list for organic zinc rich primer .
numb prestressing steel uncoated strand must comply with astm anumanumm .
epoxycoated strand must comply with astm anumanumm grit impregnated coating including annex anum .
bars must comply with astm anumanumm type ii including all supplementary requirements except the maximum weight requirements do not apply .
the reduction of area of bars with deformations removed must be at least num percent .
if couplers are used to extend bars num .
assembled units must have a tensile strength of at least the manufacturers minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the bars num .
location of couplers in the member must be authorized section num prestressing concrete num protect the prestressing steel against physical damage and rust or other results of corrosion at all times from manufacture to grouting or encasing in concrete .
package the prestressing steel in containers or shipping forms that protect the steel against physical damage and corrosion during shipping and storage .
except for epoxycoated strand a corrosion inhibitor that prevents rust or other results of corrosion must be num placed in the container or shipping form num incorporated in a corrosioninhibitorcarriertype packaging material or num applied directly to the steel if authorized .
corrosion inhibitors must not have a deleterious effect on the steel concrete or bond strength of the steel to concrete .
clearly mark each shipping container or form with num .
statement that the package contains prestressing steel num .
type of corrosion inhibitor used num .
date packaged immediately replace or restore any damaged container or shipping form to its original condition .
do not store epoxycoated strand within num feet of ocean or tidal water for more than num days .
patching material for epoxycoated strand must be num .
furnished by the manufacturer of the epoxy powder num .
applied under the manufacturers instructions num .
compatible with the original epoxy powder material num .
inert in concrete numc grout grout must consist of cement and water and may contain an admixture if authorized .
cement must comply with section numbnum .
water must comply with section numd .
admixtures must comply with section nume except admixtures must not contain chloride ions in excess of num percent by weight .
the efflux time of grout immediately after mixing must be at least num seconds .
determine the efflux time under california test num .
secondary grout must num .
comply with astm cnum num .
not have a deleterious effect on the steel concrete or bond strength of the steel to the concrete numd ducts ducts for prestressing steel must num .
be galvanized rigid ferrous metal .
num .
be fabricated with either welded or interlocked seams except galvanizing of the welded seams is not required .
num .
be mortar tight .
num .
have sufficient strength to maintain their correct alignment during placing of concrete .
num .
have positive metallic connections at joints between sections that do not result in angle changes at the joints .
num .
have waterproof tape at the connections .
num .
have bends that are not crimped or flattened .
num .
have ferrous metal or polyolefin transition couplings connecting the ducts to anchorage system components .
ferrous metal transition couplings need not be galvanized .
num .
have an inside crosssectional area of at least num times the net area of the prestressing steel for multistrand tendons .
section num prestressing concrete num num .
have an inside diameter of at least num inch larger than the diameter of the bar .
num .
have an outside diameter not exceeding num percent of the girder web width .
furnish all ducts or anchorage assemblies with pipes or other suitable connections for the injection of grout after prestressing .
nume vents vent all ducts having a vertical duct profile change of num inches or more .
vents must num .
be at least numinchdiameter standard pipe or suitable plastic pipe .
num .
be connected to ducts using metallic or plastic structural fasteners .
plastic components must not react with the concrete or enhance corrosion of the prestressing steel and be free from water soluble chlorides .
num .
be mortar tight and taped as necessary .
num .
provide a means for injection of grout through the vents and for sealing the vents .
numf permanent grout caps permanent grout caps for anchorage systems of posttensioned tendons must num .
be glassfiberreinforced plastic with antioxidant additives .
the environmental stresscracking failure time must be at least num hours under astm dnum condition c. num .
completely cover and seal the wedge plate or anchorage head and all exposed metal parts of the anchorage against the bearing plate using neoprene oring seals .
num .
have a grout vent at the top of the cap .
num .
be bolted to the anchorage with stainless steel fasteners complying with astm fnum .
all fastener components must be alloy num .
num .
be pressure rated at or above num psi .
numg debonding sheathing sheathing for debonding prestressing strand must num .
be split or unsplit flexible polymer plastic tubing num .
have a minimum wall thickness of num inch num .
have an inside diameter exceeding the maximum outside diameter of the strand by num to num inch split sheathing must overlap at least num inch .
waterproofing tape used to seal the ends of the sheathing must be flexible adhesive tape .
the sheathing and waterproof tape must not react with the concrete coating or steel .
numh anchorage system the anchorage system for posttensioning must num .
be capable of holding the prestressing steel at a force producing a stress of at least num percent of the specified ultimate tensile strength of the steel num .
permanently secure the ends of the prestressing steel num .
be equipped with permanent grout caps num construction numa general numanum general if authorized you may num .
apply a portion of the total prestressing force to a pc member before the member has obtained the concrete strength shown num .
move the member after applying the portion of prestressing force section num prestressing concrete num except for epoxycoated strand prestressing steel installed in members before placing and curing of the concrete must be continuously protected against rust or other results of corrosion until grouted .
protect the steel by using a corrosion inhibitor placed in the ducts or applied to the steel in the duct .
after final fabrication of the strand do not perform any electric welding on the prestressing steel .
if electric welding is performed on or near members containing prestressing steel attach the welding ground directly to the steel being welded .
numanum epoxycoated strand cover epoxycoated strand with an opaque polyethylene sheeting or other suitable protective material to protect the strand from exposure to sunlight salt spray and weather .
for stacked coils drape the protective covering around the perimeter of the stack .
the covering must be adequately secured and allow for air circulation around the strand to prevent condensation under the covering .
cut epoxycoated strand using an abrasive saw .
patch all visible damage to the epoxy coating caused by shipping job site or casting site handling installation or cutting of ends under astm anumanumm .
numanum ducts accurately place prestressing ducts .
securely fasten the ducts in place to prevent movement of the ducts during concrete placement .
after installation cover the duct ends and vents to prevent water or debris from entering .
support ducts vertically and horizontally during concrete placement at a maximum spacing of num feet .
if prestressing strand is installed using the pushthrough method use guide caps at the front end of each strand to protect the duct from damage .
numanum vents place vents at the following locations num .
anchorage areas at both ends of the tendon num .
each high point num .
num feet upstream and downstream of each crest of a high point num .
each change in the cross section of duct numb prestressing numbnum general tension the prestressing steel using hydraulic jacks .
the force in the prestressing steel must be the value shown in the shop drawings .
after seating the maximum tensile stress in the prestressing steel must not exceed num percent of the minimum ultimate tensile strength shown .
numbnum posttensioned members numbnuma general if requested for verification of the force in the prestressing steel furnish the resources necessary to install and support the departments testing equipment at the prestressing steel location and to remove the equipment after the testing is complete .
conduct the tensioning process such that the force being applied and the elongation of the prestressing steel can be measured at all times .
the maximum temporary tensile stress in the prestressing steel of posttensioned members must not exceed num percent of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
if steam curing is used for pc members do not install prestressing steel for posttensioning until the steam curing is completed .
section num prestressing concrete num do not tension the prestressing steel of posttensioned members until num at least num days after the last concrete has been placed in the member and num the concrete has attained the compressive strength described .
distribute the prestressing force of posttensioned bridge girders with an approximately equal quantity in each girder and place the force symmetrically about the centerline of the structure .
in slabs distribute the prestressing force uniformly across the slab .
sequence the stressing of posttensioned bridge girders such that no more than num of the prestressing force in any girder is applied before an equal force is applied in the adjacent girders .
the maximum temporary force variation between girders must not exceed the prestressing force of the largest tendon used in all girders .
do not apply an eccentric force about the centerline of the structure that exceeds num of the total prestressing force at any time during the prestressing .
numbnumb losses reserved numbnumc anchorages and distribution the ends of posttensioned prestressing steel must be secured with a permanent type anchoring system .
you may omit steel distribution plates or assemblies if you use an anchorage device of a type that is sufficiently large and that is used in conjunction with a steel grillage embedded in the concrete that effectively distributes the compressive stresses to the concrete .
if loop tendon anchorages are used enclose the anchorages in ducts for their entire length .
where the end of a posttensioned assembly is not to be covered by concrete recess the anchorage system such that the ends of the prestressing steel and all parts of the anchorage system are at least num inches inside of the end surface of the members .
after posttensioning fill the recesses with concrete and finish flush .
the concrete used to fill the recess must be the same as that used for the structure .
the load from the anchorage system must be effectively distributed to the concrete such that num .
concrete bearing stress directly underneath the plate or assembly does not exceed num psi num .
when the prestressing steel is tensioned to num percent of its specified ultimate tensile strength num .
bending stress in the plate material or assembly material does not exceed the yield point of the material num .
no visible distortion is evident in the anchorage plate numbnumd bonding and grouting numbnumdi general bond the posttensioned prestressing steel to the concrete by completely filling the entire void space between the duct and the prestressing steel with grout .
ducts vents and grout caps must be clean and free from water and deleterious materials that would impair bonding of the grout or interfere with grouting procedures .
compressed air used for cleaning must be clean dry and free from oil or contaminants .
prevent the leakage of grout through the anchorage assembly by positive mechanical means .
before starting daily grouting activities drain the pump system to remove any water from the piping system .
break down and thoroughly clean the pump and piping system after each grouting session .
after completing duct grouting activities num .
abrasive blast clean and expose the aggregate of concrete surfaces where concrete is to be placed to cover and encase the anchorage assemblies num .
remove the ends of vents num inch below the roadway surface section num prestressing concrete num numbnumdii grouting equipment grouting equipment must be num .
capable of grouting at a pressure of at least num psi num .
equipped with a pressure gauge having a fullscale reading of not more than num psi num .
able to continuously grout the longest tendon on the project in less than num minutes grout must pass through a screen with clear openings of num inch or less before entering the pump .
fit grout injection pipes ejection pipes and vents with positive mechanical shutoff valves capable of withstanding the pumping pressures .
if authorized you may substitute mechanical valves with suitable alternatives after demonstrating their effectiveness .
provide a standby grout mixer and pump .
numbnumdiii mixing and proportioning proportion solids by weight to an accuracy of num percent .
proportion liquids by weight or volume to an accuracy of num percent .
mix the grout as follows num .
add water to the mixer followed by the other ingredients .
num .
mix the grout with mechanical mixing equipment that produces a uniform and thoroughly mixed grout without an excessive temperature increase or loss of properties of the mixture .
num .
do not exceed num gal of water per num lb of cement or the quantity of water in the manufacturers instructions whichever is less .
num .
agitate the grout continuously until the grout is pumped .
do not add water after the initial mixing .
numbnumdiv placing pump grout into the duct within num minutes of the numst addition of the mix components .
inject grout from the lowest point of the duct in an uphill direction in one continuous activity maintaining a oneway flow of the grout .
you may inject from the lowest anchorage if complete filling is ensured .
before injecting grout open all vents .
pump the grout at a rate of num to num feet of duct per minute .
conduct grouting at a pressure range of num to num psi measured at the grout inlet .
do not exceed maximum pumping pressure of num psi at the grout inlet .
as grout is injected continuously discharge grout from the vent to be closed .
do not close any vent until free water visible slugs of grout and entrapped air have been ejected and the consistency of the grout flowing from the vent is equivalent to the injected grout .
close the vents in sequence in the direction of flow starting with the closest vent .
before closing the final vent at the grout cap discharge at least num gal of grout into a clean receptacle .
after closing all vents bleed all high point vents .
lock a pressure of num psi into the duct by closing the grout inlet valve .
numbnumdv weather conditions if hot weather conditions will contribute to quick stiffening of the grout cool the grout by authorized methods as necessary to prevent blockages during pumping activities .
if freezing weather conditions are anticipated during and after the placement of grout provide adequate means to protect the grout in the ducts from damage by freezing .
numbnumdvi curing during grouting and for a period of num hours after grouting eliminate vibration from contractorcontrolled sources within num feet of the frame in which grouting is taking place including from moving vehicles section num prestressing concrete num jackhammers large compressors or generators pile driving activities soil compaction and falsework removal .
do not vary loads on the span .
for pc concrete members do not move or disturb the members after grouting for num hours .
if the ambient temperature drops below num degrees f do not move or disturb the members for num hours .
do not remove or open valves until grout has set and cured for at least num hours .
numbnumdvii grout storage store grout in a dry environment .
numbnumdviii blockages if the grouting pressure reaches num psi close the inlet and pump the grout at the adjacent vent that has just been or is ready to be closed as long as a oneway flow is maintained .
do not pump grout into a succeeding outlet from which grout has not yet flowed .
when complete grouting of the tendon can not be achieved by the steps specified stop the grouting .
numbnumdix secondary grouting perform secondary grouting by vacuum grouting .
the vacuumgrouting process must be able to determine the size of the void and measure the volume of grout filling the void .
vacuum grouting equipment must consist of num .
volumeter for the measurement of void volume num .
vacuum pump with a capacity of at least num cfm and equipped with a flow meter capable of measuring the amount of grout being injected numbnumdx vertical tendon grouting provide a standpipe at the upper end of the tendon to collect bleed water and allow it to be removed from the grout .
the standpipe must be large enough to prevent the grout elevation from dropping below the highest point of the upper anchorage device .
if the grout level drops to the highest point of the upper anchorage device immediately add grout to the standpipe .
remove the standpipe after the grout has hardened .
for vertical tendons in excess of num feet high or if grouting pressure exceeds num psi inject grout at a higher vent from which grout has already flowed to maintain oneway flow .
numbnum pretensioned members numbnuma general anchor the prestressing steel at stresses that will result in the ultimate retention of jacking forces at least equal to those shown .
if prestressing steel for pretensioning is placed in the stressing bed and is to be exposed to the elements for more than num hours before encasing in concrete protect the steel from contamination and corrosion using authorized measures .
do not cut or release prestressing steel in pretensioned members until the concrete in the member has attained a compressive strength of at least the value shown or num psi whichever is greater .
if epoxy coated strand is used do not cut or release the steel until the temperature of the concrete surrounding the strand is less than num degrees f and falling .
if requested check individuallytensioned strands using authorized methods and equipment for loss of prestress not more than num hours before placing concrete for the members .
strands showing a loss of prestress of more than num percent must be retensioned to the original computed jacking force .
if prestressing steel in pretensioned members is tensioned at a temperature appreciably lower than the estimated temperature of the concrete and the prestressing steel at the time of initial set of the concrete the calculated elongation of the prestressing steel must be increased to compensate for the loss in stress .
section num prestressing concrete num the maximum temporary tensile stress in the prestressing steel of pretensioned members must not exceed num percent of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
cut and release the prestressing steel in pretensioned members in such an order that lateral eccentricity of the prestress force is a minimum .
cut off pretensioned prestressing steel flush with the end of the member .
after cutting the steel clean and paint the exposed ends of the steel and a numinch strip of adjoining concrete as follows num .
wire brush or abrasive blast clean to remove all dirt and residue on the metal and concrete surfaces .
num .
immediately after cleaning apply num coat of organic zincrich primer to the surfaces except apply num coats to surfaces that will not be covered by concrete or mortar .
do not use aerosol cans .
mix the paint thoroughly when applying and work into any voids in the prestressing steel .
numbnumb debonding prestressing strands where debond prestressing strands are shown debond the strands by encasing the strands in plastic sheathing along the entire length shown and sealing the ends of the sheathing with waterproof tape .
distribute the debonded strands symmetrically about the vertical centerline of the girder .
the debonded lengths of pairs of strands must be equal .
do not end debonding at any one cross section of the member for more than num percent of the debonded strands or num strands whichever is greater .
thoroughly seal the ends with waterproof tape to prevent the intrusion of water or cement paste before placing the concrete .
num payment not used num num concrete structures num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for constructing concrete structures .
earthwork for the following concrete structures must comply with section num num .
sound wall footings num .
sound wall pile caps num .
culverts num .
barrier slabs num .
junction structures num .
minor structures num .
pipe culvert headwalls endwalls and wingwalls for a pipe with a diameter of num feet or greater falsework must comply with section num .
joints must comply with section num .
elastomeric bearing pads must comply with section num .
reinforcement for the following concrete structures must comply with section num num .
sound wall footings num .
sound wall pile caps num .
barrier slabs num .
junction structures num .
minor structures num .
pc concrete members you may use rsc for a concrete structure only where the specifications allow the use of rsc .
numb definitions form panel continuous section of form facing material unbroken by joint marks against which concrete is placed .
opening age minimum age at which an element constructed with rsc may be opened to traffic .
pier column extension of a column or pier into bedrock material .
numc submittals numcnum general if requested submit concrete form design and materials data for each forming system .
submit a deck placement work plan for concrete bridge decks .
if requested submit shop drawings for pc members proposed by you .
include construction joint details foundation bedding and other requested information .
numcnum permanent steel deck forms submit num copies of shop drawings for permanent steel deck forms .
include in the submittal num .
layout plan num .
grade of steel num physical and section properties of members num .
method of support and grade adjustment num .
method for accommodating skew num .
methods of sealing against grout leaks section num concrete structures num numcnum bonding materials except for a bonding material previously authorized by the department submit at least a numpound test sample to mets .
allow num days for testing .
obtain the departments authorization of the bonding material before incorporating it into the work .
for a bonding material previously authorized by the department submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of the material .
numcnum rapid strength concrete for rsc submit the mix design at least num days before use .
include in the submittal num .
compressive strength test results for prequalification of rsc at age of break at num days and at num days num .
opening age in hours num .
proposed aggregate gradation num .
mix proportions of cementitious material aggregate and water num .
types and quantities of chemical admixtures if used num .
range of ambient temperatures over which the mix design will achieve the required minimum compressive strength num .
source of materials numcnum chemical adhesives submit a certificate of compliance for chemical adhesive stating compliance with icbo ac num and caltrans augmentationrevisions to icbo ac num .
revisions to icbo ac num are on the authorized material list for chemical adhesivecartridge epoxies .
submit chemical adhesive manufacturers installation procedures and warnings or precautions as an informational submittal at least num business days before starting work .
submit num test sample of each chemical adhesive system to be used from each lot to mets for testing at least num days before use .
the test sample must consist of num unit of chemical adhesive num mixing nozzle and num retaining nut .
a lot for chemical adhesives is num units or fraction thereof of the same brand and product name .
each test sample must be clearly marked with the following num .
manufacturers name and system model number num .
date of manufacture num .
lot number num .
shelf life or expiration date num .
current icbo evaluation report number numcnum colored concrete submit technical data manufacturers specifications and a work plan for mixing delivery placement finishing and curing of colored concrete .
numcnum hinge tiedowns reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb rapid strength concrete prequalify rsc before use .
prequalification of an rsc mix design includes determining the opening age and attaining the minimum specified numday compressive strength .
section num concrete structures num prequalify rsc under section numdnumb .
determine the opening age of the rsc mix design as follows num .
fabricate at least num test cylinders to be used to determine the age of break .
num .
immediately after fabrication of the num test cylinders store the cylinders in a temperature medium of num num degrees f until the cylinders are tested .
num .
determine the age of break to attain an average strength of the num test cylinders .
num .
opening age is the age of break plus num hour .
the average strength of the num test cylinders must be at least num psi .
not more than num test cylinders may have a strength of less than num psi .
if compressive strength tests performed in the field show that the concrete has attained the specified average strength you may open the lane to traffic at the age of break .
perform the compressive strength tests under the specifications for sampling and testing cylinders in section numdnuma .
if you choose to use this option notify the engineer before starting construction .
numdnumc test panels test panels must be num .
constructed at an authorized location num .
at least num by num feet by num inches deep num .
constructed and finished using the personnel materials equipment and methods to be used in the work num .
authorized before starting work the engineer may request that additional test panels be constructed until the specified finish texture and color are attained .
the engineer uses the authorized test panel to determine acceptability of the work .
numdnum department acceptance numdnuma general reserved numdnumb testing concrete surfaces numdnumbi general the engineer tests roadway concrete surfaces for smoothness coefficient of friction and crack intensity .
the engineer tests poc concrete deck surfaces for smoothness and crack intensity .
numdnumbii surface smoothness the engineer tests the surface smoothness of the following num .
completed roadway concrete surfaces of structures and approach slabs and the adjacent num feet of approach pavement num .
surfaces of concrete decks to be covered with another material num .
completed concrete deck surfaces including ramps and landings of pocs you must schedule smoothness testing .
allow num days for the engineer to perform smoothness testing .
before the testing clean the test area and remove obstructions .
except for pocs surface smoothness is tested using num .
bridge profilograph under california test num .
two profiles are obtained in each lane approximately num feet from the lane lines and num profile is obtained in each shoulder approximately num feet from the curb or rail face .
profiles are taken parallel to the direction of traffic .
num .
numfootlong straightedge placed transversely to traffic .
for pocs surface smoothness is tested using section num concrete structures num num .
numfootlong straightedge placed parallel to the centerline of the poc num .
numfootlong straightedge placed perpendicular to the centerline of the poc deck surfaces must comply with the following smoothness requirements num .
profile trace having no high points over num foot num .
profile count of num or less in any numfoot section for portions within the traveled way num .
surface not varying more than num foot from the lower edge of a numfootlong straightedge placed transversely to traffic poc deck surfaces must comply with the following smoothness requirements num .
surfaces between grade changes must not vary more than num foot from the lower edge of a numfoot long straightedge placed parallel to the centerline of the poc num .
surface must not vary more than num foot from the lower edge of a numfootlong straightedge placed perpendicular to the centerline of the poc grind surfaces not complying with the smoothness requirements under section num until the required smoothness is attained .
grinding must not reduce the concrete cover on the reinforcing steel to less than num inches .
replace portions of decks that can not be corrected by grinding .
numdnumbiii coefficient of friction after deck surfaces and approach slabs have been textured the engineer tests the coefficient of friction of the concrete surfaces under california test num .
deck surfaces and approach slabs must have a uniform surface texture with a coefficient of friction of not less than num when opened to traffic or before seal coats are placed whichever occurs first .
if portions of completed deck surfaces or approach slabs have a coefficient of friction of less than num those portions must be ground to produce a coefficient of friction of not less than num or grooved parallel to the center line .
grinding and grooving must comply with section num .
the coefficient of friction requirements do not apply for bridge decks to be covered with membrane seals .
numdnumbiv crack intensity the engineer measures crack intensity of deck surfaces after curing before prestressing and before falsework release .
clean the surface for the engineer to measure surface crack intensity .
in any num sq ft portion of a new bridge deck surface if there are more than num feet of cracks having a width at any point of over num inch treat the deck with methacrylate resin under section numb .
treat the entire deck width between barriers to num feet beyond where the furthest continuous crack emanating from the num sq ft section is num inch wide .
treat the deck surface before grinding .
in any num sq ft portion of a new poc deck surface if there are more than num feet of cracks having a width at any point of over num inch treat the deck with methacrylate resin under section numb .
treat the entire deck width between the curbs to num feet beyond where the furthest continuous crack emanating from the num sq ft section is num inch wide .
treat the deck surface before grinding .
num materials numa general reserved numb concrete except for minor structures the cementitious material content per cubic yard of concrete in structures or portions of structures must comply with the content shown in the following table section num concrete structures num use cementitious material content lbcu yd deck slabs and slab spans of bridges num roof sections of exposed top box culverts num pier columns num seal courses num min other portions of structures num concrete for pc members num except for minor structures the minimum required numday compressive strength for concrete in structures or portions of structures is the compressive strength described or num psi whichever is greater .
numc bonding materials bonding materials must be magnesium phosphate concrete modified highaluminabased concrete or portlandcementbased concrete .
magnesium phosphate concrete must be either single component that is water activated or dual component with prepackaged liquid activator .
modified highaluminabased concrete and portlandcementbased concrete must be water activated .
bonding materials must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement compressive strength psi min california test num at num hours num at num hours num flexural strength at num hours psi min california test num num bond strength at num hours psi min california test num saturated surface dry concrete num dry concrete num water absorption percent max california test num num abrasion resistance at num hours g max california test num num drying shrinkage at num days percent max astm cnum num soluble chlorides by weight percent max california test num num water soluble sulfates by weight percent max california test num num magnesium phosphate concrete must be formulated for a minimum initial set time of num minutes and minimum final set time of num minutes at num degrees f. store the materials in a cool dry environment before use .
the mix water used with wateractivated material must comply with section numd .
the quantity of water for singlecomponent type or liquid activator for dualcomponent type to be blended with the dry component must be within the limits recommended by the manufacturer and must be the least quantity required to produce a pourable batter .
if authorized you may add retarders to magnesium phosphate concrete .
the addition of retarders must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
magnesium phosphate concrete must not be mixed in containers or worked with tools containing zinc cadmium aluminum or copper metals .
modified high alumina based concrete must not be mixed in containers or worked with tools containing aluminum .
numd rapid strength concrete rsc placed in bridge decks must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
section num concrete structures num rsc must have a minimum numday compressive strength of num psi except rsc placed in bridge decks must have a minimum numday compressive strength of num psi .
nume colored concrete color pigments for colored concrete must be iron oxides complying with astm cnumcnumm .
the dosage must not exceed num percent by weight of cementitious material in the concrete mix design .
when test panels are specified cementitious materials and aggregates from the same sources used in the authorized test panel must be used for the colored concrete in the completed work .
numf mortar mortar must be composed of cement sand and water .
materials for mortar must comply with section num .
the proportion of sand to cement measured by volume must be num to num .
mortar must contain only enough water to allow placing and packing .
sand particles must be no larger than num the size of the recess or space in which the mortar is to be placed .
numg grout grout must consist of portland cement and water with a water content of at most num gallons per num pounds of cement .
numh chemical adhesives chemical adhesives for bonding dowels must be on the authorized material list for chemical adhesivecartridge epoxies .
the chemical adhesive must be appropriate for the installation conditions .
numi miscellaneous metal materials for access opening covers for new structures must comply with section num .
numj miscellaneous materials plastic pipe for deck bleeder drains must be schedule num pvc complying with astm dnum .
galvanized wire cloth for deck bleeder drains must be numinch mesh with numinchdiameter wire .
num construction numa general reserved numb methods and equipment vehicles weighing over num lb are not allowed on any bridge span until the concrete attains a compressive strength of at least num psi .
vehicles weighing over num lb are not allowed on any span until the concrete attains a compressive strength of at least num psi or attains an age of num days .
vehicles exceeding the weight limitations in veh code div num that cross bridges as allowed in section num numb must not make repetitive crossings of any span until the concrete attains an age of num days .
vehicles with a gross weight over num lb are not allowed on any span of ps concrete structures until the prestressing steel for that span is tensioned .
if authorized you may precast structural elements not designated as pc members .
you may use the slip form method for constructing pier shafts if num the results are equal to those obtained by compliance with these specifications and num adequate arrangements are made and carried out for curing finishing and protecting the concrete .
when slip forms are used for pier construction the line and grade furnished by the engineer is limited to establishing control points and checks of slip form position .
you must provide targets markers or other devices for the engineer to determine the pier shaft position .
shotcrete is not allowed as an alternative construction method for reinforced concrete members .
you may construct warped portions of wingwalls at the ends of culverts using shotcrete complying with section num .
section num concrete structures num numc preparation numcnum general bottom of footing elevations shown are approximate .
the engineer may order changes in footing dimensions or elevations .
where a roughened concrete surface is described roughen the existing concrete surface to a full amplitude of approximately num inch by abrasive blasting water blasting or using mechanical equipment .
pump water from the interior of foundation enclosures without removing concrete materials .
do not pump water during concrete placement or for num hours after placing concrete unless the pumping is done from a sump separated from the concrete work .
numcnum forms numcnuma general forms must be num .
mortar tight num .
true to the dimensions lines and grades of the structure num .
strong enough to prevent deflection during concrete placement face exposed surfaces of concrete structures with form panels .
form panels for exposed surfaces must be plywood complying with or exceeding the requirements of u.s .
product standard ps num for exterior bb concrete form class i plywood or any material that produces a similarly smooth uniform surface .
for exposed surfaces use only form panels in good condition and free of defects such as scars dents or delaminations .
design and construct forms for exposed surfaces such that surfaces do not undulate more than num inch or num of the centertocenter distance between studs joists form stiffeners form fasteners or wales in any direction .
stop using forms or forming systems that produce excessive undulations until modifications satisfactory to the engineer are made .
the engineer may reject portions of structures with excessive undulations .
form exposed surfaces of each element of a concrete structure with the same forming material or with materials that produce similar surface textures color and appearance .
use form panels in uniform widths of at least num feet and uniform lengths of at least num feet except at the ends of continuously formed surfaces where the final panel length is less than num feet .
for members less than num feet wide form panels must be the width of the entire member .
arrange form panels in symmetrical patterns conforming to the general lines of the structure .
place panels for vertical surfaces with the long dimension horizontal and horizontal joints level and continuous .
form panels for curved column surfaces must be continuous for at least num of the circumference or num feet .
for walls with sloping footings that do not abut other walls you may place panels with the long dimension parallel to the footing .
align form panels on each side of panel joints with supports or fasteners common to both panels so that a continuous unbroken concrete plane results .
form filler panels that join prefabricated panels must num have a uniform width of at least num foot and num produce a smooth uniform surface with consistent longitudinal joint lines between panels .
construct forms for exposed surfaces with triangular fillets at least num by num inch .
attach fillets so as to prevent mortar runs and to produce smooth straight chamfers at all sharp edges of the concrete .
clean inside form surfaces of dirt mortar and foreign material .
thoroughly coat forms to be removed with form oil before placing concrete .
form oil must num .
be commercial quality or an equivalent coating num .
allow the ready release of forms num .
not discolor the concrete section num concrete structures num do not place concrete in forms until num .
all form construction work has been completed including removing foreign material num .
all materials to be embedded in the concrete have been placed num .
engineer has inspected the forms forms for concrete surfaces that will not be completely enclosed or hidden below the permanent ground surface must comply with the specifications for forms for exposed surfaces .
interior surfaces of underground drainage structures are considered completely enclosed surfaces .
use form fasteners to prevent form spreading during concrete placement .
do not use twisted wire ties to hold forms in position .
form fasteners and anchors must be of those types that can be removed as specified for form bolts in section numfnum without chipping spalling heating or otherwise damaging the concrete surface .
you may cast anchor devices into the concrete for supporting forms or lifting pc members .
do not use driven types of anchorages for fastening forms or form supports to concrete except for interior surfaces of girders in ps box girder bridges where num .
girders have more than num inches of cover over the reinforcement num .
anchorages do not penetrate the girder more than num inches and have a minimum spacing of num inches num .
anchorages are placed at least num inches clear from the edge of concrete numcnumb removing forms remove all forms except soffit forms for deck slabs of cip box girders forms for the interior voids of pc members and the forms in hollow abutments or piers may remain in place for any of the following conditions num .
permanent access into the cells or voids is not shown num .
utility facilities are not to be installed in the completed cells or voids num .
utility facilities to be installed in completed cells or voids are to be inserted into casings that are placed before the completion of the cell or void num .
permanent access is shown or utility facilities other than those in preplaced casings are to be installed in cells or voids and you num remove the portions of the forms that obstruct access openings or conflict with utility facilities .
num provide a longitudinal crawl space at least num feet high and num feet wide throughout the length of these cells or voids num use a forming system that leaves no sharp projections into the cells or voids num remove forms between the hinge and num feet past the access openings in cells of cip box girder bridges with access openings near the hinges clear the inside of the cells or voids of all loose material before completing the forming for the deck of cip box girders or for the cells or voids of other members when the forms are to remain in place or after the removal of the forms or portions of forms .
you may remove forms that do not support the dead load of concrete if num hours have elapsed after concrete placement and the concrete has sufficient strength to prevent damage to the surface .
you may remove forms for railings or barriers after the concrete has hardened .
protect exposed surfaces from damage .
numcnumc permanent steel deck forms numcnumci general permanent steel deck forms and supports must comply with astm anumanumm designation ss grades num through num coating designation gnum .
permanent steel deck forms are only allowed where shown or if specified as an option in the special provisions .
section num concrete structures num numcnumcii design requirements design permanent steel deck forms based on the combined dead load of forms reinforcement and plastic concrete with an allowance for construction loads of at least num psf .
the combined dead load must be assumed to be at least num pcf for normal concrete and num pcf for lightweight concrete .
configure forms such that the weight of deck slab and forms is at most num percent of the weight of the deck slab as shown .
compute the physical design properties under aisis north american specification for the design of cold formed steel structural members .
the design span for form sheets is the clear span of the form plus num inches measured parallel to the form flutes .
maximum allowable stresses and deflections are as follows num .
tensile stress must not exceed the lesser of num times the specified yield strength or num psi .
num .
dead load deflection must not exceed the lesser of num times the form span or num inch .
the dead load for deflection calculations must be at least num psf total .
num .
you may use form camber based on the actual dead load condition .
do not use camber to compensate for deflection exceeding the allowable limits .
numcnumciii installation do not weld steel deck forms to flanges of steel girders .
permanent steel deck forms must not interfere with movement at deck expansion joints .
clearance between deck forms and bar reinforcement must be at least num inch .
do not use permanent steel deck forms for sections of deck slabs with longitudinal expansion joints unless additional supports are placed under the joint .
do not rest form sheets directly on top of girder flanges .
fasten sheets securely to form supports .
provide at least num inch of bearing at each end .
place form supports in direct contact with girder flanges .
attach supports using bolts clips or other authorized means .
locate transverse deck construction joints at the bottom of flutes .
field drill numinch weep holes at not less than num inches on center along the joint line .
repair galvanized form surfaces damaged before installation by wire brushing to remove loose and cracked coating and applying num coats of zincrich primer .
do not use aerosol cans .
you do not need to repair minor heat discoloration in welded areas .
numd placing concrete numdnum general thoroughly moisten forms and subgrade with water immediately before placing concrete .
place and consolidate concrete using methods that num do not cause segregation of the aggregate and num produce dense homogeneous concrete without voids or rock pockets .
place concrete while fresh and before initial set .
do not retemper partially hardened concrete with additional water .
place concrete continuously in each integral part of the structure .
do not start work unless placement can be completed uninterrupted .
place concrete for girder spans in at least num operations .
the last operation must consist of placing the deck slab .
allow at least num days between operations .
place concrete as close to its final position as possible .
do not use vibrators for extensive shifting of concrete .
section num concrete structures num except for cip piles do not allow fresh concrete to fall more than num feet without using pipes tubes or double belting to prevent segregation .
do not use double belting unless the member thickness is less than num inches .
except for concrete placed as pipe culvert headwalls and endwalls slope paving and aprons and concrete placed under water consolidate concrete using highfrequency internal vibrators within num minutes of placing concrete in the forms .
do not attach vibrators to or hold them against forms or reinforcing steel .
do not displace reinforcement ducts or prestressing steel during vibrating .
for structure footings over num feet in depth that have a top layer of reinforcement reconsolidate the concrete to a depth of num foot after placing consolidating and initial screeding of the concrete .
reconsolidate the concrete as late as the concrete will respond again to vibration but not less than num minutes after the initial screeding .
vibrators used for concrete with epoxycoated reinforcement or prestressing steel must have a resilient covering to prevent damage to the epoxy coating .
if concrete is inaccessible for adequate consolidation by other means external vibrators must be used and the forms must be sufficiently rigid to resist displacement or damage .
do not place concrete for horizontal members until the concrete in supporting vertical members has been consolidated and settlement due to bleeding is complete .
where shown apply a bond breaker to joint surfaces .
do not construct drainage structures to final grade until adjacent paving or surfacing is complete .
numdnum concrete bridge decks for concrete decks placed on continuous steel girders or pc concrete girders place the portion of deck over the supports last .
for decks on pc concrete girders place intermediate and end diaphragms at least num days before placing the deck concrete .
for decks on structural steel install cross frames the entire width of the bridge before placing the deck concrete .
deck closure pours must comply with the following num .
during primary deck placement and for at least num hours after completing the deck placement reinforcing steel protruding into the closure space must be free from any connection to reinforcing steel concrete forms or other attachments of the adjacent structure .
num .
closure pour forms must be supported from the superstructure on both sides of the closure space .
numdnum concrete placed under water only seal course concrete may be placed under water .
if the engineer determines that it is impossible or inadvisable to dewater excavations before placing concrete place a seal course under the water using a tremie or a concrete pump .
the seal course must be at least num feet thick and thick enough to seal the cofferdam .
the tremie must be a watertight tube at least num inches in diameter with a hopper at the top .
when concrete is deposited into the hopper flow is induced by raising the discharge end .
equip discharge and tremie tubes with a device to prevent water from entering the tube when charging the tube with concrete .
support the tubes so as to allow for free movement of the discharge end over the entire work surface and rapid lowering of the tube .
fill the tubes using a method that prevents washing of the concrete .
keep the discharge end submerged in the concrete at all times .
the tube must contain enough concrete to prevent water entry .
place the concrete carefully in a compact mass .
concrete flow must be continuous until completion of the seal course .
the seal course must be monolithic and homogeneous .
do not disturb concrete after placement .
maintain still water at the point of placement .
section num concrete structures num cure the seal course concrete for at least num days before dewatering the cofferdam .
increase the curing time for seal course concrete placed in water that is below num degrees f. periods of time when the water temperature is continuously below num degrees f is not considered as curing time .
dewater the cofferdam after the seal course has adequate strength to resist the hydrostatic load .
after dewatering clean the top of the concrete of all scum laitance and sediment .
remove local high spots to provide the specified clearance for reinforcing steel before placing fresh concrete .
numdnum construction joints place construction joints only where described unless authorized .
at horizontal construction joints num .
thoroughly consolidate fresh concrete surfaces without completely removing surface irregularities num .
at joints between girder stems and decks roughen the surfaces of fresh concrete to at least a num inch amplitude abrasive blast clean construction joint surfaces before placing fresh concrete against the joint surfaces .
remove surface laitance curing compound and other foreign materials .
flush construction joint surfaces with water and allow the surfaces to dry to a surfacedry condition immediately before placing concrete .
if authorized in an emergency you may place a construction joint at a location not described .
the engineer determines the location of the construction joint and the quantity of additional reinforcing steel to be placed across the joint .
locate longitudinal construction joints in bridge decks along lane lines if a joint location is not shown .
numdnum colored concrete when placing colored concrete num .
monitor the water content weight of cementitious materials and size weight and color of aggregate to maintain consistency and accuracy of the mixed colored concrete .
num .
schedule delivery of concrete to provide consistent mix times from batching until discharge .
do not add water after a portion of the batch has been discharged .
num .
use consistent finishing practices to ensure uniformity of texture and color .
num .
protect surrounding exposed surfaces during placement finishing and curing activities of colored concrete .
if more than num concrete pump is used to place concrete designate the pumps to receive colored concrete .
the designated pumps must receive only colored concrete throughout the concrete placement operation .
cure colored concrete by the formsinplace method or the curing compound method .
if the curing compound method is used the curing compound must be clear or match the color of the colored concrete and must be manufactured specifically for colored concrete .
do not use curing compounds containing calcium chloride .
the time between completing surface finishing and applying the curing compound must be the same for each colored concrete component .
numdnum bearing surfaces for elastomeric bearing pads wood float finish the concrete bearing surface to a level plane that varies at most num inch from a straightedge placed in any direction and is within num inch of the specified elevation .
the bearing area must extend at least num inch beyond the limits of the bearing pads .
for bearing assemblies or masonry plates not embedded in concrete construct the concrete bearing area above grade and grind to a true level plane that num does not vary perceptibly from a straightedge placed in any direction and num is within num inch of the elevation shown .
section num concrete structures num numdnum pier columns place concrete for pier columns against firm undisturbed foundation material on the bottom and sides of the pier column excavations except place concrete against forms where shown .
immediately before placing concrete all excavated surfaces against which the concrete is to be placed must be free from standing water ice mud debris and loose material .
nume miscellaneous construction numenum general where shown paint the bridge name bridge number and bent number in neat numinchhigh black letters and figures .
where shown and before backfilling to within num feet of finished grade install temporary bumpers at the ends of bridges and grade top culverts .
where pipes outside the structure join the structure cast bell recesses in the concrete to receive the pipe or cast sections of the pipe in the concrete .
if bell recesses are used mortar the pipe end into the bell .
numenum placing mortar place mortar in recesses and holes on surfaces under structural members and at other locations where described .
clean concrete areas to be in contact with mortar of loose or foreign material that would prevent bonding between the mortar and the concrete surfaces .
flush the concrete areas with water and allow them to dry to a surfacedry condition immediately before placing the mortar .
tightly pack mortar to completely fill spaces .
locations where mortar can escape must be mortartight before placing mortar .
cure mortar for num days using the water method under section numb .
do not load mortar until num hours after placement unless authorized .
numenum drill and bond dowels for drill and bond dowels drill the holes without damaging the adjacent concrete .
holes for bonded dowels must be num inch larger than the nominal dowel diameter .
if reinforcement is encountered during drilling before the specified depth is attained notify the engineer .
unless coring through the reinforcement is authorized drill a new hole adjacent to the rejected hole to the depth shown .
coat the surface of any dowel coated with zinc or cadmium with a colored lacquer .
allow the lacquer to dry thoroughly before installing the dowel .
each drilled hole must be clean and dry when placing the bonding material and dowel .
the bonding material and dowel must completely fill the drilled hole .
the surface temperature must be at least num degrees f when magnesium phosphate concrete is placed .
thoroughly dry finishing tools cleaned with water before working magnesium phosphate concrete .
leave dowels undisturbed for num hours or until the dowels can be supported by the concrete .
cure modified highaluminabased concrete and portlandcementbased concrete using the curing compound method .
do not cure magnesium phosphate concrete .
replace dowels that fail to bond or are damaged .
numenum drill and grout dowels drill the holes under section numenum .
for drill and grout dowels drill the holes num inch larger than the nominal dowel diameter .
immediately before placing dowels holes must be cleaned be thoroughly saturated with water have all free water removed and be dried to a saturated surface dry condition .
section num concrete structures num place grout into the holes and insert the dowels .
retempering of grout is not allowed .
cure grout at least num days or until the dowels are encased in concrete .
immobilize the dowels during the curing period .
cure using curing compound method or by keeping the surface continuously damp .
replace dowels that fail to bond or are damaged .
numenum drill and bond dowels chemical adhesive for drill and bond dowel chemical adhesive the drilled hole diameter and depth must comply with the icbo evaluation report for the size of dowel being installed unless otherwise shown .
increase the drilled hole depth specified in the icbo evaluation report by num percent when dowels are epoxy coated .
drill the holes without damaging the adjacent concrete .
if reinforcement is encountered during drilling before the specified depth is attained notify the engineer .
unless coring through the reinforcement is authorized drill a new hole adjacent to the rejected hole to the depth shown .
immediately after inserting the dowels into the chemical adhesive support the dowels as necessary to prevent movement until the epoxy has cured the minimum time specified in the authorized material list for chemical adhesivecartridge epoxies .
replace dowels that fail to bond or are damaged .
drill new holes adjacent to rejected dowels and install replacement dowels .
numenum nonskid abrasive finish where shown place a nonskid abrasive finish on pedestrian walkways stair treads and landings .
the nonskid finish must consist of commercialquality aluminum oxide silicon carbide or almandite garnet grit particles sieve size no .
num to num or no .
num to num .
uniformly apply grit particles at a rate of at least num lbsq ft onto the floated concrete surface while the concrete is plastic .
bury the particles into the concrete to a depth of approximately num times the diameter of each particle .
numenum drains in walls where shown construct drain holes and weep holes in abutment walls wingwalls and retaining walls .
cover retaining wall and abutment wall drains at the back face of the wall with numinch mesh numinch diameter aluminum or galvanized steel wire hardware cloth .
mount hardware cloth in forms before pouring concrete or fasten the cloth to the exterior concrete surface with masonry nails .
in addition to wall drains install hydrostatic pressure relief holes num inches in diameter at the bottom of walls immediately above footings at approximately numfoot centers .
numenum deck bleeder drains the engineer provides the exact location for each deck bleeder drain .
drill the holes for drains in existing bridges using a diamond core drill bit .
do not spall hole edges .
holes must be num inches in diameter .
install drains such that the top of the pipe is approximately num inch below the concrete deck surface .
replace drains out of position as determined by the engineer .
secure plastic pipe installed in existing bridges with an epoxy adhesive .
score the outside surfaces of the pipe before installing the pipe .
spread epoxy on both the pipe and hole surfaces .
epoxy must completely fill the space between the pipe and the hole .
install drains before placing the deck seal .
center the wire cloth above the drains .
place the cloth after placing the deck seal and before placing the hma .
secure the cloth using an authorized method to prevent movement during hma placement .
do not damage the deck seal .
numenum utility facilities where shown utility facilities will be carried in or on structures .
install hangers anchor bolt inserts manhole frames and covers sleeves and other accessories required for the utility facility that must be cast in the concrete .
the utility owner will furnish these items .
the utility owner will furnish and install conductors and casings when the structure is ready for the installation and before any work that interferes with installation is started .
section num concrete structures num notify the engineer at least num days before the date structures are ready for utility installation .
the engineer will notify the utility owner .
numenum concrete headers and steel plates concrete for concrete headers must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
steel plates and attachment hardware must comply with section num except that galvanizing is not required .
numenum diaphragm bolsters reserved numenum hinge tiedowns reserved numf finishing concrete numfnum general strike off exposed surfaces of consolidated concrete to the lines and grades shown .
provide a uniform surface texture having the specified finish without undulations or irregularities .
the engineer determines the acceptability of the surface finishes .
finish sidewalks curbs and stairways on structures under section num except surfaces are not marked .
numfnum ordinary surface finish apply ordinary surface finish to all concrete surfaces as a final finish or before applying a higher class finish .
ordinary surface finish must be the final finish for the following surfaces num .
undersurfaces of slab spans box girders spandrel arch spans and floor slabs between girders of superstructures num .
inside vertical surfaces of t girders of superstructures num .
surfaces to be buried underground or covered with embankment and surfaces of culverts above finished ground that are not visible from the traveled way ordinary surface finish includes num .
filling holes or depressions num .
repairing rock pockets and unsound concrete num .
removing fins and projections flush to the surface num .
removing stains and discolorations visible from traveled ways you do not need to remove fins from surfaces that are buried underground or enclosed .
remove form bolts and metal placed for your convenience to at least num inch below the concrete surface .
clean and fill the resulting holes with mortar .
you do not need to remove form bolts in box girder cells except you must remove bolts flush if deck forms are removed from the cells .
fill bolt holes with mortar under section numenum .
fill depressions and pockets with packed mortar or shotcrete as determined by the engineer .
cure filler under section numh .
for exposed surfaces add enough white cement to the patching material to match the surrounding concrete after drying .
if the engineer determines that rock pockets are extensive remove and replace the affected portions of the structure .
numfnum class num surface finish class num surface finish includes finishing concrete surfaces to produce smooth even surfaces of uniform texture and appearance without bulges depressions or other imperfections .
section num concrete structures num class num surface finish must be the final surface finish for the following surfaces num .
except for those surfaces listed in ordinary surface finish the surfaces of bridge superstructures including the undersurfaces of deck overhangs num .
surfaces of bridge piers piles columns and abutments and retaining walls above finished ground and to at least num foot below finished ground num .
surfaces of open spandrel arch rings spandrel columns and abutment towers num .
surfaces of pedestrian undercrossings except floors and surfaces to be covered with earth num .
surfaces of culvert headwalls above finished ground and endwalls visible from a traveled way num .
interior surfaces of culvert barrels having a height of num feet or more for a distance equal to the culvert height where visible from a traveled way num .
interior surfaces of pump house motor and control rooms and enginegenerator rooms num .
surfaces of railings do not apply class num surface finish until a uniform appearance can be attained .
use power carborundum stones or disks to remove bulges and other imperfections .
sand areas not complying with the class num surface finish requirements using power sanders or other authorized abrasive means until the specified surface finish is attained .
numfnum class num surface finish where a class num surface finish is described num .
apply an ordinary surface finish to the concrete surface .
num .
abrasive blast the surface to a rough texture and then thoroughly wash the surface with water .
num .
pneumatically apply a mortar coat approximately num inch thick in at least num passes to the damp surface .
the coating must firmly bond to the concrete surface .
the mortar coat must consist of either num sand portland cement and water mechanically mixed before entering the nozzle or num premixed sand and portland cement with water added before leaving the nozzle .
the proportion of cement to sand must be at least num to num .
use sand with a grading suitable for the work .
you may substitute cementitious material complying with section num for portland cement .
you may use admixtures specified in section num if authorized .
do not mortar coat areas where bridge name or other designations are to be painted .
the coating surface must be num uniform without unsightly bulges depressions or other imperfections and num as left by the nozzle .
protect the coating from damage and keep it damp for num days after placing .
remove and replace loose areas of coating .
where a class num surface finish is described for a pedestrian undercrossing use silica sand and white portland cement .
numfnum finishing roadway surfaces numfnuma general construct concrete roadway surfaces of structures approach slabs sleeper slabs and adjoining approach pavement and concrete decks to be covered with another material to the grade and cross section shown .
surfaces must comply with the specified smoothness surface texture and surface crack requirements .
the engineer sets deck elevation control points for your use in establishing the grade and cross section of the deck surface .
the grade established by the deck elevation control points includes all camber allowances .
elevation control points will not be closer together than approximately num feet longitudinally and num feet transversely to the bridge centerline .
before starting concrete placement for any deck section num .
set to grade all rails and headers used to support or control the finishing equipment num .
check rails and headers to ensure the completed deck complies with smoothness requirements section num concrete structures num num .
move the finishing equipment over the length of the section to check steel and bulkhead clearances for approach slabs sleeper slabs and other roadway surfaces of concrete structures texture the roadway surface as specified for bridge deck surfaces in section numfnumb .
finish bridge decks to be covered with membrane seals to a smooth surface free of mortar ridges and other projections .
where a future widening is shown strike off deck surfaces under curbs railings barriers and sidewalks to the same plane as the roadway and leave undisturbed .
deck surfaces must comply with the following smoothness requirements num .
profile trace having no high points over num foot num .
profile count of num or less in any numfoot section for portions within the traveled way num .
surface not varying more than num foot from the lower edge of a numfootlong straightedge placed transversely to traffic complete the smoothness testing and any required grinding before applying seal coats .
numfnumb bridge deck surface texture numfnumbi general except for bridge widenings texture roadway surfaces of bridge decks approach slabs and sleeper slabs and other roadway surfaces of concrete structures longitudinally by grinding and grooving or by longitudinal tining .
for bridge widenings texture the roadway surfaces longitudinally by longitudinal tining .
do not texture bridge decks that are to be covered with an overlay .
if a bridge is opened to traffic before the overlay is placed texture the deck by longitudinal tining .
numfnumbii grinding and grooving when texturing the deck surface by grinding and grooving place a num inch of sacrificial concrete cover on the bridge deck above the finished grade shown .
place items to be embedded in the concrete based on the final profile grade elevations shown .
construct joint seals after completing the grinding and grooving .
before grinding and grooving deck surfaces must comply with the smoothness and deck crack treatment requirements .
grind and groove the deck surface as follows num .
grind the surface to within num inches of the toe of the barrier under section num .
grinding must not reduce the concrete cover on reinforcing steel to less than num inches .
num .
groove the ground surfaces longitudinally under section num .
the grooves must be parallel to the centerline .
numfnumbiii longitudinal tining when texturing the deck surface by longitudinal tining perform initial texturing with a burlap drag or broom device that produces striations parallel to the centerline .
perform final texturing with spring steel tines that produce grooves parallel with the centerline .
the tines must num .
be rectangular in cross section num .
be from num to num inch wide on numinch centers num .
have enough length thickness and resilience to form grooves approximately num inch deep construct grooves to within num inches of the layout line of the concrete barrier toe .
grooves must be from num to num inch deep and num inch wide after concrete has hardened .
section num concrete structures num for irregular areas and areas inaccessible to the grooving machine you may hand construct grooves .
handconstructed grooves must comply with the specifications for machineconstructed grooves .
tining must not cause tearing of the deck surface or visible separation of coarse aggregate at the surface .
numfnum finishing pedestrian overcrossing surfaces construct deck surfaces including ramps and landings of pocs to the grade and cross section shown .
surfaces must comply with the specified smoothness surface texture and surface crack requirements .
the engineer sets deck elevation control points for your use in establishing the grade and cross section of the deck surface .
the grade established by the deck elevation control points includes all camber allowances .
except for landings elevation control points include the beginning and end of the ramp and will not be closer together than approximately num feet longitudinally and num feet transversely to the poc centerline .
landing elevation control points are at the beginning and the end of the landing .
broom finish the deck surfaces of pocs .
apply the broom finish perpendicular to the path of travel .
you may apply water mist to the surface immediately before brooming .
clean any discolored concrete by abrasive blast cleaning or other authorized methods .
poc deck surfaces must comply with the following smoothness requirements num .
surfaces between grade changes must not vary more than num foot from the lower edge of a numfoot long straightedge placed parallel to the centerline of the poc num .
surface must not vary more than num foot from the lower edge of a numfootlong straightedge placed perpendicular to the centerline of the poc numg concrete surface textures numgnum general provide the concrete surface textures shown .
the engineer determines the acceptability of the surface textures .
construct a test panel for each type of concrete surface texture shown .
fractured rib texture must consist of straight ribs of concrete with a fractured texture on the raised surface between ribs .
grooves between ribs must be num continuous with no apparent curves or discontinuities and num straight to within num inch in num feet .
the texture must have random shadow patterns .
broken concrete at adjoining ribs and groups of ribs must have a random pattern .
the texture must not have repetitive fractured surfaces or secondary shadow patterns .
heavy blast texture must consist of an abrasiveblasted concrete surface of uniform color and sandy texture with air and water bubbles in the concrete partially exposed .
formed relief texture must consist of a formed relief constructed to the dimensions and shapes shown with a class num surface finish .
intersecting corners of plane surfaces must be sharp and crisp without easing or rounding .
cure concrete surface textures by the formsinplace or water methods .
numgnum form liners use form liners for concrete surface textures except for heavy blast and formed relief textures .
other forming methods must be authorized .
form liners must num be manufactured from an elastomeric material by a manufacturer of commercially available concrete form liners and num leave a crisp sharp definition of the concrete surface texture .
form liners must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement shore a hardness astm dnum num tensile strength psi min astm dnum num section num concrete structures num comply with the form liner manufacturers instructions for use .
seal and repair cuts and tears in form liners under the form liner manufacturers instructions .
do not use form liners that are delaminated or deformed .
extend form liners the full length of texturing with transverse joints at numfoot minimum spacing .
do not use small pieces of form liners .
align grooves straight and true .
grooves must match at joints between form liners .
for grooved patterns joints in the direction of grooves must be located in depressions .
butt adjoining liners together without distortion open cracks or offsets .
clean joints between liners and remove mortar before use .
adhesives must be compatible with the form liner material and the concrete .
adhesives must be recommended by the liner manufacturer and not cause swelling of the liner material .
cast form liner patterns to prevent recurring textural configurations exhibited by repeating recognizable shadow patterns .
remove surfaces with recurring textural configurations by reworking using authorized methods or by replacement .
use a form release agent recommended by the form liner manufacturer .
the release agent must not num .
cause swelling of the liner material num .
cause delamination from the forms num .
stain the concrete num .
react with the liner material coat form liners with a thin film of release agent .
for textures with longitudinal patterns apply the release agent using a natural bristle brush in the direction of the pattern .
clean excess release agent from liners using compressed air .
remove release agent buildup due to liner reuse at least every num uses .
form liners must release without leaving pieces of liner on the concrete or removing concrete from the surface .
except for formed relief textures abrasive blast concrete surface textures with fine abrasive after removing forms to remove sheen without exposing coarse aggregate .
numh curing concrete structures except for bridge decks cure newly placed concrete for cip structures using the water method or the formsinplace method under section numb .
cure the top surface of bridge decks using both the curing compound method and the water method .
the curing compound must be curing compound no .
num .
cure the top surface of bridge decks to be sealed with butyl rubber membrane using only the water method .
for bridge decks and flat slabs using the water method without a curing medium keep the entire surface damp by applying water with an atomizing nozzle that forms a mist and not a spray until the concrete has set .
after the concrete has set continuously sprinkle the entire concrete surface with water for at least num days .
you may use a pigmented curing compound complying with section numbnum for num .
concrete surfaces of construction joints num .
concrete surfaces that are to be buried underground num .
concrete surfaces not visible from a public traveled way where only a ordinary surface finish is to be applied and a uniform color is not required if you use the curing compound method on the bottom slab of box girder spans the curing compound must be curing compound no .
num .
if ordered during periods of hot weather apply water to concrete surfaces being cured by the curing compound method or by the formsinplace method until the engineer determines that a cooling effect is no longer required .
this work is change order work .
section num concrete structures num for rsc using portland cement num .
cure the concrete using the curing compound method .
fogging of the surface with water after the curing compound has been applied is not required .
num .
immediately repair any damage to the film of the curing compound with additional curing compound .
do not repair damage to the curing compound after the concrete is opened to traffic .
num .
cover the surface with an insulating layer or blanket when the ambient temperature is below num degrees f during the curing period .
the insulation layer or blanket must have the rvalue rating shown in the table below .
a heating tent may be used instead of or in combination with the insulating layer or blanket .
temperature range during curing period f rvalue rating min num num num num num num numi protecting concrete structures maintain concrete at a temperature of not less than num degrees f for num hours after placing and at not less than num degrees f for an additional num days .
num payment the payment quantity for seal course concrete is the actual volume of seal course concrete placed except the maximum payment quantity is the volume of concrete contained between vertical planes num foot outside the neat lines of the seal course shown .
the department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the seal course concrete quantity .
num joints num general numa general numanum summary section num includes general specifications for constructing sealing and protecting joints in concrete structures .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit a certificate of compliance for polyethylene material for snowplow deflectors .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials numbnum general premolded expansion joint filler must comply with astm dnum .
expanded polystyrene must be commercially available polystyrene board with num a flexural strength of at least num psi when tested under astm cnum and num a compressive yield strength from num to num psi at num percent compression .
face the surfaces of expanded polystyrene that concrete is placed against with numinchthick hardboard complying with ansi anum .
you may use other facing materials that provide equivalent protection .
secure the hardboard using nails waterproof adhesive or other authorized means .
numbnum snowplow deflectors snowplow deflectors must consist of ultrahighmolecularweight polyethylene plates with anchorage devices .
section num concrete structures num anchorage devices must comply with astm anum uns designation snum or snum .
ultrahighmolecularweight polyethylene plates must be uv stabilized and comply with astm dnum and the requirements shown the following table quality characteristic test method requirement density pcf min astm dnum num tensile strength ultimate psi min astm dnum num tensile strength yield psi min astm dnum num elongation at break percent astm dnum num hardness shore d min astm dnum num numc construction numcnum general construct open joints using a suitable material that you subsequently remove .
do not chip or break concrete corners when removing the material .
reinforcement must not extend across an open joint .
for filled joints place premolded or expanded polystyrene joint filler in position before placing concrete .
fill holes and joints with mastic to prevent the passage of mortar or concrete .
finish concrete edges at joints using an edger .
numcnum snowplow deflectors drilling and bonding anchorage devices must comply with the specifications for drilling and bonding dowels in section numenum .
where shown apply a thread locking system to the anchorage devices under section numb .
numd payment not used num sealed joints numa general numanum general numanuma summary section num includes general specifications for fabricating and installing sealed joints .
sealed joints must num .
be in planned position num .
resist the intrusion of foreign material and water num .
provide bumpfree passage of traffic mr is measured normal to the longitudinal joint axis .
use the seal type shown in the following table for the mr shown movement rating seal type mr num inch type a or b num inch mr num inches type b num inches mr num inches strip seal joint seal assembly mr num inches modular unit joint seal assembly or seismic joint numanumb definitions reserved .
section num concrete structures num numanumc submittals submit a work plan for cleaning expansion joints .
include details for preventing material equipment or debris from falling onto traffic or railroad property .
numanumd quality assurance reserved numanum materials you may clean and paint metal surfaces of joint seal assemblies instead of galvanizing .
cleaning and painting must comply with the specifications for new structural steel in section num except sspcqp num sspcqp num and aiscnumsspcqp num certifications are not required .
finish coats are not required .
do not paint stainless steel or anchorages embedded in concrete .
numanum construction the engineer may order you to install a joint seal larger than required by the mr .
this work is change order work .
the joint opening at the time of placement must be that shown adjusted for temperature .
do not impair the joint clearance .
cover or otherwise protect joints at all times before joint seals are installed .
do not allow debris or foreign material to enter joints .
clean expansion joints at existing bridges before installing joint seals .
remove all existing seal material dirt debris damaged waterstops and joint filler .
use methods that do not damage existing sound concrete .
verify the joint size after cleaning .
clean existing joints with undamaged waterstops to the top of the waterstop unless the waterstop is to be removed .
clean existing joints without waterstops and joints with damaged waterstops down to the hinge or bearing seat .
repair joint damage as ordered .
cleaning joints below existing waterstops that are damaged and repairing existing joint damage is change order work .
numanum payment joint seals and joint seal assemblies are measured from end to end along the centerline of the completed seal including return sections and curb faces .
numb type a and al joint seals numbnum general numbnuma summary section numb includes specifications for installing type a and al joints seals .
type a and al joint seals consist of fieldmixed silicone sealant placed in grooves in the concrete .
numbnumb definitions reserved numbnumc submittals submit a certificate of compliance and certified test report for each batch of sealant .
at least num days before use submit numquart test samples of the following to mets num .
both components from each batch of sealant num .
manufacturerrequired primers section num concrete structures num numbnumd quality assurance numbnumdi general reserved numbnumdii department acceptance the department tests sealants under california test num .
numbnum materials the sealant must be a numcomponent silicone type that withstands a num percent movement .
the sealant must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement modulus at num percent elongation psi california test num num recovery inches max california test num num notch test california test num notched or loss of bond num inch max water resistance california test num notched or loss of bond num inch max ultraviolet exposure california test num no more than slight cracking or checking cone penetration mm california test num num the sealant must be selfleveling and cure rapidly enough to not flow on grades up to num percent .
label sealant containers or provide identification tickets for tanks of numcomponent material .
include the following num .
material designation num .
lot number num .
manufacturers name and instructions for use num .
dates of manufacture packing and expiration do not use material that has expired unless it is retested and authorized .
polyethylene foam or rod stock for retaining sealant must be commercial quality with a continuous impervious glazed surface .
numbnum construction numbnuma general do not use sealant or adhesive that has skinned over or can not be redispersed by hand stirring .
abrasive blast clean joints and remove foreign material with highpressure air immediately before installing seals .
protect waterstops during cleaning .
joint surfaces must be surface dry when seals are placed .
place the sealant using equipment that mixes and extrudes the sealant into the joint .
the equipment and the sealant placement must be as recommended by the sealant manufacturer .
do not use liquid components that have been exposed to air for more than num hours .
numbnumb type a seal preparation for type a joint seals do not start cutting grooves until joint material is delivered to the job site .
concrete saws for cutting grooves in the concrete must have diamond blades with a minimum thickness of num inch .
cut both sides of the groove simultaneously for a minimum numst pass depth of num inches .
the completed groove must have num .
top width within num inch of the width shown or ordered num .
bottom width not varying from the top width by more than num inch for each num inches of depth num .
uniform width and depth section num concrete structures num cutting grooves in existing decks includes cutting any conflicting reinforcing steel .
saw cutting grooves is not required at the following locations num .
joints armored with metal num .
joints in curbs sidewalks barriers and railings if grooves are formed to the required dimensions num .
existing joints where type a seals are to be installed remove all material from the deck joint to the bottom of the saw cut .
remove foreign material from joints in curbs sidewalks barriers railings and deck slab overhangs .
the engineer may order you to saw cut grooves at existing joints to be sealed with a type a joint seal .
this work is change order work .
repair spalls fractures or voids in the grooved surface at least num hours before installing the joint seal .
bevel the lips of saw cuts by grinding .
numbnumc type al seal preparation for type al joint seals remove expanded polystyrene and foreign material to the depth of the joint seal .
grind or edge the lip of the joint .
numbnum payment not used numc type b joint seals numcnum general numcnuma summary section numc includes specifications for installing type b joint seals .
type b joint seals consist of preformed elastomeric joint seals placed in grooves in the concrete .
numcnumb definitions reserved numcnumc submittals submit a certificate of compliance with certified test report for each lot of elastomeric joint seal and lubricantadhesive .
test reports must include the seal mr the manufacturers minimum uncompressed width and test results .
submit each joint seal test sample selected by the engineer for testing with its certificate of compliance at least num days before use .
numcnumd quality assurance numcnumdi general reserved numcnumdii quality control the engineer selects test samples of joint seal material and lubricantadhesive at random from each lot of material .
test samples are selected from stock at the job site or at a location acceptable to the engineer and the manufacturer .
joint seal test samples must be at least num feet long .
demonstrate the adequacy of installation procedures for type b seals before starting installation activities .
numcnumdiii department acceptance reserved numcnum materials preformed elastomeric joint seals must section num concrete structures num num .
comply with astm dnum num .
consist of a multichannel nonporous homogeneous material furnished in a finished extruded form num .
have a minimum seal depth at the contact surface of at least num percent of the minimum uncompressed seal width designated by the manufacturer num .
provide an mr of at least that shown when tested under california test num num .
have the top and bottom edges in continuous contact with the sides of the groove throughout the entire range of joint movement num .
be furnished full length for each joint with at most num shop splice in any numfoot length for seals that would admit water or debris fill each cell to a depth of num inches at the open ends with open cell polyurethane foam or close the cells by other authorized means .
you may make num field splice per joint if authorized .
splice location and method must be authorized .
seals must be manufactured full length and then cut at the splice location and rematched before splicing .
shop and field splices must have no visible offset of exterior surfaces and no evidence of bond failure .
combination lubricantadhesive must comply with astm dnum .
numcnum construction prepare joints under section numbnumb except remove all material from the deck joint to the top of the waterstop or to the depth of the seal to be installed plus num inches .
thoroughly clean contact surfaces and the top surface of the seal to within num inch from either edge immediately before applying the lubricantadhesive .
liberally apply the lubricantadhesive to vertical groove surfaces and the sides of the joint seal under the manufacturers instructions .
install joint seals full length for each joint using equipment that does not distort or damage the seal or the concrete .
the top edges of the installed seal must be in a plane normal to the sides of the groove .
numcnum payment not used numd joint seal assemblies with a movement rating of num inches or less numdnum general numdnuma summary section numd includes specifications for fabricating and installing joint seal assemblies with an mr of num inches or less .
joint seal assemblies with an mr of num inches or less must consist of metal or metal and elastomeric assemblies placed in recesses over joints .
strip seal joint seal assemblies consist of a num joint cell .
if authorized you may use an alternative joint seal assembly if num .
quality of the alternative assembly and its suitability for the intended application are at least equal to that of the joint seal assembly shown .
the factors to be considered include the ability of the assembly to resist the intrusion of foreign material and water throughout the full range of movement for the application and the ability to function without distress to any component .
num .
alternative joint seal assembly has had at least num year of proven satisfactory service under conditions similar to those described .
numdnumb definitions reserved numdnumc submittals numdnumci general for alternative joint seal assemblies submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of joint seal materials .
the certificate must state that the materials and fabrication involved comply with the specifications and the data submitted in obtaining the authorization for the alternative joint seal assembly .
section num concrete structures num numdnumcii shop drawings for alternative joint seal assemblies submit num copies of shop drawings for each joint seal assembly to osd documents unit .
notify the engineer of your submittal .
include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
after review submit num to num copies as requested for final authorization and use during construction .
include details of the joint seal assembly and anchorage components method of installation blockout details and additions or rearrangements of reinforcing steel .
if requested submit supplemental calculations for each proposed alternative joint seal assembly .
include in the shop drawings the thermal equation for setting the minimum joint opening at installation .
shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer .
allow num days for the departments review .
submit num corrected copy to osd documents unit for each joint seal assembly within num days of final authorization .
numdnumd quality assurance reserved numdnum materials numdnuma general metal parts must comply with section num .
bolts nuts and washers must comply with astm anum .
sheet neoprene must comply with the specifications for neoprene in section numb .
fabricate sheet neoprene to fit the joint seal assembly accurately .
numdnumb alternative joint seal assemblies alternative joint seal assemblies must have cip anchorage components for casting into the deck .
the anchorage components must include anchor studs spaced at a maximum of num inches .
the studs must be at least num inch in diameter and num inches long except the studs may be num inches long in the overhang .
instead of complying with section num metal parts may comply with astm anumanumm .
elastomer must be neoprene complying with the requirements shown in table num of astm dnum except recovery and compressiondeflection tests are not required and the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement hardness points type a durometer astm dnum modified num compression set percent max num hours at num c astm dnum modified num the design loading must be the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications design truck with num percent dynamic load allowance .
the tire contact area must be num inches measured normal to the longitudinal assembly axis by num inches wide .
the assembly must provide a smoothriding joint without slapping of components or tire rumble .
the mr of the assembly must be measured normal to the longitudinal axis of the assembly .
dimensions for positioning the assembly within the mr during installation must be measured normal to the longitudinal axis .
do not consider skew of the deck expansion joint .
section num concrete structures num the maximum depth and width of the recess must be such that the primary reinforcement providing the necessary strength of the structural members is outside the recess .
the maximum depth at abutments and hinges is num inches .
the maximum width on each side of the expansion joint is num inches .
horizontal angle points and vertical corners at curbs must be premolded sections or standard sections of the assembly that have been miter cut or bent to fit .
numdnum construction deck surfaces must comply with section numfnum before placing and anchoring joint seal assemblies .
poc deck surfaces must comply with section numfnum before placing and anchoring joint seal assemblies .
preassemble metal parts of assemblies before installation to verify geometry .
except for primary reinforcement continue reinforcement through the recess construction joint into the recess and engage anchorage components of the assembly .
thoroughly clean joints immediately before installing sheet neoprene .
install sheet neoprene at such time that it will not be damaged by construction activities .
place the assembly in the blockedout recess in the concrete deck surface .
the depth and width of the recess must allow the installation of the assembly anchorage components or anchorage bearing surface to the lines and grades shown .
for alternative joint seal assemblies install elastomer under the manufacturers instructions .
thoroughly clean the joint and blockout immediately before elastomer installation .
numdnum payment not used nume joint seal assemblies with a movement rating over num inches numenum general numenuma summary section nume includes specifications for fabricating and installing joint seal assemblies with an mr over num inches .
joint seal assemblies and seismic joints consist of metal or metal and elastomeric assemblies anchored or cast into a recess in the concrete over the joint .
numenumb definitions reserved numenumc submittals numenumci general reserved numenumcii shop drawings submit shop drawings for each joint seal assembly to osd documents unit .
notify the engineer of your submittal .
include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
if requested submit supplemental calculations for each proposed alternative joint seal assembly .
shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer .
allow num days for the departments review .
after review submit num to num copies as requested for final authorization and use during construction .
include details of the joint seal assembly and anchorage components method of installation blockout details and additions or rearrangements of reinforcing steel .
section num concrete structures num submit num corrected copy to osd documents unit for each joint seal assembly within num days of authorization .
numenumciii certificate of compliance submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of joint seal assembly materials .
numenumd quality assurance numenumdi general vertical expansion joints in barriers must be accessible for inspection after recess concrete is placed .
joint seal assemblies will not be authorized without evidence of num year of satisfactory service under similar conditions .
numenumdii quality control a qualified representative of the assembly manufacturer must be present during the installation of the numst assembly and available during remaining installations .
numenumdiii department acceptance reserved numenum materials numenuma general joint seal assemblies must consist of a metal frame system supporting rails and support bars with intervening neoprene glands .
neoprene glands must comply with the requirements shown in table num of astm dnum except recovery and compressiondeflection tests are not required and the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement hardness points type a durometer astm dnum modified num compression set percent max num hours at num c astm dnum modified num metal parts of the joint seal assembly must comply with section num or astm anumanumm .
bolts nuts and washers must comply with the specifications for hs steel fastener assemblies in section num .
anchorage components must include anchor studs spaced at a maximum of num inches .
studs must be at least num inch in diameter and num inches long except the studs may be num inches long in the overhang .
assemblies must be assembled completely at the fabrication site .
numenumb design requirements if the assembly consists of more than num component design the assembly such that the external components can be removed and reinstalled at any position within the larger half of the mr to allow for inspection of the internal components .
except for components in contact with the tires the design loading must be the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications design truck with num percent dynamic load allowance .
each component in contact with the tires must support a minimum of num percent of the aashto lrfd bridge design specifications design truck with num percent dynamic load allowance .
the tire contact area must be num inches measured normal to the longitudinal assembly axis by num inches wide .
the assembly must provide a smoothriding joint without slapping of components or tire rumble .
the maximum width of unsupported or yielding components or grooves in the roadway surface of the assembly must be num inches measured in the direction of vehicular traffic .
assemblies must be capable of adjustment to the a dimension shown .
the assembly must have cip anchorage components that form a mechanical connection between the joint components and the concrete deck .
section num concrete structures num numenum construction measure dimensions for positioning the assembly during installation normal to the longitudinal axis of the assembly disregarding the skew of the deck expansion joint .
deck surfaces must comply with section numfnum before placing joint seal assemblies and anchorages .
place each assembly into a blockedout recess in the concrete deck surface .
the depth and width of the recess must allow the installation of the assembly anchorage components or anchorage bearing surface to the lines and grades shown .
except for primary reinforcement continue reinforcement through the recess construction joint into the recess and engage anchorage components of the assembly .
install each assembly with a watertight continuous return num inches up into barriers at the low side of the deck .
neoprene glands must be continuous without field splices or joints .
numenum payment not used numf asphaltic plug joint seals numfnum general numfnuma summary section numf includes specifications for constructing asphaltic plug joint seals .
asphaltic plug joint seals consist of an asphaltic binder and aggregate joint seal system .
numfnumb definitions reserved numfnumc submittals numfnumci general reserved numfnumcii shop drawings submit num copies of shop drawings for the proposed asphaltic plug joint seal system to osd documents unit .
notify the engineer of your submittal .
include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
allow num days for the departments review .
after review submit num to num copies as requested for final authorization and use during construction .
numfnumciii product data submit evidence from the manufacturer that num linear feet of the joint seal has had at least num years of satisfactory service under similar conditions .
numfnumciv certificate of compliance submit certificates of compliance for materials used in the joint seals .
submit a copy of the certified test report for binder material .
numfnumcv samples submit a numpound test sample of binder material to mets .
the test sample must be removed from the same material to be shipped to the job site .
submit the test sample at least num days before shipment to the job site .
numfnumd quality assurance numfnumdi general reserved section num concrete structures num numfnumdii quality control binder material must be tested and certified by an authorized laboratory .
a technical representative of the joint seal manufacturer must be present during installation .
numfnum materials all joint components must be from a single manufacturer .
the binder must be a thermoplastic polymericmodified asphalt thermoplastic polymermodified bitumen polymermodified asphalt sealant or modified elastomeric binder complying with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement asphalt compatibility astm dnum pass bond nonimmersed at num f num at num f num astm dnum pass num cycles pass num cycles cone penetration nonimmersed mm num g total weight num seconds at num num f num g total weight num seconds at num num f astm dnum modified num min num max ductility cm min at num num f astm dnum num flexibility at num num f astm dnuma pass flow mm max num hours at num num f astm dnum num resilience percent min at num num f astm dnum num softening point f min astm dnum num tensile adhesion percent min astm dnum num safe heating temperature f num recommended pouring temperature f num ado not oven age specimens .
after num hours at standard conditions allow specimens to condition at num num f for num hours before testing .
binder material delivered to the job site must be labeled with num .
manufacturers name num .
lot or batch number num .
dates of manufacturing packaging and expiration num .
manufacturers instructions for use binder material must be retested and recertified for use if the expiration date passes .
aggregates must comply with num .
section numc except the results of cleanness value and sand equivalent tests must comply with the requirements for both operating range and contract compliance num .
asphaltic plug manufacturers instructions the polyethylene backer rod must be commercial quality with a continuous impervious glazed surface that can withstand the hot liquid binder material and is suitable for retaining the hot liquid binder while it hardens .
the bridging plate must be num inches wide and at least num inch thick and comply with astm anumanumm .
cut the bridging plate into numinchminimumlength sections .
place holes for locating pins along the longitudinal plate centerline num inches on center .
the locating pins must be at least numd common steel nails or equal .
numfnum construction uniformly double wash and dry natural aggregates before use .
section num concrete structures num remove existing expansion dams and asphaltic concrete to the limits shown .
do not damage the deck or remaining asphaltic concrete .
steel dowels exposed when removing concrete must be cut off flush with the existing concrete or at the bottom of concrete removal whichever is lower .
patching around or over dowels in sound concrete is not required .
chip voids back to sound concrete and fill voids with magnesium phosphate concrete .
clean expansion joints under section numcnum .
repair spalls if ordered .
repairing spalls is change order work .
abrasive blast blockout surfaces to receive the asphaltic plug joint seal .
clean and dry blockout surfaces and the adjacent num inches of roadway immediately before placing the joint seal .
use a hot air lance producing a minimum temperature of num degrees f and a directional velocity of at least num ftsec .
there must be no moisture present during installation .
place the top of the backer rod to a depth of at least num inch and at most equal to the width of the existing gap below the bottom of the blockout .
center bridging plate sections over the existing gap .
place the sections flat on the bottom of the blockout .
the sections must be butt jointed .
do not overlap the sections or allow gaps between the plate and blockout .
install the joint seal under the manufacturers instructions .
numfnum payment not used num sliding joints numa general section num includes specifications for constructing sliding joints .
sliding joints consist of neoprene strips lubricated with silicone grease and covered with sheet metal .
numb materials neoprene strips must comply with the specifications for neoprene in section numb .
silicone grease must comply with society of automotive engineers as num .
sheet metal must be commercialquality galvanized sheet steel smooth and free of kinks bends or burrs .
joints must be butt joints sealed with plastic ductsealing tape .
numc construction apply a uniform film of silicone grease to the upper surface of the neoprene strip before placing the sheet metal .
float the concrete surfaces where neoprene strips are placed to a level plane and finish with a steel trowel .
do not allow grout or concrete seepage into the sliding joint during concrete placement .
numd payment not used num waterstops numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for installing waterstops .
numanum definitions reserved section num concrete structures num numanum submittals submit a certificate of compliance for waterstop material .
the certificate of compliance for pvc waterstop must include a statement that the material complies with item num of army corps of engineers crdc num .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials waterstops must be manufactured from neoprene or pvc .
neoprene must num be manufactured from a vulcanized elastomeric compound containing neoprene as the only elastomer and num comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement tensile strength min psi astm dnum num ultimate elongation min percent astm dnum num compression set max percent num hours at num c astm dnum method b num tear strength min knm astm dnum die c num hardness type a points astm dnum num num ozone resistance num strain num hours at num num f astm dnum except num num parts per num no cracks brittleness temperature at num c astm dnum section num pass flame propagation astm cnum must not propagate flame change in volume max percent irm num immersed num hours at num c astm dnum num change in mass max percent immersed num days at num c astm dnum num after accelerated aging under astm dnum for num hours at num degrees c the elastomer must not show quality characteristic changes greater than those shown in the following table quality characteristic requirement tensile strength percent num elongation at break percent num hardness points num pvc waterstops must num be manufactured from pvc complying with crdc num and num comply with the ozone resistance requirement for neoprene .
furnish waterstops full length for straight portions of joints .
manufacturers shop splices must be fully vulcanized .
numc construction use spacers wire or other authorized methods to secure reinforcing bars supporting waterstops .
if waterstops are out of shape or position after placing concrete remove the concrete and reset waterstops .
field splices for neoprene waterstops must be one of the following num .
vulcanized num .
mechanical using stainless steel parts num .
made with a splicing union of the same stock as the waterstop completed field splices must have a fullsize tensile strength of num pounds per inch of width .
section num concrete structures num field splice pvc waterstops by heat sealing under the manufacturers instructions .
do not burn the plastic when melting .
cut and splice waterstops at changes in direction as necessary to avoid buckling or distortion of the waterstop .
numd payment not used num strip waterstops numa general section num includes specifications for installing strip waterstops .
numb materials the neoprene sheet must comply with the specifications for neoprene in section numb .
the neoprene adhesive must comply with federal specification mmmanum .
the protective board must be at least numinchthick wood or fiberboard that is at least num ft long and the width shown .
the neoprene sheet must be smooth and free from pin holes or surface blemishes and show no sign of delamination .
numc construction join neoprene sheets as follows num .
lap the sheets at least num inches .
num .
apply the adhesive to both faces at the manufacturers recommended rate .
num .
let the adhesive dry to an aggressive tack .
num .
bring the sheets together and roll in both directions to obtain a tight bond .
abrasive blast clean the concrete surfaces to receive a strip waterstop .
allow the cleaned surfaces to air dry num hours before applying the adhesive .
surfaces where adhesive is to be applied must have a cloth finish or a buffed finish .
surfaces must be clean and dry when the adhesive is applied .
apply the adhesive to the concrete and neoprene sheet at the manufacturers recommended rate .
let the adhesive dry to an aggressive tack .
apply the sheet to the concrete surface and roll in both directions to obtain a tight bond .
completely cover the installed strip waterstops with num layer of protective board attached with adhesive .
the protective board must remain in place until backfilling is complete .
numd payment not used num bearings num general numa general section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing bearings .
numb materials not used numc construction not used numd payment not used section num concrete structures num num elastomeric bearing pads numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing elastomeric bearing pads .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals numanuma general reserved numanumb samples numanumbi general reserved numanumbii plain elastomeric bearing pads for plain elastomeric bearing pads the engineer selects a test sample that is at least num by num inches from each lot of pads or batch of elastomer to be furnished whichever results in the larger number of test samples .
you may designate that test samples be taken at the point of manufacture or at the job site .
job site test samples are completed pads as shown .
submit plain elastomeric bearing pad test samples at least num days before use .
furnish additional pads to replace the pads selected for testing .
numanumbiii steelreinforced elastomeric bearing pads submit num test sample from each lot of steelreinforced bearing pads at least num days before use .
the size of the test sample must be as shown in the following table bearing pad thickness test sample size num inches or less smallest complete bearing shown more than num inches num numinchthick test sample at least num by num inches cut by the manufacturer from the center of the thickest complete bearinga asubmit the test sample and the remaining parts of the complete bearing .
numanumc certificate of compliance numanumci general reserved numanumcii plain elastomeric bearing pads submit a certificate of compliance with certified test results for the elastomer for plain elastomeric bearing pads .
numanumciii steelreinforced elastomeric bearing pads submit a certificate of compliance with certified test results from the bearing manufacturer for steel reinforced elastomeric bearing pads .
numanum quality assurance numanuma general reserved numanumb department acceptance numanumbi general reserved section num concrete structures num numanumbii plain elastomeric bearing pads the department takes specimens from the test sample prepares them by cutting and grinding and tests them for tensile strength elongation tear strength and ozone resistance under section numbnum .
numanumbiii steelreinforced elastomeric bearing pads the department tests a specimen taken from the test sample for tensile strength elongation and strength under section numbnum .
specimens must show no loss of bond between the steel and elastomer laminates .
numb materials numbnum general elastomeric bearing pads num inch or less in thickness must comply with section numbnum .
elastomeric bearing pads over num inch in thickness must comply with section numbnum or section num numbnum .
silicone grease must comply with society of automotive engineers as num .
sheet metal must be commercialquality galvanized sheet steel smooth and free of kinks bends or burrs .
joints must be butt joints sealed with plastic ductsealing tape .
numbnum plain elastomeric bearing pads for plain elastomeric bearing pads pads num inch or less in thickness must be either laminated or all elastomer .
pads over num inch in thickness must be laminated .
the stacking of individually laminated pads to attain thicknesses over num inch or the cold bonding of individual laminated pads is not allowed .
elastomeric bearing pads may be cut from large sheets .
cutting must be performed so as to avoid heating of the material to produce a smooth edge with no tears or other jagged areas and to cause as little damage to the material as possible .
neoprene must be the only polymer in the elastomeric compound and must be not less than num percent by volume of the total compound .
the elastomer must comply with astm dnum type cr grade num with a shear modulus of num num psi .
the elastomer must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement tensile strength min psi astm dnum num ultimate elongation min astm dnum num compression set max num hours at num c astm dnum method b num tear strength min knm astm dnum die c num hardness type a points astm dnum with num kg mass num num ozone resistance num strain num hours at num num c astm dnum except num num parts per num no cracks instantaneous thermal stiffening at num c astm dnum not more than num times the stiffness measured at num c low temperature brittleness at num c astm dnum section num pass after accelerated aging under astm dnum for num hours at num degrees c the elastomer must not show quality characteristic changes greater than those shown in the following table section num concrete structures num quality characteristic requirement tensile strength loss num ultimate elongation loss num but not less than num percent total elongation of the material hardness points num numbnum steelreinforced elastomeric bearing pads steelreinforced elastomeric bearing pads must comply with the specifications for steellaminated elastomeric bearings in astm dnum and the following num .
bearing pads must consist of alternating steel laminates and internal elastomer laminates with top bottom and side elastomer covers .
steel laminates must have a nominal thickness of num inch num gauge .
internal elastomer laminates must have a thickness of num inch .
top and bottom elastomer covers must each have a thickness of num inch .
the combined thickness of internal elastomer laminates and top and bottom elastomer covers must be equal to the bearing pad thickness shown .
the elastomer cover to the steel laminates at the sides of the bearing must be num inch .
if guide pins or other devices are used to control the side cover over the steel laminates any exposed portions of the steel laminates must be sealed by vulcanized patching .
num .
total bearing thickness must be equal to the sum of the thicknesses of the elastomeric laminates and covers and the steel laminates .
num .
elastomer must comply with section numbnum .
numc construction notify the engineer of the type of bearing pad to be used before constructing the bearing seats .
the bearing seat elevation must correspond to the selected bearing thickness .
where shown lubricate the upper surface of the elastomeric bearing pad with a uniform film of silicone grease before placing the sheet metal cover .
do not allow grout or concrete seepage into the sliding surface during concrete placement .
numd payment not used num ptfe spherical bearings numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing ptfe spherical bearings .
ptfe spherical bearings consist of ptfe and stainless steel bearing surfaces stainless steel plates and anchors .
ptfe spherical bearings are either num fixed type with spherical bearing surfaces or num expansion type with spherical and sliding bearing surfaces .
numanum definitions load category ptfe spherical bearings of differing vertical load capacity within a range defined as follows num .
bearings of num kips capacity or less num .
bearings over num kips up to and including num kips capacity num .
bearings over num kips capacity bearings in num different load categories that have vertical load capacities within num kips of each other are considered to be in num load category for proof testing .
section num concrete structures num numanum submittals numanuma general submit proof that the bearing manufacturer has furnished ptfe spherical bearings that have had at least num years of satisfactory service for num projects with similar conditions to this project .
submit certificates of compliance for the materials used in ptfe bearings .
submit test reports for prooftested bearings signed by the personnel conducting the testing .
include bearing numbers of the tested bearings and the names of the personnel interpreting the test results .
if proof tests can not be performed at the specified load submit a testing plan listing additional physical tests to be performed .
numanumb shop drawings submit shop drawings to osd documents unit .
notify the engineer of your submittal .
include in the notification the date and list of contents of the submittal .
for initial review submit num copies for railroad bridges and num copies for other structures .
after review submit num to num copies as requested for authorization and use during construction .
allow num days for the departments review for railway bridges and at least num days for all other structures .
shop drawings must include a description of the method of mechanical interlocking of ptfe fabric to the metallic substrate .
at locations other than hinges shop drawings must include temporary support details for the bearing sole plate during concrete placement .
numanum quality assurance numanuma general the bearing manufacturer must have furnished ptfe spherical bearings that have had at least num years of satisfactory service for num projects with similar conditions to this project .
a qualified representative of the bearing manufacturer must be present during installation of the numst bearing and be available during remaining installations .
templates for the spherical surfaces must be available for inspection .
numanumb quality control numanumbi general reserved numanumbii proof testing proof test the ptfe spherical bearings in the engineers presence as follows num .
test fixedtype bearings for compression .
num .
test expansiontype bearings for compression and initial static coefficient of friction .
proof test num bearing from each lot of production bearings .
a lot of bearings is num bearings or fraction thereof of the same type within a load category .
the engineer selects random test samples from each lot of production bearings .
notify the engineer at least num days before starting proof testing .
if proof tests can not be performed at the specified load perform the additional physical tests described in the testing plan in the presence of the engineer .
the tests must demonstrate that the requirements for proof testing at the specified load are satisfied .
before proof testing the test bearings must be conditioned for num hours at num num degrees f. clean the bearing surfaces before testing .
for compression testing of ptfe spherical bearings section num concrete structures num num .
rotate the bearings at the design rotation or num radians whichever is greater and hold for num hour at a load of num times the maximum vertical load capacity .
you may rotate the bearing by inserting a beveled plate between the bearing and the restraining surface before loading .
num .
maintain the bearing in a rotated position during testing .
for coefficient of friction testing of ptfe spherical bearings num .
continuously load the bearing to the minimum dead load for num hours before testing .
maintain the dead load during testing .
num .
measure the initial static coefficient of friction on the numst movement of the bearing .
num .
measure the initial static and dynamic coefficients of friction at a sliding speed of not more than num inch per minute .
the initial static friction must not exceed that specified .
num .
cycle the test bearings for a minimum of num movements .
each movement must consist of at least num inch of relative movement at a sliding speed of not more than num inches per minute .
after cycling measure the initial static and dynamic coefficients of friction at a sliding speed of not more than num inch per minute .
the initial static friction must not exceed that specified .
prooftested bearings must not show any signs of the following num .
bond failure of bearing surfaces num .
separation or liftoff of plates from each other or from ptfe surfaces num .
excessive transfer of ptfe to the stainless steel surface num .
other defects if a prooftested bearing fails to comply with the above requirements proof test all the remaining bearings in the lot .
numb materials numbnum general welding must comply with aws dnum except welding of stainless steel must comply with aws dnum .
ptfe spherical bearings must be selflubricating .
ptfe surfaces must be unfilled fabric made from virgin ptfe oriented multifilament and other fibers .
filament resin must comply with astm dnum .
at the highest point of substrate and after compression the ptfe fabric must have a thickness from num to num inch .
steel plates must comply with astm anumanumm .
stainless steel plates must comply with astm anumanumm type num and be at least num inch thick .
surfaces of flat stainless steel that mate with ptfe surfacing must have a minimum no .
num mirror finish .
surfaces of curved stainless steel that mate with ptfe surfacing must have a finish of less than num microinches root mean square .
determine the finish under ansi bnum .
ptfe spherical bearings must have an initial static coefficient of friction of at most num .
stud connectors must comply with section num .
protect bearing surfaces from contamination and weather damage .
numbnum fabrication flat stainless steel surfaces must be a weld overlay on structural steel plate or a solid or sheet stainless steel .
curved stainless steel surfaces must be solid stainless steel except curved stainless steel surfaces over num inches thick may be a weld overlay on structural steel plate .
if a weld overlay is used for stainless steel surfacing attach the overlay by submerged arc welding using type numl electrodes .
the completed overlay must have a numinch minimum thickness after fabrication .
section num concrete structures num if stainless steel sheets are used for stainless steel surfacing attach the sheets by perimeter arc welding using type numl electrodes .
after welding the stainless steel surface must be smooth and without waves .
plate radius dimensional tolerances are from num to num inch for convex plates and from num to num inch for concave plates .
use fullsize convex and concave metal templates for the spherical surfaces of each bearing radius .
ptfe fabric backing material on bearing surfaces must be epoxy bonded and mechanically interlocked to the steel substrate .
bonding must be performed under controlled factory conditions .
the mechanical interlock on the spherical concave surface must be integrally machined into the steel substrate .
welded retention grids are not allowed on the concave surface .
except for the selvage oversaw or recess edges such that no cut fabric edges are exposed .
during fabrication the maximum temperature of bonded ptfe surfaces must be num degrees f. after bonding to the substrate the ptfe surface must be smooth and free from bubbles .
assemble ptfe spherical bearings at the fabrication site .
the ptfe and stainless steel interfaces must be in full bearing after completing assembly .
use at least num steel straps bolted to threaded holes in the masonry and sole plates to secure each bearing assembly as a unit for shipment .
steel straps must num not be welded and num be adequate to use for lifting the bearing assembly .
bearings must be shipped as a unit and remain intact when uncrated and installed .
numc construction prepare concrete surfaces to receive ptfe spherical bearings under section numcnum .
the engineer must be present during the dismantling of each bearing assembly at the job site .
temporarily support ptfe bearing sole plates during concrete placement .
temporary supports must prevent rotation or displacement of the bearings .
temporary supports must not num inhibit the function of the ptfe bearings after concrete is placed or num restrict movement at bridge joints due to temperature changes and prestress shortening .
materials for temporary supports must comply with the requirements for form fasteners in section numcnuma .
replace or resurface damaged bearings and bearings with scratched mating surfaces .
resurfacing must be performed at the bearing manufacturers plant .
numd payment the payment quantity for ptfe spherical bearings does not include the test bearings .
a ptfe spherical bearing with more than num ptfe surface is num bearing .
num reserved num precast concrete members num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing precast concrete members .
prestressing concrete members must comply with section num .
cure pc concrete members under section num .
furnishing pc concrete members includes furnishing members to the job site ready to incorporate into the work .
erecting pc concrete members includes erecting members into final position in the work .
numb definitions reserved section num concrete structures num numc submittals numcnum general submit a certificate of compliance signed by the manufacturers qc representative for each pc concrete box culvert shipment .
for pc ps concrete girders submit a girder erection work plan .
include procedures details and sequences for unloading lifting and erecting girders and for temporary bracing installation .
the work plan must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
numcnum shop drawings numcnuma general submit shop drawings for pc concrete members .
numcnumb girders for pc ps concrete girders shop drawings must include num .
anticipated deflections of the girders before deck placement and the methods of accommodation .
include the following anticipated deflections num upward deflection due to prestressing forces num downward deflection due to girder dead load num deflection due to creep and shrinkage from the time of girder stressing to the planned deck placement num .
deflection calculations that consider the age of the girder concrete when stressing and the planned placement of the deck .
use the concrete producers estimated modulus of elasticity at the applicable concrete age for calculating deflections .
for segmental or splicedgirder construction shop drawings must include the following additional information num .
details showing construction joints or closure joints num .
arrangement of bar reinforcing steel prestressing tendons and pressure grouting pipe num .
materials and methods for making closures num .
construction joint keys and surface treatment num .
other requested information for segmental girder construction shop drawings must include concrete form and casting details .
numcnumc closure wall panels submit num copies of shop drawings for pc concrete closure wall panels as an informational submittal .
include in the submittal num .
panel dimensions num .
materials num .
prestressing methods num .
tendon arrangement and stresses num .
additions or rearrangement of reinforcing steel from that shown numcnumd box culverts shop drawings for pc concrete box culverts must include the construction method dimensions reinforcement including splice type and location and height of earth cover .
numcnume deck panels reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general pc materials must be available to the department for inspection .
allow the department free access at all times to any portion of the fabrication site where material is stored or work is performed .
section num concrete structures num numdnum quality control reserved numdnum department acceptance pc concrete members are inspected at the fabrication site .
notify the department when materials are delivered to the fabrication site .
allow num days after notifying the department before starting fabrication .
num materials numa general reserved numb delivery storage and handling carefully handle store transport and erect pc concrete members to avoid twisting racking or other distortion that would result in cracking or damage to the members .
handle store transport and erect pc members in an upright position such that the points of support and directions of the reactions with respect to the member are approximately the same as when the member is in its final position .
numc materials for a project in a freezethaw area reinforcement must be epoxy coated under section num .
bearing plates threaded inserts and other metal fittings must comply with section num concrete for keyways must have a cementitious material content of at least num lbcu yd and a numinch maximum grading .
penetration of the concrete must be near the lower limit of the specified nominal penetration .
grout must comply with astm cnumcnumm .
deck shear connector rods shown as tie rods must comply with the following num .
steel fastener components must comply with section num .
num .
lock washers must be ansi heavy duty spring washers .
num .
all metal must be hotdip galvanized after fabrication under astm anumanumm .
numd fabricating precast concrete members numdnum general reserved numdnum girders box girders and double t girders before curing activities the top surface of each pc member must be given a coarse texture by brooming with a stiff bristled broom or by other suitable devices that results in uniform transverse scoring .
the top surface texture of the following pc members must have at least a numinch amplitude num .
girders num .
box girders with a concrete deck shown num .
t girders with a concrete deck shown wood float portions of the top surface of box girders to be covered by expanded polystyrene .
for segmental or splicedgirder construction materials for construction joints or closure joints at exterior girders must match the color and texture of the adjoining concrete .
at splicedgirder closure joints num .
if shear keys are not shown the vertical surfaces of the girder segment ends must be given a coarse texture as specified for the top surface of pc members .
num .
posttensioning ducts must extend out of the vertical surface of the girder segment closure end sufficiently to facilitate splicing of the duct .
section num concrete structures num for spliced girders pretension strand extending from the closure end of the girder segment to be embedded in the closure joint must be free of mortar oil dirt excessive mill scale and scabby rust and other coatings that would destroy or reduce the bond .
numdnum slabs forms for circular voids in concrete slabs must num be watertight and constructed of an authorized material that does not break or deform during concrete placement and num not increase the span dead load .
before curing the top surface of concrete slabs must be given a coarse texture by brooming with a stiff bristled broom or by other suitable devices that results in uniform transverse scoring .
the requirements of the numth and numth paragraphs of section numdnumbii do not apply .
numdnum closure wall panels exposed surfaces of closure wall panels must match the adjacent cip concrete .
prestressing steel must be num placed not more than num inches from panel edges and num spaced not more than num inches on center between edge tendons .
anchorage hardware must comply with section num .
bolt holes must comply with section numenumb except holes must not be punched full size .
numdnum box culverts reinforcement for pc concrete box culverts may be welded wire reinforcement .
manufacturing tolerances for pc sections must comply with the tolerances specified in section num of aashto m num .
you may use the dry cast method of construction where shown on the authorized shop drawings .
results must be equal to those obtained under section num .
external vibrators must be used .
forms must be sufficiently rigid to resist displacement or damage .
dry casting forms may be removed after consolidating if no slumping of the concrete occurs .
form the ends of members such that sections can be laid together to make a continuous line of box sections with a smooth interior free of irregularities in the flow line .
splices in circumferential reinforcement must be lapped .
welded splices for the outside apron of steel are allowed only where shown .
wall reinforcement on the inside of the box may be lapped and welded at any location or connected by welding at the corners to slab reinforcement at the inside of the box .
handling devices or holes are allowed in members for handling and laying .
clean and fill the resulting holes with mortar .
exposed spacers standoffs or ends of longitudinals used to position reinforcement are not a cause for rejection .
do not weld spacers or standoffs to circumferential reinforcement .
you may weld spacers or standoffs to longitudinal reinforcement .
clearly mark each pc unit .
use indentation waterproof paint or other authorized means .
include contract number date of manufacture manufacturer and the design earth cover .
mark each unit by indentation on the inner or outer surface so that the top is evident immediately after stripping forms .
paint the word top with waterproof paint on the inside and outside surfaces of the tops of each unit .
numdnum lagging for a project in a freezethaw area concrete for pc concrete lagging must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
if concrete lagging is steam cured supports for reinforcement must be stainless steel containing at least num percent chromium .
numdnum deck panels reserved section num concrete structures num num construction numa general reserved numb girders box girders and double t girders for girders and box girders or double t girders with a concrete deck shown clean top surfaces of laitance and curing compound before placing deck concrete .
you may make adjustments to accommodate girder deflections before placing deck concrete including adjustments to bearing seat elevations .
adjustments are limited by the following num .
minimum permanent vertical clearance under the structure is not reduced .
num .
deck profile grade and cross slope can not be changed .
num .
except for box girders a minimum of num inch of deck slab concrete is maintained between the deck slab reinforcement and the top of the girders .
num .
for box girders a minimum of num inch of deck slab concrete is maintained between the top of expanded polystyrene in the area between the girder webs and the deck slab reinforcement .
adjustments to accommodate girder deflections are not considered a change in dimensions .
grout keyways after pc members are in final position .
before grouting abrasive blast clean the keyways to expose clean aggregate .
flush keyways with water and allow them to dry to a surface dry condition immediately before placing the grout .
no equipment or other loads are allowed on spans that have been grouted until num hours after the last grout is placed .
do not tension or tighten transverse posttensioning tendons until num hours after grouting the last keyway .
the specifications for prestressing force distribution and sequencing of stressing in the posttensioning activity in numbnuma do not apply if posttensioning of spliced girders before starting deck construction is described .
the composite deckgirder structure must be posttensioned in a subsequent stage .
temporary splicedgirder supports must comply with the specifications for falsework in section num .
before posttensioning of spliced girders remove the forms at cip concrete closures and intermediate diaphragms to allow inspection for concrete consolidation .
numc slabs for slab spans with a concrete overlay clean the slab top surfaces under section numdnum .
for slab spans with an hma overlay removal of laitance and curing compound from the top surfaces is not required .
where the ends of transverse rods will be exposed recess exposed nuts and ends of rods at least num inch below the member surface .
snug tighten nuts after the deck units are positioned and before placing mortar in the keyways .
fill the anchor dowel holes with mortar after the slabs are in final position .
fill keyways with concrete .
keyways must be mortartight before placing concrete .
thoroughly consolidate the concrete in keyways .
tighten nuts num hours after concrete in the keyways has been placed .
burr threads at the ends of bolts or rods to prevent loosening .
fill recesses with mortar after tightening nuts .
no equipment or other loads are allowed on spans until num hours after the last mortar is placed in anchor dowel holes or the last concrete is placed in keyways .
for slab spans with a concrete overlay at least num slabs adjacent to a span must be in place before the concrete overlay is placed in that span .
section num concrete structures num numd closure wall panels reserved nume box culverts construct box culverts using pc members where described .
you must select the combination of concrete dimensions and reinforcement if more than num allowable combination is shown .
structure excavation and backfill must comply with section num .
laying of pc concrete box culverts must comply with the specifications for laying reinforced concrete pipe in section numc .
joints must comply with the specifications for cement mortar or resilient material joints in section num numf .
you may use an external sealing band complying with astm cnum instead of joint material .
numf lagging place concrete lagging for soldier piles walls level .
place a concrete leveling course if required .
each lagging member must be continuous over num piles and cantilever at least num inches beyond pile centerlines .
continuity over num piles is not allowed .
numg deck panels reserved num payment payment for diaphragm dowels and bolts in pc concrete members is not included in the payment for any type of furnish or erect pc concrete member .
the payment quantity for pc concrete lagging is the wall area shown without deductions for spacing between lagging or openings for piping .
pc concrete box culvert is measured as specified for concrete pipe in section num .
num approach slabs num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing approach slabs and paving notch extensions .
structure approach drainage system must num consist of geocomposite drain filter fabric plastic pipe treated permeable base and drainage pads and num comply with section num .
structure excavation and backfill must comply with section num .
treated permeable base must comply with section num .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals if using rsc submit the rsc mix design at least num days before constructing the trial slab .
numd quality assurance numdnum general if woven tape fabric is shown notify the engineer of the source of woven tape fabric at least num days before use .
notify the engineer of the type of treated permeable base to be used under approach slabs at least num days before starting placement .
after notification do not change the type of permeable base without authorization .
section num concrete structures num numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb rapid strength concrete before starting work on approach slabs constructed using rsc prepare a trial slab for each concrete mix design .
trial slabs must be num .
constructed finished and cured within the allowed time with the materials tools equipment personnel and methods to be used in the work num .
num by num feet by num inches thick num .
constructed near the job site outside the project limits at an authorized location trial slabs must demonstrate that you are capable of producing approach slabs within the anticipated time periods including delivery placement finishing and curing times and under similar atmospheric and temperature conditions expected during construction activities .
multiple trial slabs for each concrete mix design may be required to encompass variable atmospheric conditions .
test the trial slab concrete for compressive strength under section numdnum .
trial slab concrete must develop the following minimum compressive strengths num .
num psi at the age of break num .
num psi at num days num .
num psi at num days num materials numa general hardboard and expanded polystyrene must comply with section numbnum .
numb fabric filter fabric must be class a. woven tape fabric must num .
be fabric of woven strips or tapes num .
retain at least num percent tensile strength when tested under astm dnum with num hours exposure num .
comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement weight min ozsq yd astm dnum num grab breaking load min lb astm dnum num apparent elongation min percent astm dnum num toughnessa min lb num apercent apparent elongation times the grab breaking load numc concrete concrete for approach slabs and paving notch extensions must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard and comply with one of the following num .
cure for at least num days before opening to traffic num .
comply with the specifications for rsc for paving notch extensions you may use magnesium phosphate concrete modified highaluminabased concrete or portlandcementbased concrete complying with the specifications for bonding materials in section num .
the concrete may be extended by using a clean uniform rounded aggregate filler with a moisture content of at most num percent .
the quantity of aggregate filler must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
concrete strengths for the extended concrete must be at least that specified section num concrete structures num for the bonding materials .
the aggregate gradation must comply with the requirements shown in the following table sieve size percentage passing numinch num no .
num num for a project in a freezethaw area concrete for approach slabs and paving notch extensions must comply with section numi .
concrete for drainage pads must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
numd aggregate base ab must be produced from commercialquality aggregates consisting of broken stone crushed gravel or natural roughsurfaced gravel and sand in any combination .
gradation must comply with the numinch maximum gradation specified in section numb .
nume bar reinforcement bar reinforcing steel must comply with section num .
in a freezethaw area epoxy coat bar reinforcement under section num .
galvanize unbonded portions of bar reinforcement under section num .
numf miscellaneous joint materials steel components of abutment ties must comply with section num .
pvc conduit used to encase abutment tie rods must be commercial quality .
steel angles plates and bars at concrete barrier joints must comply with section num .
type al joint seals must comply with section numb .
the pourable seal between the steel angle and concrete barrier must comply with the specifications for type a and al joint seals in section numb .
sealants may be mixed by handheld powerdriven agitators and placed by hand methods .
sliding joints for the sleeper slabs must comply with num .
building paper must be commercialquality numpound asphalt felt .
numg hot mix asphalt hma for a temporary roadway structural section must comply with the specifications for minor hma in section num .
num construction numa general drill and bond bar reinforcement and abutment tie rods under section numenum .
finish and treat the top surfaces of approach slabs under section numfnum .
edger finish the slab edges .
cure approach slabs using curing compound no .
num .
abrasive blast clean the concrete surfaces and thoroughly clean joints immediately before placing the joint seals .
joint surfaces must be dry when seals are placed .
numb type n approach slabs numbnum general reserved section num concrete structures num numbnum filter fabric place filter fabric immediately after grading and compacting the subgrade .
handle and place filter fabric under the manufacturers instructions .
adjacent borders of filter fabric must be overlapped from num to num inches or stitched .
if overlapping the borders the preceding roll must overlap the following roll in the direction the material is being spread .
if stitching the border use yarn of a contrasting color .
yarn size and composition must be as recommended by the fabric manufacturer .
use num to num stitches per inch of seam .
do not operate equipment or vehicles on filter fabric .
numbnum treated permeable base place and compact atpb at a temperature from num to num degrees f. do not use material stored for more than num hours in the work .
compact atpb base as soon as the mixture has cooled sufficiently to support the weight of the equipment without undue displacements .
use a vibratingshoetype compactor or a roller weighing from num to num tons .
compact ctpb with a vibratingshoetype compactor or with a steeldrum roller weighing from num to num tons .
compaction must start within num hour of spreading and must consist of num complete coverages of the ctpb .
numc type eq approach slabs reserved numd type r approach slabs numdnum general the type r approach slab thicknesses shown are minimums .
thicknesses may vary due to material removed .
at locations where the removal of existing materials and approach slab construction is not required to be completed within the same work shift the requirements for a temporary roadway structural section and trial slab do not apply .
numdnum removal of existing facilities remove portions of existing structures pavement and base approach slabs asphalt concrete surfacing concrete pavement subsealing material and cementtreated base as necessary for the construction of the new approach slab .
remove portions of seattype abutments under section num .
saw cut full depth the outline of concrete pavement to be removed using a powerdriven saw .
do not use power impact tools within num feet of pavement to remain in place .
before removing asphalt concrete cut the outlines of excavations in asphalt concrete on a neat line to a minimum depth of num foot using a powerdriven concrete saw or wheeltype rockcutting excavator .
these excavations must be permanently or temporarily backfilled to conform to the grade of the adjacent pavement before opening the lane to traffic .
dispose of materials no longer used in the work .
numdnum existing base material uniformly grade and compact the existing base material remaining in place after removing the existing pavement and base materials to the required depth .
the finished surface of the base material at any point must not extend above the authorized grade .
fill areas of base material that are low as a result of overexcavation with structure approach slab concrete at the same time that the new concrete is placed .
section num concrete structures num where pavement subsealing has been performed under existing approach slabs remove the full depth of subsealing material .
where removal of ctb is required to construct the approach slab remove the full depth of the ctb .
fill voids between the new approach slab and the base material remaining in place that are caused by removal of subsealing material or ctb with either ab or approach slab concrete .
if you fill these voids with structure approach slab concrete fill the voids at the same time that the new concrete is placed .
numdnum aggregate base spread and compact ab for filling voids below the structure approach slab concrete by methods that will produce a wellcompacted uniform base free from pockets of coarse or fine material to the authorized grade .
where the required thickness of ab is num inches or less the base may be spread and compacted in num layer .
where the required thickness of ab is more than num inches the base must be spread and compacted in num or more layers of approximately equal thickness .
the maximum compacted thickness of any num layer must not exceed num inches .
numdnum profile grade establish a grade line for the new approach slab that will provide a smooth profile grade .
the profile grade must be authorized .
numdnum temporary roadway structural section if approach slabs can not be constructed before the lane is opened to traffic fill the excavation with a temporary roadway structural section .
temporary structural section must consist of a numfootthick layer of commercial quality cold mix over ab .
keep a standby quantity of cold mix and ab at the job site for a temporary roadway structural section .
spread and compact the ab and cold mix .
produce a wellcompacted uniform base having a surface of uniform smoothness texture and density without pockets of coarse or fine material .
you may spread and compact ab and cold mix in num layer each .
the finished surface num must not vary more than num foot from the lower edge of a numfoot straightedge placed parallel with the centerline and num must match the elevation of the existing pavement and structure along the joints between the existing pavement and structure and the temporary surfacing .
maintain the temporary structural section until it is replaced with the approach slab .
nume paving notch extensions the construction joint between the paving notch extension and the existing abutment must comply with the specifications for horizontal construction joints in section numdnum .
patch spalls in the existing paving notch when placing the paving notch extension .
the surface temperature must be at least num degrees f during concrete placement .
contact surfaces to receive concrete may be damp but not saturated .
retempering of concrete is not allowed .
finishing tools cleaned with water must be thoroughly dried before working concrete .
the engineer may require you to use a flowcontrolled modified material when placing concrete on slopes over num percent .
except for magnesium phosphate concrete cure the concrete using the curing compound method .
allow num hours between placing the paving notch extension and placing the approach slab .
num payment the payment quantity of aggregate base approach slab is the volume used to fill voids below approach slab concrete .
the payment quantity does not include the volume of ab used to fill an overexcavation .
section num concrete structures num num mass concrete num general numa summary section num includes specifications for placing mass concrete elements .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a thermal control plan with design calculations for each mass concrete element .
the thermal control plan and the calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
submit num copies of the control plan and num copies of the design calculations .
include the following num .
mix design num .
duration and method of curing num .
maximum allowable temperature differentials between the hottest point of the concrete and the exterior concrete faces num .
procedures to control concrete temperature differentials at time of placement num .
methods of controlling temperature differentials num .
temperature differential monitoring and recording system details num .
temperature sensor types and locations num .
measures to ensure compliance with maximum temperature and temperature differential requirements determine the maximum allowable temperature differential assuming cracking due to heat of hydration does not occur .
submit temperature data daily as an informational submittal .
submit a daily progress report as an informational submittal .
a copy of the daily report must be available at the job site .
submit a modified thermal control plan to correct deficiencies for replacement mass concrete .
include supporting calculations .
numd quality assurance numdnum general an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state must num .
inspect and test the temperature monitoring and recording systems before concrete placement num .
be present during mass concrete activities num .
provide daily progress reports numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb temperature monitoring provide a temperature monitoring and recording system for mass concrete elements .
the system must consist of temperature sensors connected to a data acquisition system .
the system must be capable of recording printing and downloading temperature data to a computer .
locate temperature sensors within mass concrete elements such that the maximum temperature difference within the element is monitored .
at a minimum monitor temperatures at the following locations num .
calculated hottest location num .
num outer faces num .
num corners except for cip piling elements num .
top surfaces section num concrete structures num record temperature readings automatically at least every hour .
install a redundant set of sensors near the primary set with recording capability .
make records using the redundant set if the primary set fails .
you may discontinue hourly temperature recording under the following conditions num .
maximum internal temperature is falling num .
difference between the interior concrete temperature and the average daily air temperature is less than the allowable temperature differential for num consecutive days num .
there are no mass concrete elements to be cast adjacent protect the temperature sensor wiring to prevent movement during concrete placement .
keep wire runs as short as possible .
do not let the ends of temperature sensors come into contact with concrete supports forms or reinforcement .
do not damage the monitoring and recording system when placing and consolidating concrete .
correct equipment failures in temperature control and monitoring and recording systems immediately .
the temperature acceptance criteria for mass concrete elements are as follows num .
maximum allowable temperature must not exceed num degrees f. num .
maximum temperature differential must not exceed that listed in the thermal control plan .
num materials grout for cooling pipes must be a nonshrink grout mix complying with astm cnumcnumm and astm cnumcnumm for num percent shrinkage and num percent minimum and num percent maximum expansion .
num construction you may use mechanical cooling systems to control internal concrete temperatures during curing .
mechanical cooling systems must comply with the thermal control plan .
embed the cooling system within the mass concrete element .
surface connections to cooling pipes must be removable to num inches below the concrete surface .
design the forms such that cooling or temperature monitoring is not disturbed during form removal .
secure the cooling pipes to prevent movement during concrete placement .
replace damaged cooling pipes immediately .
pressure test the cooling system for leaks at num psi for num minutes before placing concrete .
coolant must be circulating when concrete placement starts .
pressure grout the cooling pipes after cooling is complete .
place the grout under the manufacturers instructions .
after the surface connections are removed the holes must be reamed and filled with mortar .
remove mass concrete elements that do not comply with the temperature acceptance criteria .
num payment not used num minor structures num general numa general section num includes specifications for constructing minor structures .
minor structures include num .
pipe culvert headwalls and endwalls for a pipe with a diameter less than num feet num .
drainage inlets num .
other structures described as minor structures section num concrete structures num numb materials concrete must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
nonshrink grout must be a dry packaged type complying with astm cnumcnumm .
metal frames covers grates and other miscellaneous iron and steel used with minor structures must comply with section num .
pc units for drainage inlets must be round oval or rectangular in cross section or any combination .
transitions from a rectangular grate opening to a round or oval basin must be made in not less than num inches .
provide means for field adjustment to meet final grade paving or surfacing .
numc construction you may construct forms for drainage inlets using any material that produces the interior dimensions and wall thicknesses shown .
undulations of interior wall surfaces must not exceed num inch .
extend the outside forms at least num inches below the top of the inlet .
you may place concrete against excavated earth below this depth except you must use fulldepth outside forms or other protection when work activities or unstable earth may cause hazardous conditions or contamination of the concrete .
you may construct minor structures using pc units or a combination of pc and cip structures as an alternative to cip construction provided that the structure in place substantially complies with the specified cip construction .
you may use pc drainage inlets as an alternative to cip drainage inlets .
remove exterior forms to at least num inches below the final ground surface .
exterior forms below this depth may remain if their total thickness is not more than num inch .
cure concrete surfaces of minor structures using the water method the formsinplace method or the curing compound method .
numd payment the department does not adjust the payment quantity for minor structures designated as final pay on the bid item list if the constructed height of the minor structure is within num inches of the vertical dimensions shown .
metal frames and covers or frames and grates are not included in the payment for minor structures .
num precast drainage inlets reserved num reserved num num reinforcement num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for fabricating and placing reinforcement .
numb definitions affected zone portion of the reinforcing bar where any properties of the bar including the physical metallurgical or material characteristics have been changed by either num .
fabrication or installation of a splice .
the weld and num inch adjacent to the weld is part of the affected zone .
num .
manufacturing process for headed bar reinforcement .
lot num .
num count or fraction thereof of the same type of mechanical splice coupler model for each num .
bar size num .
bar deformation pattern num .
hoop diameter num .
num count or fraction thereof of cjp buttwelded splices or resistancebuttwelded splices for each num .
bar size num .
hoop diameter numc submittals numcnum general reserved numcnum shop drawings if a portion of an assemblage of bar reinforcing steel exceeds num feet in height and is not encased in concrete submit shop drawings and design calculations for a temporary support system .
temporary support system shop drawings and calculations must be sealed and signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
the temporary support system must be designed to num .
resist all expected loads num .
prevent collapse or overturning of the cage if form installation or other work requires changes to or the temporary release of any part of the temporary support system the shop drawings must show the support system to be used during these changes or the temporary release .
the minimum horizontal wind load to be applied to the reinforcing steel assemblage or to a combined assemblage of reinforcing steel and forms must be the sum of the products of the wind impact area and the applicable wind pressure value for each height zone .
the wind impact area is the total projected area of the assemblage normal to the direction of the applied wind .
determine wind pressure values using the following table section num reinforcement num wind pressure height zone h feet above ground wind pressure value psf num num num num h num num num h num num h num num numcnum certificates submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of reinforcement .
if requested submit the following num .
copy of the certified mill test report for each heat and size of reinforcing steel showing physical and chemical analysis num .
num copies of a list of all reinforcement before starting reinforcement placement numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general reserved numb bar reinforcement reinforcing bars must be deformed bars complying with astm anumanumm grade num except you may use num .
deformed bars complying with astm anumanumm grade num in num .
junction structures num .
sign and signal foundations num .
minor structures num .
concrete crib members num .
mechanicallystabilizedembankment concrete panels num .
masonry block sound walls num .
deformed or plain bars complying with astm anumanumm grade num or num in num .
slope and channel paving num .
concrete barriers type num and num num .
plain bars for spiral or hoop reinforcement in structures and concrete piles you may substitute welded wire reinforcement for reinforcing bars in the following num .
slope paving and lined ditches num .
retaining walls num .
concrete barriers num .
sidewalks curbs and gutters on structures num .
nonstructural aesthetic additions num .
culvert headwalls end walls and wing walls num .
shotcrete num .
deck overlays num .
shear reinforcement stirrups in pc girders substituted welded wire reinforcement must be on an equivalent area basis .
the engineer determines the exact location .
if the welded wire reinforcement does not provide the required area of steel supplement it with reinforcing bars .
section num reinforcement num numc welded wire reinforcement welded wire reinforcement must comply with astm anumanumm .
numd reinforcing wire reinforcing wire must comply with the specifications for plain wire in astm anumanumm .
num construction numa general reserved numb cleaning before concrete is placed the reinforcement to be embedded must be free of mortar oil dirt excessive mill scale and scabby rust and other coatings that would destroy or reduce the bond .
numc bending do not bend or straighten bars in a way that damages the material .
do not use bars with kinks or improper bends .
hooks and bends must comply with the building code requirements for structural concrete published by aci .
numd placing firmly and securely hold reinforcement in position by num .
wiring at intersections and splices .
num .
using precast mortar blocks or ferrous metal chairs spacers metal hangers supporting wires or other authorized devices of sufficient strength to resist crushing under applied loads .
do not use aluminum plastic or wood supports .
do not place bars on layers of fresh concrete as the work progresses .
metal supports must have a clear cover of at least num inch .
do not consider protective coatings on metal supports when determining clear cover .
where the clear cover to reinforcement shown or determined by the engineer exceeds the minimum specified clear cover increase the clear cover for metal supports accordingly .
the centertocenter spacing of parallel bars must be at least num times the bar diameter .
the clear distance between bundles of bars and adjacent bundles or single bars must be at least num .
num times the maximum size of the coarse aggregate num .
num times the larger bar diameter for numbar bundles num .
num times the larger bar diameter for numbar bundles tie bundle bars together at not more than numfoot centers .
unless otherwise shown reinforcement must have a numinch clear cover measured from the surface of the concrete to the outside of the reinforcement .
adjust or relocate reinforcement in posttensioned concrete during the installation of prestressing ducts or tendons as required to provide described clearances to the prestressing tendons anchorages jacks and equipment .
obtain authorization for any adjustments or relocations .
end each unit of spiral reinforcement at both ends by lapping the spiral reinforcement on itself for at least num diameters followed by num a numdegree hook with a numinch tail hooked around an intersecting longitudinal bar or num a mechanical lap splice coupler .
discontinuities in spiral reinforcement may be made only where shown or authorized .
the spiral on each side of a discontinuity or a lap splice is a separate unit .
where discontinuities in spiral reinforcement are not allowed splice the spiral reinforcement .
lap splices in spiral reinforcement must be lapped at least num diameters followed by num a numdegree hook with a numinch tail hooked around an intersecting longitudinal bar or num a mechanical lap splice coupler .
section num reinforcement num roll welded wire reinforcement flat before placing concrete .
secure welded wire reinforcement in place with devices that prevent the reinforcements vertical and transverse movement .
do not tack weld on reinforcing bars unless shown .
for column and pile bar reinforcing cages measuring num feet in diameter and larger num .
tie all reinforcement intersections with double wire ties on at least num vertical bars of each cage equally spaced around the circumference .
num .
tie at least num percent of remaining reinforcement intersections in each cage with single wire ties .
stagger tied intersections from adjacent ties .
num .
provide bracing to avoid collapse of the cage during assembly transportation and installation .
num payment the payment quantity of bar reinforcing steel is the calculated weight of the reinforcing bars and wire .
the payment quantity of bar reinforcing steel includes the lap of bars for lap splicing including locations where you use a continuous bar instead of the splice shown .
the payment quantities are based on the following bar reinforcing steel quantities deformed bar designation no .
weight pounds per foot nominal diameter inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num note bar numbers approximate the number of eighths of an inch included in the nominal diameter of the bars .
the nominal diameter of a deformed bar is equal to the diameter of a plain round bar having the same weight per linear foot as the deformed bar .
the cross sectional area of reinforcing wire in hundredths of square inches is equal to its wsize number .
the density of reinforcing wire is num lbcu in .
the payment quantity of welded wire reinforcement is determined based on the measured area covered by the reinforcement and does not include laps .
the payment quantity for bar reinforcing steel bridge includes diaphragm dowels and bolts in pc concrete members .
if alternative transverse deck reinforcement placement details are shown the payment quantities are based on the detail that shows truss bars .
bar reinforcing steel involved in bridge work is paid for as bar reinforcing steel bridge or bar reinforcing steel epoxy coatedbridge unless it is included in a separate bid item .
section num reinforcement num num epoxycoated reinforcement and epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement num general numa general numanum summary section num includes general specifications for fabricating and placing epoxycoated reinforcement and epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement .
the substitution of welded wire reinforcement for bar reinforcement specified in numb is not allowed for epoxycoated bar reinforcement or epoxycoated prefabricated bar reinforcement .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals numanuma general reserved numanumb samples numanumbi general reserved numanumbii epoxy powder test samples submit a test sample from each batch of epoxy powder to be used for epoxy coating reinforcement to mets .
each test sample must be num .
weighed to num ounces num .
packaged in an airtight container num .
identified with the manufacturers name and batch number numanumbiii patching material test samples submit a test sample from each batch of patching material to be used to repair epoxy coating on reinforcement to mets .
each test sample must be num .
weighed to num ounces num .
packaged in an airtight container num .
identified with the manufacturers name and batch number numanumbiv test samples submit test samples of epoxycoated reinforcement and epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement to mets .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials except for field welding of butt splices complete welding of the reinforcement before epoxy coating .
if a part of a bar or wire is described to be epoxy coated coat the entire bar unless the bar or wire is spliced outside the limits of epoxy coating in which case epoxy coating is not required on the part of the bar or wire beyond the splice .
do not store reinforcement within num feet of ocean or tidal water for more than num months .
patching material and the patching process must be suitable for field application .
section num reinforcement num the following must be on the authorized material list for fusion bonded epoxy powders and corrosion protection coverings num .
epoxy powder num .
corrosion protection covering for splices numc construction except for lap splices cover splices of reinforcement with a corrosion protection covering .
install covering under the manufacturers instructions .
numd payment the weight of epoxy coating is not included in the weight of reinforcement .
bar or wire reinforcement extending beyond the limits for epoxycoated reinforcement shown is paid for as bar reinforcing steel bridge .
num epoxycoated reinforcement numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for fabricating and placing epoxycoated reinforcement .
in a freezethaw area epoxy coat the following num .
all longitudinal and transverse reinforcement in a bridge deck num inches or less in thickness num .
longitudinal and transverse reinforcement within num inches of the top surface of a bridge deck greater than num inches in thickness num .
reinforcement that extends to within num inches of the top surface of the bridge deck num .
reinforcement within or that extends to within num inches of the top surface of abutment backwalls if the top surface of the backwall is at deck level num .
reinforcement in concrete barriers num .
reinforcement at locations shown numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals numanuma general reserved numanumb test samples for each shipment of epoxycoated reinforcement to the job site or pc plant submit two numinchlong test samples from each size of reinforcement .
before transporting test samples num .
securely bundle and package the num test samples in a way that preserves their condition during transportation num .
identify each test sample by shipment and contract number using weatherproof markings num .
attach a completed sample identification card to the test samples numanumc certificates submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of epoxycoated reinforcement .
include the following with the submittal num .
certification that the coated reinforcement complies with astm anumanumm for bar reinforcement or astm anumanumm class a type num for wire reinforcement num .
all certifications specified in astm anumanumm for bar reinforcement or astm anumanumm for wire reinforcement section num reinforcement num submit a certificate of compliance for the patching material including a certification that the patching material is compatible with the epoxy powder to be used .
instead of providing a certification for the patching material you may identify on the container that the patching material is compatible with the epoxy powder to be used .
numanum quality assurance numanuma general perform qualification testing and certifications required by astm anumanumm and astm anumanumm at an authorized laboratory numanumb department acceptance test samples must comply with the requirements for coating thickness and coating adhesion specified in astm anumanumm for bar reinforcement or astm anumanumm class a type num for wire reinforcement as follows num .
if both test samples comply with the requirements the department accepts all epoxycoated reinforcement represented by the test .
num if both test samples do not comply with the requirements the department performs num additional test on the reinforcement of the same size from the same shipment .
this additional test consists of testing num test samples randomly selected by the engineer for coating thickness and adhesion .
if both test samples do not comply with the specified requirements the department rejects all epoxycoated reinforcement represented by the test .
numb materials epoxycoated reinforcement must comply with num .
astm anumanumm for bar reinforcement num .
astm anumanumm class a type num for wire reinforcement fabrication and handling of epoxycoated bar reinforcement at the job site and pc plant must comply with astm dnumdnumm .
coating must be light green .
numc construction if damage to the coating occurs during field bending patch the area immediately .
job site and pc plant practices must comply with sections xnum through xnum of appendix xnum of astm anumanumm for wire reinforcement except replace should with must .
numd payment not used num epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for fabricating and placing epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals numanuma general reserved numanumb test samples for each shipment of epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement to the job site or pc plant submit two num inchlong test samples from each size of reinforcement .
section num reinforcement num before transporting test samples num .
securely bundle and package the num test samples in a way that preserves their condition during transportation num .
identify each test sample by shipment and contract number using weatherproof markings num .
attach a completed sample identification card to the test samples numanumc certificates submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of epoxycoated reinforcement .
include with the submittal num .
certification that the coated reinforcement complies with astm anumanumm for bar reinforcement or astm anumanumm class a type num for wire reinforcement num .
all certifications specified in astm anumanumm for bar reinforcement or astm anumanumm for wire reinforcement submit a certificate of compliance for the patching material including a certification that the patching material is compatible with the epoxy powder to be used .
instead of providing certification for the patching material you may identify on the container that the patching material is compatible with the epoxy powder to be used .
numanum quality assurance numanuma general perform qualification testing and certification required by astm anumanumm and astm anumanumm at an authorized laboratory .
numanumb department acceptance test samples must comply with the requirements for coating thickness and coating adhesion specified in astm anumanumm for bar reinforcement or astm anumanumm class a type num for wire reinforcement as follows num .
if both test samples comply with the requirements the department accepts all epoxycoated reinforcement represented by the test .
num if both test samples do not comply with the requirements the department performs num additional test on the reinforcement of the same size from the same shipment .
this additional test consists of testing num test samples randomly selected by the engineer for coating thickness and adhesion .
if both test samples do not comply with the specified requirements the department rejects all epoxycoated reinforcement represented by the test .
numb materials epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement must comply with num .
astm anumanumm for bar reinforcement num .
astm anumanumm class a type num for wire reinforcement coating must be purple or gray .
numc construction do not bend epoxycoated prefabricated bar or wire reinforcement after coating application .
job site and pc plant practices must comply with sections xnum through xnum of appendix xnum of astm anumanumm for bar reinforcement except replace should with must .
numd payment not used num galvanized bar reinforcement num general section num includes specifications for fabricating and placing galvanized bar reinforcement .
section num reinforcement num num materials galvanize bar reinforcement under astm anumanumm class num except chromating is not required .
num construction job site and pc plant practices must comply with sections xnum through xnum of appendix xnum of astm anumanumm for bar reinforcement except replace should with must .
num payment not used num reserved num headed bar reinforcement num general numa summary section num includes specifications for fabricating headed bar reinforcement .
numb definitions lot num count or fraction thereof of headed bar reinforcement for each num bar size num head size num head type num method of manufacture num heat number of bar material num heat number of head material a reinforcing bar with a head on each end is counted as num headed reinforcing bars for establishing and testing production lots .
numc submittals numcnum general if any part of the head is fabricated in the field submit a prequalification report as specified under section numcnumc .
numcnum samples numcnuma general reseved numcnumb test samples submit test samples to mets .
include copies of the certificates of compliance with the test samples .
numcnum test reports submit a qc test report for each lot .
each test report must include num .
lot number num .
bar size num .
type of headed bar reinforcement num .
physical condition of each test sample num. notable defects on any test sample num .
affected zone limits of each test sample num .
location of visible necking area on each test sample num .
ultimate strength of each test sample section num reinforcement num numcnum certificates submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of headed bar reinforcement .
include with the submittal copies of num .
mill test reports for bar reinforcement and head material num .
qc test reports num .
daily production logs numd quality assurance numdnum general section num does not apply to headed bar reinforcement .
numdnum qualifications if any part of the head is fabricated in the field the operator and procedure must be prequalified as specified for service and ultimate butt splices under section numdnum .
welding welder qualifications and inspection of welding must comply with aws cnum .
numdnum test samples after completing fabrication of a lot of headed bar reinforcement including preparation for any required epoxy coating notify the engineer that the lot is ready for testing .
after receiving notification that lots are ready for qc testing the engineer num randomly selects department acceptance test samples to be removed from each lot and num places tamperproof markings or seals on the test samples .
test samples must be num feet long for bar reinforcement sizes no .
num and below and num feet long for bar reinforcement sizes no .
num and above .
before transporting test samples to an authorized laboratory and mets num .
securely bundle and package the num test samples for each test in a way that preserves their condition during transportation num .
identify each test sample by lot number and contract number using weatherproof markings num .
attach a completed sample identification card to each bundle a test sample is rejected if the tamperproof marking or seal is disturbed before testing .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general maintain a daily production log for the fabrication of headed bar reinforcement for each production lot .
the log must include num .
production lot numbers num .
number of bars in each production lot num .
heats of bar and head material used in each production lot num .
fabrication records including tracking and production parameters for welds or forgings numdnumb quality control testing a qc test must consist of tensile testing num headed bar reinforcement test samples selected from each lot of completed headed bar reinforcement before shipping the lot to the job site or pc plant .
tensile test headed bar reinforcement test samples num .
at a laboratory on the authorized laboratory list num .
in the condition received num .
under astm anumanumm do not perform tests on test samples from bundles containing fewer than num test samples .
section num reinforcement num at least num business days before performing any testing at the authorized laboratory notify the engineer of num .
date of the testing num .
location of the authorized laboratory where the tests will be conducted num .
number of lots to be tested at fracture headed bar reinforcement test samples must comply with the requirements specified in section num as follows num .
if only num test sample complies with the requirements the department rejects all headed bar reinforcement in the lot .
num .
if only num test samples comply with the requirements perform num additional test on the same lot of headed bar reinforcement .
this additional test must consist of tensile testing num test samples randomly selected by the engineer and removed by you from the lot .
if any of the num test samples from this additional test do not comply with the specified requirements the department rejects all headed bar reinforcement in the lot .
num .
if num or more test samples comply with the requirements the department accepts all headed bar reinforcement in the lot .
tag each headed bar in a production lot to be shipped to the job site or pc plant in a way that allows accurate identification at the job site or pc plant .
numdnumc quality control test report the quality control test report must be num prepared by the laboratory performing the testing and num signed by an engineer representing the laboratory .
the engineer must be registered as a civil engineer in the state .
numdnum department acceptance the department tests headed bar reinforcement as specified for qc testing in section numdnumb .
the department will notify you of the department acceptance test results for each bundle of num test samples of splices within num business days after mets receives the bundle unless more than num bundle is received on the same day in which case allow num additional business days for each additional bundle received .
num materials headed bar reinforcement must comply with astm anumanumm .
at fracture headed bar reinforcement must num .
comply with the tensile requirements of astm anumanumm class a .
num .
show signs of visible necking in the reinforcing bar .
the visible necking must be located at least num bar diameter away from the affected zone .
equipment used to perform friction welding must be fitted with an inprocess monitoring system to record essential production parameters that describe the process of welding the head onto the reinforcement .
record the following parameters num .
friction welding force num .
forge force num .
rotational speed num .
friction upset distance and time num .
forge upset distance and time headed bar reinforcement must have full size heads and must be on the authorized material list .
if headed bar reinforcement is to be epoxy coated num .
round edges of heads num .
remove sharp edges burrs and weld flash that would prevent proper coating of the headed bar section num reinforcement num do not use threaded heads if headed bar reinforcement is to be epoxy coated .
num construction reserved num payment the payment quantity for headed bar reinforcement is the quantity of heads .
reinforcing bar used for headed bar reinforcement is paid for as bar reinforcing steel .
the length of bar used in calculating the weight of reinforcing bar is the entire length of the completed headed bar including the head thickness .
num splicing num general numa summary section num includes specifications for splicing bar reinforcement .
reinforcing bar splices consist of lap splices service splices or ultimate butt splices .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general section numc applies to service and ultimate butt splices .
numcnum product data numcnuma general reseved numcnumb radiographic film developing process records if requested submit records of radiographic film developing processes and any chemical changes to the developing processes .
numcnum samples numcnuma general reseved numcnumb test samples submit service splice and ultimate butt splice test samples to mets .
include copies of the certificates of compliance with the test samples for mechanical splices and resistancebuttwelded splices .
numcnum test reports numcnuma general reserved numcnumb splicing quality control test report submit a qc test report for each lot of service splices and ultimate butt splices .
each qc test report must include num .
lot number and location num .
bar size num .
splice type num .
mechanical splice length num .
test specimen length num .
physical condition of splice test sample section num reinforcement num num. notable defects num .
total measured slip num .
ultimate tensile strength of each splice num .
the following for ultimate butt splices num .
location of visible necking area num .
largest measured strain allow num business days for the engineers review .
numcnumc splice rejection mitigation report for a rejected lot of service splices or ultimate butt splices submit a splice rejection mitigation report .
allow num business days for the engineers review .
numcnum certificates submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of service splice or ultimate butt splice material .
include with the submittal num .
type or series identification of the splice material including tracking information for traceability num .
grade and size number of reinforcement to be spliced num .
statement that the splice material complies with the type of mechanical splice on the authorized material list for steel reinforcing couplers num .
for resistancebuttwelded material num .
heat number num .
lot number num .
mill certificates numcnum qualification statements numcnuma general reserved numcnumb welder and welding procedures qualifications submit welder and welding procedure qualifications as an informational submittal .
numcnumc splice prequalification report for each bar size of each coupler model of service splice or ultimate butt splice to be used in the work submit a splice prequalification report that includes num .
copy of the manufacturers product literature giving complete data on the splice material and installation procedures num .
names of the operators who will be performing the splicing num .
descriptions of the positions locations equipment and procedures that will be used in the work num certified test results from the authorized laboratory for the prequalification splice test samples num .
certifications from the fabricator for operator and procedure prequalification num .
manufacturers qc process control manual numcnumd weld flash removal process if specified submit a proposed weld flash removal process .
the submittal must show that the process produces a smooth profile that can be successfully epoxy coated under section num .
numd quality assurance numdnum general section numd applies to service and ultimate butt splices .
assign a splicing qc manager .
before testing resistancebuttwelded splice test samples of reinforcement to be epoxy coated remove the weld flash using the authorized process for flash removal .
section num does not apply to resistancebuttwelded splices .
section num reinforcement num numdnum qualifications numdnuma general reserved numdnumb operator and procedure prequalification before performing any service or ultimate butt splicing obtain certifications from the fabricator for prequalification of the operators and the procedures to be used in the work .
for each bar size of each splice coupler model type to be used each operator must prepare num .
num prequalification splice test samples num .
num additional prequalification splice test samples if using splices dependent on bar deformations splice test samples must have been prepared and tested no more than num years before the submittal of the splice prequalification report .
splice test samples and testing must comply with the qc testing requirements specified in section num numdnumb for the type of splice to be used in the work .
numdnumc welder and welding procedure qualifications before performing any cjp butt welds qualify welders and welding procedures under aws dnum .
qualify welders and welding procedures on splice test samples of the type to be used in the work .
numdnum test samples numdnuma general splice test samples must comply with california test num .
for splicing new reinforcement to existing reinforcement make splice test samples using only reinforcement having the deformation pattern of the new reinforcement .
before transporting splice test samples to an authorized laboratory and mets num .
securely bundle and package the num test samples for each test in a way that preserves their condition during transportation num .
identify each splice test sample by location lot number and contract number using weatherproof markings num .
attach a completed sample identification card to each bundle when preparing or removing splice test samples for qc testing concurrently prepare or remove num department acceptance splice test samples during num .
the numst qc test num .
num of every num subsequent qc tests or fraction thereof randomly selected by the engineer numdnumb ultimate butt splice after completing the ultimate butt splices in a lot including any required epoxy coating notify the engineer that the splices are ready for testing .
except for hoops the engineer selects splice test samples at the job site or pc plant .
the engineer selects splice test samples for hoops at the job site pc plant or fabrication plant .
after being notified the engineer randomly selects the num splice test samples to be removed and places tamperproof markings or seals on the test samples .
a test sample is rejected if the tamperproof marking or seal is disturbed before testing .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved section num reinforcement num numdnumb quality control testing numdnumbi general qc testing includes total slip testing service splice testing and ultimate butt splice testing .
test qc splice test samples num .
in the condition received num .
under california test num num .
at a laboratory on the authorized laboratory list before performing service splice or ultimate butt splice testing perform total slip testing on the service splice or ultimate butt splice test samples as specified in section numdnumbii .
do not perform tests on splice test samples from bundles containing fewer than num test samples .
at least num business days before performing any testing at the authorized laboratory notify the engineer of num .
date of the testing num .
location of the authorized laboratory where the tests will be conducted num .
number of lots to be tested if a qc test for a lot is rejected repair or replace reinforcing bars from which test samples were removed before the engineer selects additional splices from this lot for more testing .
if a lot of splices is rejected do not use the rejected lot or any subsequent lots until num .
qc manager has performed a complete review of your qc process for these splices num .
you have prepared a splice rejection mitigation report describing num .
cause of the failure num .
method used to identify the cause of failure num .
identification of affected lots num .
provisions for preventing similar failures in future lots num .
procedure for repairing or replacing the splices in the rejected lot num .
engineer has notified you that the splice rejection mitigation report is authorized numdnumbii total slip testing except for mechanical lap welded or hoop splices test num of the num splice test samples for total slip .
if the splice test sample exceeds the total slip value specified in section numbnum test the num remaining test samples for total slip .
if any of the num remaining test samples exceed the specified total slip value the department rejects all splices in the lot .
numdnumbiii service splice testing a service splice test consists of preparing and testing num splice test samples for each lot of completed splices .
prepare the test samples using the same splice material position operators location equipment and procedures to be used in the work .
splice test samples must comply with the requirements specified in section numbnum as follows num .
if only num splice test sample complies with the requirements the department rejects all splices in the lot .
num .
if only num splice test samples comply with the requirements perform num additional test on the same lot of splices .
this additional test must consist of tensile testing num splice test samples randomly selected by the engineer and removed by you from the lot of completed splices .
if any of the num splice test samples from this additional test do not attain the specified minimum tensile strength the department rejects all splices in the lot .
num .
if num or more splice test samples comply with the requirements the department accepts all splices in the lot .
section num reinforcement num numdnumbiv ultimate butt splice testing an ultimate butt splice test consists of removing and testing num splice test samples from each lot of completed splices .
at fracture splice test samples must comply with the requirements specified in section numbnum as follows num .
if only num splice test sample complies with the requirements the department rejects all splices in the lot .
num .
if only num splice test samples comply with the requirements perform num additional ultimate butt splice test on the same lot of splices .
if any of these num splice test samples do not comply with the specified requirements the department rejects all splices in the lot .
num .
if num or more splice test samples comply with the requirements the department accepts all splices in the lot .
the department does not require ultimate butt splice testing on repaired splices from a lot unless an additional ultimate butt splice test is required on the same lot of splices .
if this additional test is required the engineer may select any repaired splice for the additional test .
if splices are made vertically at the job site in or above their final positions for bar reinforcement of columns or cip concrete piles instead of removing the splice test samples from the completed lot you may prepare the samples as specified for service splice test samples in section numdnumbiii .
test the splice test samples as specified for ultimate butt splice test samples .
if test samples for cjp buttwelded splices are not removed from a lot of completed splices perform rt as follows num .
perform rt of cjp buttwelded splices under aws dnum num .
before tensile testing the splice test samples num .
on num percent of cjp buttwelded splices from a production lot num .
radiographic procedures must comply with aws dnum and dnum .
num .
for fieldproduced cjp butt welds do not radiograph more than num weld during num exposure .
num .
make radiographs by either xray or gamma ray .
each radiograph must have a density of from num to num in the area of interest .
the department allows a density tolerance of num for densitometer variations .
gamma rays must be from the iridium num isotope and the emitting specimen must not exceed num inch in the greatest diagonal dimension .
num .
you may add an allowable weld buildup of num inch to the total material thickness when determining the proper penetrameter selection .
the department does not accept image quality indicator equivalency .
num .
sufficiently shim penetrameters using a radiographically identical material .
penetrameter image densities must be from num to num .
num .
regardless of the reinforcing bar size radiographic film must be class num .
num .
record the results of radiographic interpretations on a signed certification and keep a copy with the film packet .
for rt num .
the department does not allow sight development of film .
num .
technique sheets prepared under asme boiler and pressure vessel code section v article num section tnum must include the developer temperature developing time fixing duration and all rinse times .
notify the engineer num hours before performing any rt .
the engineer selects the splices that compose the production lot and the splices within each lot to receive rt .
if more than num percent of the splices radiographically tested in a production lot are defective perform rt on an additional num percent of the splices selected by the engineer from the same production lot .
if more than num percent of the cumulative total of splices tested from the same production lot are defective perform rt on all remaining splices in the lot .
the department does not pay for additional rt performed due to the identification of defective splices .
section num reinforcement num repair defects under aws dnum .
numdnumc weld flash removal process removal of the weld flash must produce a smooth profile free of any sharp edges that would prevent proper coating of the reinforcement such that num .
ultimate tensile strength and elongation properties of the bar are not reduced num .
outside radius of the flash at any point along the circumference of the bar is not num .
less than the nominal radius of the bar num .
greater than num inch beyond the nominal radius of the bar numdnumd splicing quality control test report the splicing quality control test report must be num prepared by the laboratory performing the testing and num signed by an engineer representing the laboratory .
the engineer must be registered as a civil engineer in the state .
numdnum department acceptance the department tests service splices and ultimate butt splices as specified for qc testing in section num numdnum .
the department will notify you of the department acceptance test results for each bundle of num test samples of splices within num business days after mets receives the bundle unless more than num bundle is received on the same day in which case allow num additional business days for each additional bundle received .
num materials numa general reserved numb service splices and ultimate butt splices numbnum general section numb applies if service splices or ultimate butt splices are used in the work .
the total slip must not exceed the values shown in the following table when tested under california test num total slip reinforcing bar no .
total slip inch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num the following must be on the authorized material list for steel reinforcing couplers num .
mechanical couplers num .
fabricators of resistancebuttwelded splices numbnum service splices service splices must develop a minimum tensile strength of num psi .
section num reinforcement num numbnum ultimate butt splices ultimate butt splice test samples must demonstrate necking as either of the following num .
for necking option i as specified in california test num the test sample must fracture in the reinforcing bar outside of the affected zone and show visible necking .
num .
for necking option ii as specified in california test num the largest measured strain must be at least num .
num percent for no .
num and larger bars num .
num percent for no .
num and smaller bars num construction numa general buttwelded or mechanical splices not shown as requiring a service splice or an ultimate butt splice must comply with the specifications for service splices .
do not place splices at a location shown as a nosplice zone .
reinforcing bars may be continuous where splices are shown .
if splice locations are not shown determine splice locations using commercial lengths where practicable .
unless another option is shown stagger splices in adjacent reinforcing steel .
the minimum distance between staggered lap splices or staggered mechanical lap splices must be the same as the length specified for a lap splice in the largest bar .
the minimum distance between staggered butt splices must be num feet measured between the splice midpoints along a line centered between the axis of the adjacent bars .
for reinforcing bars where splice test samples were removed replace either of the following num .
removed portion of the bar or hoop using mechanical ultimate butt splices num .
bar or hoop in kind numb lap splicing splices made by lapping must consist of placing reinforcing bars in contact and wiring them together while maintaining the alignment of the bars and the minimum clearances .
do not splice the following by lapping num .
no .
num bars num .
no .
num bars num .
hoops num .
reinforcing bars where you can not provide a minimum clear distance of num inches between the splice and the nearest adjacent bar for reinforcing bars complying with astm anumanumm grade num or astm anumanumm the length of lap splices must be at least num .
num diameters of the smaller bar spliced for reinforcing bars no .
num or smaller num .
num diameters of the smaller bar spliced for reinforcing bars nos .
num num and num for reinforcing bars complying with astm anumanumm grade num the length of lap splices must be at least num .
num diameters of the smaller bar spliced for reinforcing bars no .
num or smaller num .
num diameters of the smaller bar spliced for reinforcing bars nos .
num num and num for splices in bundled bars the length of the lap splices must be num .
equal to the length of a single bar lap splice for bundles of num bars num .
num times the length of a single bar lap splice for bundles of num bars section num reinforcement num lap welded wire reinforcement such that the overlap between the outermost cross wires is at least the larger of the following num .
num inches num .
spacing of the cross wires plus num inches num .
numerical value of the longitudinal wire size wsize number times num divided by the spacing of the longitudinal wires in inches numc service splices and ultimate butt splices numcnum general service splices and ultimate butt splices must be one of the following num .
mechanical splices num .
resistancebuttwelded splices num .
cjp buttwelded splices numcnum mechanical splices perform service splicing and ultimate butt splicing of mechanical splices num .
under the manufacturers instructions unless otherwise specified num .
using the manufacturers standard equipment jigs clamps and other required accessories splice devices must have a clear cover of at least num inches measured from the surface of the concrete to the outside of the splice device .
to provide the specified clear cover to reinforcement num .
adjust or relocate stirrups ties and other reinforcement num .
place additional reinforcement if needed numcnum resistancebuttwelded splices if resistancebuttwelded bar reinforcement is to be epoxy coated remove the weld flash using the authorized process for flash removal .
numcnum completejointpenetration buttwelded splices cjp buttwelded splices must comply with aws dnum .
use only the joint details and dimensions shown in figure num of aws dnum except do not use the single vgroove weld with split pipe backing detail .
make butt welds with multiple weld passes without an appreciable weaving motion using a stringer bead having a width at most num times the diameter of the electrode .
perform slagging between each weld pass .
weld reinforcement must not exceed num inch in convexity .
electrodes for welding must have a minimum cvn impact value of num j at num degrees f. for welding of bars complying with astm a numa numm grade num or num the requirements of table num of aws dnum are superseded by the following the minimum preheat and interpass temperatures must be num degrees f for grade num bars and num degrees f for grade num bars .
immediately after completing the welding cover at least num inches of the bar on each side of the splice with insulated wrapping to control the rate of cooling .
the insulated wrapping must remain in place until the bar has cooled below num degrees f. if welding different grades of reinforcing bars num .
electrode must comply with the specifications for grade num bar num .
preheat must comply with the specifications for grade num bar if any of the specified preheat interpass and postweld cooling temperatures are not met remove the weld and heataffectedzone metal and reweld the splice .
protect welding from air currents drafts and precipitation to prevent loss of heat or loss of arc shielding .
do not direct butt splice reinforcing bars by thermite welding .
section num reinforcement num num payment not used num stray current protection num general numa summary section num includes specifications for installing stray current protection .
stray current protection consists of one or a combination of the following num .
prestressing tendon connections num .
bar reinforcing steel connections num .
copper cable to bar reinforcing steel connections num .
pile and concrete epoxy insulation num .
concrete insulation course num .
neoprene sheet insulation num .
joint sealant insulation num .
membrane insulation num .
mortar block insulation num .
epoxycoated reinforcing steel insulation num .
plastic end cover insulators num .
pipe wrapping tape insulation num .
epoxy for insulation of embedded metal materials numb definitions reserved numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum prestressing tendon connection welding operators must be prequalified by satisfactorily completing a field qualification test weld .
the operator must make qualification test welds in the presence of the engineer using num .
materials similar to those in the work num the same position and under the same conditions of welding that will be encountered in the work visual inspection of completed welds must show no evidence of cracks lack of fusion or undercutting .
numdnumdnum reserved num materials numa general reserved numb prestressing tendon connection for prestressing tendon connections the no .
num steel wire must comply with astm anum anum or anumm .
numc bar reinforcing steel connection reserved numd copper cable to bar reinforcing steel connection materials for exothermic welding the copper cable to bar reinforcing steel connections must comply with the manufacturers instructions for the following section num reinforcement num num .
mold size and shape num .
powder charge size and alloy mixture copper cable must comply with section num .
tape must be commercially available vinyl electrical tape with a thickness of at least num mils .
test box cover and anchorage devices must comply with section num .
the gasket must be made of commercially available neoprene .
nume pile and concrete epoxy insulation for pile and concrete epoxy insulation epoxy must be num .
commercial quality num .
nonconductive num .
suitable for adherence to concrete and steel surfaces numf concrete insulation course concrete insulation course must comply with section num and contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard of concrete .
numg neoprene sheet insulation fabricate neoprene sheet insulation from sheet neoprene complying with the specifications for neoprene in section num .
the sheet must be at least num inch thick .
numh joint sealant insulation the joint sealant insulation must be a singlecomponent nonsag polyurethane sealant complying with astm c num .
the primer and backing rod must comply with the joint sealant manufacturers instructions .
numi membrane insulation membrane insulation must comply with the specifications for dampproofing or preformed membrane waterproofing in section num .
numj mortar block insulation mortar block insulation must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
the blocks must be dense homogeneous and watertight .
numk epoxycoated reinforcing steel insulation epoxycoated reinforcing steel insulation must comply with section num .
if a coupling nut is used at an attachment between an approach slab and an abutment the nut must be epoxy coated either before or after fabrication .
numl plastic end cover insulators the plastic end cover insulators must be of the type commercially available to protect workers from protruding reinforcing bars .
bond the covers to the reinforcing bars with commercially available epoxy that is compatible with the plastic covers .
numm pipe wrapping tape insulation for pipe wrapping tape insulation the tape must be pressuresensitive pvc or polyethylene tape with a nominal thickness of num mils .
use a primer as instructed by the manufacturer of the tape .
numn epoxy for insulation of embedded metal materials for insulation of embedded metal materials epoxy must be num .
commercial quality num .
nonconductive section num reinforcement num num .
suitable for adhering to metal surfaces instead of epoxy coating the hanger rods you may use commercial quality neoprene bushings around the pipe at strap supports .
instead of epoxy coating the metal parts of joint seal assemblies in contact with concrete you may apply a heavy coat of bituminous paint .
num construction numa general reserved numb prestressing tendon connection do not perform welding on the prestressing anchorage devices .
do not perform arc welding on the prestressing strand .
connect the collector wire to the prestressing strand by gas welding .
do not gas weld until the tendons are grouted and have cured for at least num hours .
you may join num wire pigtail ends by gas welding at any stage of the work .
oxyacetylene welding must comply with the best standards of the industry .
use gas welding rods complying with class rgnum steel rods .
numc bar reinforcing steel connection weld bars and splices by the manual shielded metalarc process before installing any prestressing strands .
use lowhydrogen electrodes complying with the specifications for enum electrodes in aws anumanumm .
numd copper cable to bar reinforcing steel connection fusion weld the copper cable to the bar reinforcing steel by an exothermic type welding process .
apply commercially available rubber splicing compound to the welded connection .
apply num layers of tape each half lapped .
nume pile and concrete epoxy insulation abrasive blast clean concrete surfaces on which epoxy insulation is to be applied to the extent that clean aggregate is exposed .
apply the epoxy by brush or other means that will completely and uniformly cover the surfaces .
remove lifting anchors as specified for their removal in a corrosive environment in section numbnum .
numf concrete insulation course excavate and backfill for concrete insulation course under section num .
the joint between the concrete insulation course and the footing must comply with the specifications for horizontal construction joints in section numdnum except abrasive blast cleaning is not required .
numg neoprene sheet insulation for neoprene sheet insulation lap each successive sheet securely to the preceding sheet by at least num inches .
numh joint sealant insulation abrasive blast clean and prime concrete surfaces to receive joint sealant insulation .
numi membrane insulation the exposed surfaces of membrane insulation must be of uniform height above ground without unsightly bulges depressions or other imperfections .
membrane insulation must comply with the specifications for dampproofing or preformed membrane waterproofing in section num .
section num reinforcement num numj mortar block insulation reserved numk epoxycoated reinforcing steel insulation for a coupling nut which is epoxy coated after fabrication apply the epoxy by brush or other means that will completely and uniformly cover the surfaces in contact with concrete .
numl plastic end cover insulators use enough epoxy to ensure that no voids exist between the plastic end cover insulators and the reinforcing bars .
numm pipe wrapping tape insulation for pipe wrapping tape insulation apply num layer of tape half lapped .
numn epoxy for insulation of embedded metal materials for embedded metals insulated with epoxy num .
prepare galvanized surfaces under section num .
num .
apply the epoxy by brush or other means to completely and uniformly cover the surfaces in contact with concrete .
num payment not used num num shotcrete num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for placing shotcrete .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
numb definitions drymix process deliver mixed aggregate and cementitious material pneumatically or mechanically to the nozzle body and add water and mix the materials in the nozzle body .
wetmix process deliver mixed aggregate cementitious material and water pneumatically to the nozzle and add any admixture at the nozzle .
rebound shotcrete material that ricochets off the receiving surface is recovered and is clean and free of foreign material .
numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance reserved num materials shotcrete must consist of cementitious material fine aggregate and water .
cementitious material fine aggregate and water must comply with section num .
for the drymix process num .
thoroughly mix num part cementitious material to not more than num parts fine aggregate in a dry state before charging into the machine .
measurement must be either by volume or weight .
num .
fine aggregate must contain not more than num percent moisture by weight .
for the wetmix process num .
shotcrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
num .
you may substitute a maximum of num percent pea gravel for the fine aggregate .
the maximum size of pea gravel must be such that num percent passes the numinch screen and at least num percent passes the numinch screen .
num .
you may add admixtures complying with section nume .
if colored shotcrete is described color shotcrete by mixing a fine ground synthetic mineral oxide into the shotcrete .
the synthetic mineral oxide must be specifically manufactured for coloring shotcrete .
the coloring agent must be uniformly and homogeneously mixed with the shotcrete .
num construction numa general reserved numb preparing foundations evenly grade foundations before applying shotcrete .
no point on the graded slope may be above the slope plane shown .
thoroughly compact foundations .
foundations must contain enough moisture to provide a firm foundation and to prevent absorption of water from the shotcrete .
foundations must be free of surface water .
use ground or gauging wires if necessary to establish thickness surface planes and finish lines .
section num shotcrete num numc placing shotcrete apply shotcrete by either the drymix or wetmix process .
direct the nozzle in a way that minimizes rebound of the shotcrete .
maintain a uniform velocity of the material as it leaves the nozzle and at a rate determined for the job site conditions .
for drymix shotcrete num .
maintain a constant pressure of at least num psi in the placing machine if the hose length is num feet or less .
increase the pressure at least num psi for each additional num feet of hose or fraction thereof .
num .
maintain uniform water pressure at the nozzle of at least num psi greater than the air pressure at the machine .
num .
do not use aggregate and cementitious materials that have been mixed for more than num minutes .
for wetmix shotcrete num .
transport shotcrete under section numgnum num .
limit placing to numfoot lifts measured along the slope num .
place gauging wires at approximately numfoot centers num .
do not use materials that have been mixed for more than num minutes you may reuse rebound as fine aggregate in quantities not to exceed num percent of the total fine aggregate requirements .
numd finishing shotcrete place shotcrete to the depth shown and check the surface with a straightedge .
bring to grade any low spots or depressions by placing additional shotcrete .
the finished surface must be smooth and uniform for the type of work involved .
remove and replace loose areas of shotcrete .
cure shotcrete for at least num hours by spraying with water by a moist earth blanket or by any of the methods specified in section numb .
if you add a coloring agent to the shotcrete and you use the curing compound method for curing the shotcrete use curing compound no .
num .
protect shotcrete under section numc .
num payment shotcrete is measured along the slope of areas placed and the thickness shown .
the department does not pay for shotcrete placed outside the dimensions shown or to fill low areas of foundations .
num structural shotcrete num general numa summary section num includes specifications for placing structural shotcrete .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit num .
qc plan that includes num .
number and qualifications of nozzlemen available to place shotcrete number of nozzlemen on the job site at any time during shotcrete placement description of their work schedule and procedures for avoiding fatigue of any nozzleman section num shotcrete num num .
proposed method of placing shotcrete including application rates details of proposed construction joints and their locations and methods for achieving the required thickness and surface finish num .
procedures for curing shotcrete surfaces num .
description of any required debris containment system num .
preconstruction test panels and test results num .
production test cores and test results numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum qualifications each nozzleman must have at least num hours of experience as a nozzleman on projects with a similar application .
numdnum preconstruction test panels obtain authorization of the qc plan before constructing test panels .
construct num unreinforced test panel and num reinforced test panel for each proposed mix design .
use nozzlemen application crew equipment materials mix designs and procedures proposed for the work .
cure the test panels under conditions similar to those in the work .
for the unreinforced test panel num .
determine the size of the test panel num .
obtain numinchdiameter cores from the test panel num .
discard cores that show evidence of improper coring num .
identify each core that is to be tested num .
test cores for compressive strength num .
label and submit the test panel and a copy of the test results within num days of testing num .
include the mix design and ambient temperature in the submittal for the reinforced test panel num .
construct a square test panel that has the same num thickness num bar size and quantity of bar reinforcement or other obstructions and num positioning of bar reinforcement or obstructions as the most heavily reinforced section of shotcrete to be placed num .
minimum length of each side must equal num times the thickness of the most heavily reinforced section of shotcrete to be placed but not less than num inches num .
break the test panel in the presence of the engineer after a minimum numday cure into pieces no larger than num inches in the greatest dimension num .
surfaces of the broken pieces must be dense and free of laminations and sand pockets and must show that the bar reinforcement or other obstructions are completely encased obtain and test cores for compressive strength under section numdnuma .
instead of constructing a separate unreinforced test panel you may obtain cores from the reinforced test panel to determine the compressive strength .
if you choose this option do not break the test panel until it has cured for at least num days .
dispose of test panels .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general obtain cores for compressive strength testing under astm cnumcnumm .
discard cores that contain bar reinforcement or other obstructions or show evidence of improper coring .
test cores for compressive strength at num days under astm cnumcnumm at an authorized laboratory .
the compressive strength is the average strength of at least num cores that are free from bar reinforcement or other obstructions .
section num shotcrete num notify the engineer at least num hours before performing any coring or testing .
numdnumb field quality control obtain at least four numinchdiameter test cores from each num cu yd or portion thereof of shotcrete placed each day .
three cores must be free from reinforcement or obstructions .
one core must include reinforcement .
the engineer determines each core location .
cores must be both visually inspected and tested for compressive strength .
the engineer performs the visual inspection and you must perform compressive strength testing .
identify each core including a description of the core location and mix design and submit the cores immediately after coring .
the engineer will perform the visual inspection and return the cores to you for compressive strength testing within num hours .
numdnum department acceptance numdnuma general the department accepts shotcrete based on test cores for visual inspection and compressive strength .
numdnumb visual inspection each test core must be dense and be free of laminations and sand pockets .
any core with reinforcement must show reinforcement or other obstructions are completely encased .
shotcrete represented by an unacceptable core will be rejected unless you submit evidence that the quality of the shotcrete placed in the work is acceptable .
numdnumc compressive strength if the compressive strength of the shotcrete is below the specified compressive strength num .
make corrections to the mix design or fabrication procedures and obtain authorization before you place additional shotcrete .
num .
shotcrete represented by the cores is subject to one of the following num if the compressive strength is at least num percent of the specified strength numcu yd is deducted from the payment for structural shotcrete .
num if the compressive strength is below num percent of the specified strength but is at least num percent of the specified strength numcu yd is deducted from the payment for structural shotcrete .
num if the compressive strength is below num percent of the specified strength the shotcrete must be removed .
if the compressive strength is below the specified strength but is at least num percent of the specified strength the deductions specified above apply unless you obtain and submit evidence that the strength of the concrete placed in the work is greater than or equal to the specified strength and this evidence is accepted by the engineer .
if the compressive strength is below num percent of the specified compressive strength the noncompliant concrete represented by the test must be removed unless you obtain and submit evidence that the strength of the concrete placed in the work is at least num percent of the specified compressive strength and this evidence is accepted by the engineer .
if the evidence consists of tests made on cores taken from the work obtain and test the cores under astm cnumcnumm .
num materials shotcrete must have a minimum compressive strength of num psi unless otherwise described .
the shotcrete must attain the minimum compressive strength at num days except num days are allowed for shotcrete with a described minimum compressive strength greater than num psi .
mortar must comply with section numf .
section num shotcrete num num construction for ground anchor and soil nail walls backfill voids due to the removal of cobbles boulders portions of boulders debris or other obstructions with shotcrete .
forms must comply with section numcnum .
splicing of reinforcing bars no .
num or larger must be made using a service butt splice .
apply shotcrete by the wetmix process .
shotcrete must completely encase reinforcement and other obstructions .
rebound must not be used in structural shotcrete .
taper construction joints .
construction joints must comply with section numdnum .
before final set use air blowpipes to remove rebound overspray and other debris from the areas to receive shotcrete .
if a finish coat is used remove loose material uneven or excess material and glaze .
scarify the remaining surface .
remove surface deposits that take a final set by abrasive blasting .
before placing the finish coat wash receiving surface with an airwater blast .
you may apply finish coats by the drymix process if authorized .
remove shotcrete that extends into the space shown for cip concrete .
cure shotcrete under section numh .
the surface finish of the shotcrete must comply with section num numf .
shotcrete must be maintained at a temperature of at least num degrees f for num hours after placing and at least num degrees f for an additional num days .
after removing field qc test cores fill the holes with mortar under section numenum .
num payment payment for bar reinforcing steel is not included in the payment for structural shotcrete .
num sculpted shotcrete reserved num reserved num num waterproofing num general num general section num includes general specifications for waterproofing .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num asphalt membrane waterproofing and dampproofing num general section num includes specifications for applying asphalt membrane waterproofing and dampproofing .
asphalt membrane waterproofing consists of a coating of primer and a firmly bonded membrane composed of num layers of saturated glass fabric and num moppings of waterproofing asphalt .
dampproofing consists of a coating of primer and num moppings of waterproofing asphalt .
num materials waterproofing asphalt must comply with astm dnum type i for below ground and type ii for above ground .
the primer must comply with astm dnumdnumm .
treated glass fabric must comply with astm dnum type i .
num construction numa general the surface to be waterproofed must be smooth and free from holes and projections that could puncture or damage the membrane .
the surface to be waterproofed or dampproofed must be dry and thoroughly cleaned of dust and loose materials .
do not apply the primer or asphalt in wet weather or at ambient temperatures below num degrees f. apply the primer to the surface and allow it to dry before applying the numst coat of asphalt .
apply the waterproofing asphalt at a temperature of num degrees f. for waterproofing on steel column casings apply the asphalt membrane waterproofing to the painted undercoat of the casings .
for a backfilled surface you may use preformed membrane waterproofing as an alternative to asphalt membrane waterproofing .
numb waterproofing after priming the surface apply the waterproofing as follows num .
starting at the lowest point mop the waterproofing asphalt thoroughly onto the primed surface .
num .
roll a strip of fabric num the width of the fabric roll onto the hot asphalt immediately and press into place eliminating all air bubbles and obtaining close conformity with the surface .
num .
mop hot asphalt onto this strip and an adjacent section of the surface of a width equal to slightly greater than num the width of the fabric being used .
roll a full width of the fabric into this hot asphalt completely covering the first strip .
press into place in the same way as for the numst strip .
section num waterproofing num num .
mop the numnd strip and an adjacent section of the surface with hot asphalt .
shingle a numrd strip of fabric on such that it laps the numst strip by at least num inches .
num .
continue this process until the entire surface is covered with each strip of fabric lapping at least num inches over the second to last strip .
num .
mop the entire surface with hot asphalt .
ensure a thorough seal and firm bond at all fabric laps .
regulate the work such that at the end of the work day the final mopping of asphalt has been applied to all the fabric in place .
the exposed surfaces of the membrane waterproofing applied to steel column casings must be of uniform height above ground without unsightly bulges depressions or other imperfections .
do not apply the asphalt membrane waterproofing to a surface until you are prepared to place the backfill within a short enough time such that the waterproofing is not damaged as a result of exposure .
remove and replace waterproofing membrane that loses bond with the surface .
numc dampproofing apply dampproofing using the following procedure num .
prime the surface to be dampproofed .
num .
thoroughly mop the surface with waterproofing asphalt .
num .
after the numst mopping of asphalt has set sufficiently mop the entire surface with a numnd coat of hot asphalt .
num .
ensure that there are no skips in the coatings and that all surfaces are thoroughly covered .
num payment reserved num preformed membrane waterproofing num general numa summary section num includes specifications for applying preformed membrane waterproofing to surfaces that are to be backfilled .
numb definitions not used numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for the preformed membrane sheet .
include the following num .
type of preformed membrane sheet num .
conditioner or primer application rates numd quality assurance reserved num materials preformed membrane waterproofing must consist of num .
adhesive num .
conditioner or primer applied to a prepared surface num .
preformed membrane sheet of rubberized asphalt or polymermodified bitumen num .
mastic or tape for sealing the edges of the sheet num .
protective covering over the sheet held by an adhesive the preformed membrane sheet must be permanently applied to a polyethylene film or reinforced with one of the following num .
polypropylene mesh fabric num .
polyesterpolypropylene fabric section num waterproofing num num .
fiberglass mesh fabric the total thickness of the membrane sheet and polyethylene film or fabric reinforcement must be at least num mils .
the membrane sheet must comply with the requirements shown in the following table membrane sheet quality characteristic requirements quality characteristic test method requirement polyethylene film fabric reinforced breaking strengtha min lbin astm dnumb numc numc percent elongation at breakd min astm dnumb numc numc pliability astm dnumdnumme no cracks no cracks rubberized asphalt softening point f min aashto t num num num polymermodified bitumen softening point f min aashto t num num num abreaking factor in machine direction bmethod a average num samples cat num num degrees f dmachine direction enumdegree bend over a numinch mandrel at num degrees f adhesive conditioner primer mastic and sealing tape must be manufactured for use with the membrane sheet material used .
the protective covering must be hardboard at least num inch thick or another material that furnishes equivalent protection .
num construction apply adhesive conditioner primer mastic and sealing tape under the manufacturers instructions .
backfill material and equipment must not cut scratch depress or cause any other damage to the preformed membrane .
thoroughly clean dirt dust loose or unsound concrete and other extraneous material from the surface to receive the waterproofing .
the surface must be free from fins sharp edges and protrusions that could puncture or damage the membrane .
round outside corners and chamfer inside corners to be covered .
the surface must be dry when applying components of the waterproofing .
do not apply the preformed membrane waterproofing to a surface until you are prepared to place the protective covering and backfill within a short enough time such that the membrane is not damaged by workers equipment exposure to weathering or any other cause .
repair or replace damaged membrane or protective covering .
flash all projections such as pipes conduits and sleeves passing through the preformed membrane waterproofing with prefabricated or fieldfabricated boots fitted coverings or other devices as necessary to provide watertight construction .
thoroughly mix and continuously agitate the conditioner or primer during application .
allow the conditioner primer or adhesive to dry to a tackfree condition before placing membrane sheets .
recoat the surface if the membrane sheet is not placed over the primer conditioner or adhesive within the time recommended by the manufacturer .
do not apply preformed membrane sheets in wet or foggy weather or when the ambient temperature is below num degrees f. place the preformed membrane material starting at the bottom and lap by a minimum of num inches at splices and at repairs to holes or tears .
section num waterproofing num after placing the membrane apply a trowelled bead of manufacturerrecommended mastic or sealing tape to the exposed edges of the membrane sheets .
the surface of the preformed membrane must be free from dirt and other extraneous material before placing the protective covering .
place the protective covering on a coating of adhesive .
apply the adhesive at a rate sufficient to hold the protective covering in position until backfilled .
num payment not used num waterproofing and cover num general section num includes specifications for applying membrane waterproofing and protective cover to deck surfaces of railroad underpasses .
furnish and apply the waterproofing and cover under the arema manual for railway engineering .
num materials numa general reserved numb membrane the waterproofing membrane must consist of butyl rubber secured with an authorized adhesive .
you may substitute ethylene propylene diene monomer epdm for the butyl rubber if it complies with the specifications for butyl rubber .
comply with the arema manual for railway engineering chapter num part num for num .
butyl rubber membrane num .
adhesive num .
splicing cement num .
butyl gum splicing tape num .
antibonding paper num .
fibered aluminum roof coating the butyl rubber membrane must be at least num inch thick .
numc protective cover the protective cover must comply with the arema manual for railway engineering chapter num part num and must consist of num layers of asphaltic panels applied with adhesive and sealing compound to a total thickness of at least num inch .
sealing compound for joints and edges must be compatible with num .
membrane num .
adhesive used to fasten the membrane to the deck num .
splicing cement num .
protective cover panels the individual panels must be at least num inch thick .
the installed panels must be at least num by num feet except as cut for closures .
ship and store the panels on smooth flat surfaces .
if the panels are shipped with an inert material between the sheets to prevent sticking remove the inert material before installation .
section num waterproofing num num construction numa general do not apply the membrane waterproofing until you are prepared to place the protective cover within a short enough time such that the membrane is not damaged by workers equipment exposure to weathering or any other cause .
repair or replace damaged membrane .
sweep or air blow the concrete surfaces to receive the seal to clean them of dirt dust gravel loose concrete particles and other extraneous materials .
remove projections and fill depressions that could damage the membrane .
the horizontal surfaces of the finished waterproofing must be free from depressions and pockets .
the membrane must be carefully turned into drainage fittings .
take special care to make the waterproofing effective at the following locations num .
along the sides and ends of girders num .
at stiffeners gussets expansion joints offsets in ballast retainers and other discontinuities for retainerbuffers and headers use no .
num structural grade douglas fir timbers pressure treated under awpa unum use category ucnumb commodity specification a except do not use chromated copper arsenate .
for the anchor bolt assemblies associated with retainerbuffers and headers use commercial quality hotdip galvanized steel bolts plates and sheet metal .
numb butyl membrane waterproofing the surface to be waterproofed must be dry when the membrane is applied .
do not apply the membrane when the atmospheric temperature is below num degrees f. apply the membrane using the following procedure num .
position and draw the membrane sheets tight without stretching .
num .
roll num of the membrane uniformly in a direction away from the starting edge or subsequent splice .
num .
apply the adhesive to the exposed deck area with a squeegee at a rate of at least num gallon per num square feet of deck surface .
num .
allow the adhesive to dry to a tackfree condition .
num .
unroll and press the membrane firmly and uniformly in place avoiding trapping of air .
num .
repeat the same procedure for the remaining num of the membrane sheet avoiding wrinkles and buckles .
position each succeeding sheet to fit the previously installed sheet and splice the sheets .
membrane splices must be tongueandgroove type as shown in figure num no .
num of the arema manual for railway engineering chapter num part num .
splice the membrane sheets using the following procedure num .
clean all seam lap and splice areas with heptane hexane toluene trichloroethylene or white gasoline using a clean cloth mop or similar synthetic cleaning device .
num .
spread splicing cement continuously on the seam lap and splice areas at a uniform rate of at least num gallon per num square feet based on both mating surfaces .
num .
after the cement has dried to a tackfree condition apply the butyl gum splicing tape to the cemented area of the membrane extending the tape to at least num inch beyond the edges of the splice and lap areas .
num .
roll or press the tape firmly into place to obtain full contact avoiding bridging and wrinkles .
num .
reinforce corner splices with num continuous layers of rubber membrane over num layer of butyl tape .
flash all projections such as pipes conduits and sleeves passing through the membrane waterproofing with prefabricated or fieldfabricated boots fitted coverings or other devices as necessary to provide watertight construction .
use butyl gum tape between layers of rubber membrane .
patch holes in the membrane sheeting under the manufacturers instructions with a minimum overlap of num inches .
before laying the membrane across a transverse expansion joint in the bridge deck lay and center on the joint a numinchwide galvanized numgage steel sheet covered by an numinchwide strip of antibond paper .
section num waterproofing num numc asphaltic protective cover before placing the protective cover num .
thoroughly clean the surface of the applied membrane of dirt dust loose or unsound concrete and other extraneous material num .
at transverse expansion joints in the bridge deck lay and center on the joint above the membrane a numinchwide galvanized numgage steel sheet covered by an numinchwide strip of antibond paper lay the panels with num superimposed layers .
offset the joints in the numnd layer from the joints in the numst layer by approximately num the width of the panel .
lay the panels in an adhesive coating using the following procedure num .
apply the adhesive with a squeegee at a rate of at least num gallon per num square feet of deck surface .
num .
as you lay successive panels thoroughly coat the edges and ends of adjacent panels already laid with a sealing compound .
num .
lay the panels tightly against those previously laid such that the sealing compound completely fills the joints and squeezes out at the top .
num .
after all of the panels have been laid fill any voids between the panels with sealing compound .
where an edge or protrusion of asphaltic panels is exposed to prolonged sunlight coat the area with fibered aluminum roof coating .
num payment the payment quantity for waterproofing and cover is the area determined from the dimensions shown along the slope including the area of timber retainers and headers .
num deck seal num general numa summary section num includes specifications for applying a deck seal .
the deck seal must consist of a preformed membrane seal system .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for the preformed membrane sheet .
include the type of sheet and the conditioner or primer application rates .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials the preformed membrane seal system must consist of num .
primer or conditioner applied to a prepared concrete surface num .
preformed membrane sheet of rubberized asphalt or polymermodified bitumen num .
mastic for binding and sealing the edges of the sheet to the barrier or curb face the preformed membrane sheet must be reinforced with one of the following num .
polypropylene mesh num .
polyesterpolypropylene fabric num .
fiberglass mesh the total thickness of the membrane sheet and polyethylene film or fabric reinforcement must be at least num mils .
the membrane sheet must comply with the values shown in the following table section num waterproofing num deck seal membrane sheet quality characteristic requirements quality characteristic test method requirement breaking strengtha min lbin astm dnumb numc percent elongation at breakd min astm dnumb numc pliability astm dnumdnumme no cracks rubberized asphalt softening point min f aashto t num num polymermodified bitumen softening point min f aashto t num num abreaking factor in machine direction bmethod a average num samples cat num num degrees f dmachine direction enumdegree bend over a numinch mandrel at num degrees f primer conditioner and mastic must be manufactured for use with the preformed membrane sheet material used .
num construction before applying the deck seal num .
where a slurry leveling course is shown apply the slurry leveling course .
num .
sweep or air blow the concrete surfaces to receive the seal to clean them of dirt dust gravel loose concrete particles and other extraneous materials .
you may leave concrete curing compound on the surface .
num .
remove sharp protrusions from the surface that could puncture the membrane .
num .
round or chamfer sharp corners to be covered .
use portland cement concrete or mortar to make chamfers or to fill the void beneath railing bumper rails .
before applying the primer or conditioner tape or adhere oilresistant construction paper mask to deck areas that are to be covered by expansion dams .
place the membrane seal continuously across the paper masks except cut the mask and the preformed sheet at or near the expansion joint if requested .
the surfaces must be dry and the temperature of the deck and of the materials must be at least num degrees f when the membrane seal is applied except the rubberized asphalt material may be applied when the temperature is at least num degrees f. apply primer conditioner and mastic under the manufacturers instructions .
apply the primer or conditioner to the entire area to be sealed except where a slurry leveling course has been applied .
where a slurry leveling course has been applied apply a prime coat consisting of an rsnum grade asphaltic emulsion spread at a rate of num gallon per num sq yd of surface covered .
thoroughly mix and continuously agitate the primer and conditioner during application .
allow the primer to dry to a tackfree condition before placing membrane sheets .
recoat the surface if the membrane sheet is not placed over the primer or conditioner within the time recommended by the manufacturer .
apply the preformed membrane sheet to the primed or conditioned surface either by hand methods or by mechanical applicators .
place the membrane sheets using the following procedure to achieve a shingling effect in the direction that water will drain num .
place a minimum numinchwide membrane strip along the juncture of the deck and the base of the barrier curb face at the low side of the deck with the sheet extending up the face num inches .
num .
starting at the gutter line lay sheets longitudinally side lapped with adjacent sheets by at least num inches and end lapped by at least num inches .
num .
if the deck has a reversing superelevation place a minimum numinchwide strip at the juncture of the deck and the base of the barrier or curb at the high side of the deck extending up the face num inches .
section num waterproofing num num .
roll the membrane sheets with hand rollers or other apparatus as necessary to develop a firm and uniform bond with the primed or conditioned concrete surface minimizing wrinkles and air bubbles .
num .
patch tears cuts or narrow overlaps using an adhesive as follows num .
place sections of a membrane sheet over the defective area such that the patch extends at least num inches beyond the defect .
num .
for modified bitumen sheets with a permanent polyester film use a propane torch to melt the polyester film on the section to be patched .
place the patch over the heated surface and roll or press it firmly onto the surface .
at open joints and deck bleeder pipes cut and turn the membrane sheet into the joint or bleeder while laying the membrane sheet .
if the membrane sheet is manufactured with a release film remove the film from the contact area of the lap joint or splice before making the joint or splice .
do not remove the film from the remainder of the membrane sheet until immediately before placing the hma .
apply a bead of mastic at the following locations num .
along the exposed edge of the membrane sheet that extends up the barrier or curb face num .
if the deck has a reversing superelevation along the edge in the high side gutter after installing the sheets do not allow traffic on the seal until hma is placed over it .
num payment the payment quantity for deck seal is the area covered determined from the dimensions shown with no deduction for masked areas .
num slurry leveling course num general section num includes specifications for applying a slurry leveling course on roughsurfaced deteriorated bridge decks .
num materials the slurry leveling course must consist of a mixture of num parts of undiluted asphaltic emulsion mixed with num parts by volume of aggregate .
the asphaltic emulsion must be commercialquality grade qsnumh or cqsnumh .
the aggregate must be a commercialquality sand that passes a no .
num sieve .
num construction mix the slurry seal in a continuous pugmill mixer .
the mixer must produce a uniform and homogeneous mixture .
you may blend additional water into the slurry to improve mixing and spreading properties if the added water plus the surface moisture on the aggregate does not exceed num percent by volume of the undiluted emulsion .
protect surfaces of the bridge and other improvements that are not to receive slurry leveling course from spatter and stains .
spread the slurry on waterdampened but puddlefree concrete surfaces with a squeegee or broom of suitable stiffness .
apply the slurry at a rate sufficient to fill local depressions in the deck without filling over high deck areas .
mask or cover open joints drains access openings and sliding surfaces during the application of slurry .
num payment the payment quantity for slurry leveling course is the volume of undiluted asphaltic emulsion used to produce the slurry not including any additional water blended into the slurry .
section num waterproofing num num silane waterproofing treatment reserved num reserved num num steel structures num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for furnishing and erecting structural steel or metalwork .
structural steel bridge includes furnishing and erecting structural steel .
furnish structural steel bridge includes fabricating and delivering structural steel to the job site ready to incorporate into the work .
erect structural steel bridge includes erecting structural steel at the job site into final position in the work .
numb definitions thread stickout the threaded end of a bolt projecting past the outer nut face .
unidentified stock material material that can not be identified with certified mill test reports .
numc submittals numcnum general submit copies of mill orders when orders are placed .
submit certified mill test reports before fabrication .
include cvn impact test results if impact testing is specified .
include grain size if fine grain steel is specified .
except for unidentified stock material submit certificates of compliance for materials used in the work .
submit a calibration certificate for each bolt tension measuring device and calibrated wrench before use .
submit reports from testing performed on fastener components and assemblies before shipment to the job site .
test reports must include the rotational capacity lot numbers and the reports listed in the certification report number of tests and retests and certification and test report sections of the referenced astm standards .
for astm fnum anchor bolts include chemical composition and carbon equivalence for each heat of steel .
for hs connections submit a record of which lots are used in each joint as an informational submittal .
numcnum shop drawings submit shop drawings for steel structures to osd documents unit .
notify the engineer of the submittal .
include the submittal date and contents in the notification .
allow num days for the departments review for highway bridges and num days for railway bridges .
submit num copies for highway bridges and num copies for railway bridges .
submit num to num copies as requested by the engineer to osd documents unit after review for final authorization .
the shop drawings must include num .
sequence of shop and field assembly and erection .
for continuous members include proposed steel erection procedures with calculations that show girder capacity and geometry will be correct .
num .
welding sequences and procedures .
num .
layout drawing of the entire structure with locations of butt welded splices .
num .
locations of temporary supports and welds .
num .
vertical alignment of girders at each stage of erection .
num .
matchmarking diagrams .
num .
details for connections not shown or dimensioned on the plans .
num .
details of allowed options incorporated into the work .
num .
direction of rolling of plates where orientation is specified .
num .
distortion control plan .
num .
dimensional tolerances .
include measures for controlling accumulated error to meet overall tolerances .
num .
material specification and grade listed on the bill of materials .
num .
identification of tension members and fracture critical members .
section num steel structures num num .
proposed deviations from plans specifications or previously submitted shop drawings .
num .
contract plan sheet references for details .
submit camber calculations with the shop drawings .
numcnum check testing submit test samples for check testing to mets .
submit test samples for each heat of maximum thickness of num .
tension flanges and webs of fracture critical members num .
tension flanges and webs of horizontally curved girders num .
hanger plates furnish plates shapes or bars with extra length to provide for removal of check samples .
take samples from any location within the plate .
mark donor plates with the same identifying numbers as the test samples .
remove material for test samples in the engineers presence .
test samples for plates over num inches wide must be num by num inches with the long dimension transverse to the direction of rolling .
test samples for other products must be num inches long taken in the direction of rolling with a width equal to the product width .
submit test samples before fabricating into components .
mark samples with the direction of rolling heat numbers and plate numbers using paint or indelible marking material .
you may steel stamp samples in one corner of the plate instead of marking .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum qualifications welder qualification must comply with aws dnum .
each manual torque wrench must have a dial gauge or digital read out .
any electric pneumatic or hydraulic calibrated wrench used to tension fasteners must have an adjustable control unit to shut off the wrench at the desired torque .
bolt tension measuring devices and calibrated wrenches must be calibrated not more than num year before use and at least yearly during the project .
the calibration must be performed by an authorized repair and calibration center approved by the tool manufacturer .
certification equipment and calibration standards must be traceable to nist .
calibrate bolt tension measuring devices to be accurate to within num percent of actual tension .
calibration must consist of at least num evenly spaced verification readings performed over a range of num to num percent of full scale .
calibrate calibrated wrenches to be accurate to within num percent of actual torque .
calibration must consist of at least num evenly spaced verification readings performed over a range of num to num percent of full scale .
if a torque multiplier is used calibrate the torque multiplier and calibrated wrench as a unit .
include sockets and extensions of the same length to be used in the work during calibration .
adjust the manufacturers torque multiplier during calibration so that the product of the torque multiplier and the input calibrated wrench reading is within num percent of actual torque value .
use this system only as calibrated .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general welder inspection must comply with aws dnum .
the engineer determines the location of all ndt testing for welding .
in addition to ndt requirements in aws dnum ultrasonically test num percent of all main member cjp groove welds in butt joints subject to calculated tension in material over num inch thick .
section num steel structures num perform ndt on num percent of each pin as follows num .
mt under astm anum s num with no linear indication allowed exceeding num mm num .
ut under astm anum s num level s and level da in two perpendicular directions for bolts installed as snug tight rotational capacity testing and installation tension testing are not required .
numdnumb source quality control numdnumbi general reserved numdnumbii charpy vnotch requirements determine cvn values under astm enum .
sampling procedures must comply with astm anum .
use the frequency h heat testing for steels complying with astm anumanumm grades num num numw and hps numw .
use the frequency p piece testing for steels complying with astm anumanumm grades hps numw num and numw .
numdnumbiii rotational capacity testing numdnumbiiinum general perform rotational capacity testing on hs fastener assemblies before shipment to the job site .
test each combination of bolt production lot nut lot and washer lot as an assembly .
assign a rotational capacity lot number to each combination of lots tested .
mark each shipping unit of fastener assemblies with the rotational capacity lot number .
test num fastener assemblies from each lot .
both fastener assemblies tested from a rotational capacity lot must pass for the lot to be acceptable .
use num hardened washer under the nut for testing .
test zinccoated assemblies after lubrication .
you do not need to test cap screws or bolts used for slip base plates .
numdnumbiiinum long bolt test use the following equipment num .
calibrated bolt tension measuring device .
num .
hand wrench or suitable tool for turning bolt .
num .
calibrated dial or digital torque wrench with socket .
num .
spacer washers or bushings .
spacer washers or bushings must have the same inside diameter and an equal or larger outside diameter as the appropriate hardened washers complying with astm fnum .
num .
steel beam or member to which the tension measuring device will be attached .
the member must be accessible from the ground .
use the following procedure num .
measure and record the bolt length from the bolt washer face to the end of the shank .
num .
install the nut on the bolt such that the first num to numfull threads closest to the bolt head are between the nut face and bolt head .
num .
measure and record the length of bolt thread protruding beyond the outer nut face .
if the nut can not be fully threaded onto the bolt test the assembly under section numdnumbiiinum .
num .
insert the bolt into the tension measuring device .
install the hardened washer and any required spacers under the nut to produce the thread length recorded in step num above .
num .
tighten the nut using a hand wrench to the minimum snug tension shown in the following table section num steel structures num table num anum snugtight tension values bolt diameter inches minimum snug tensiona kips num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num athe tension may exceed the table num value by at most num kips .
num .
matchmark the assembly as follows num .
place a mark on num corner of the nut .
num .
place a heavy reference line on the face plate of the tension measuring device that aligns with the mark on the nut .
num .
place a line that aligns with the mark on the nut across the flat end of the bolt shank or on the exposed portions of the threads of tension control bolts .
num .
place a mark on the outside of the turning socket .
the mark must be aligned with the mark on the nut corner and be visible when the nut is being turned .
num .
make an additional mark on the face plate at the required rotation shown in the following table clockwise from the heavy reference line table num required nut rotation for rotational capacity tests ab bolt lengthc required rotation turn num bolt diameters or less num more than num and at most num bolt diameters num more than num and at most num bolt diametersd num anut rotation is relative to bolt regardless of the element being turned .
for bolts installed by num turn or less the tolerance is num degrees for bolts installed by num turn or more the tolerance is num degrees .
bapplicable only to connections in which all material within the grip of the bolt is steel .
cas measured in step num above .
dif the bolt length exceeds num diameters the required rotation must be determined by actual tests in a suitable tension device simulating site conditions .
num .
turn the nut to attain the minimum tension for the applicable bolt diameter shown the following table table num anum minimum tension values bolt diameter inches minimum tension kips num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num section num steel structures num num .
after attaining the tension shown in table num record in ftlb the moving torque required to turn the nut and the corresponding bolt tension .
measure the torque with the nut in motion .
use this corresponding bolt tension to determine t using the following formula t b x dnum where b corresponding bolt tension in pounds d bolt diameter in inches num .
turn the nut until the rotation shown in table num is attained .
measure the rotation from the heavy reference line on the face plate .
record the bolt tension .
num .
remove the nut and examine the threads on the nut and bolt .
acceptance criteria are as follows num .
moving torque recorded in step num must be less than or equal to the calculated value t. num .
bolt tension recorded in step num must be at least the turntest tension value shown in table num .
num .
nut is removed from the bolt with no signs of thread stripping or galling on the bolt or nut .
num .
bolt must not shear or fail during the test .
num .
assembly must not seize before the final rotation in step num is attained .
table num anum turn test tension values bolt diameter inches turn test tension kips num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numdnumbiiinum short bolt test use the following equipment num .
calibrated dial or digital torque wrench with socket .
num .
hand wrench .
num .
spacer washers or bushings .
spacer washers or bushings must have the same inside diameter and an equal or larger outside diameter as the appropriate hardened washers complying with astm fnum .
num .
steel plate or girder .
this member must have a thickness that provides the required number of threads within the bolt grip as specified in procedure step num of section numdnumbiiinum .
use the following procedure num .
measure and record the bolt length from the bolt washer face to the end of the shank .
num .
install the nut on the bolt .
the first num to numfull threads must be located between the nut washer face and the bolt washer face .
measure and record the length of bolt thread protruding beyond the outer nut face .
num .
install the bolt into the hole in the plate or girder .
the hole must be num inch larger than the nominal bolt diameter .
install the hardened washer and any required spacers to produce the thread length recorded in step num .
num .
tighten the nut snug tight using a hand wrench .
do not exceed num percent of the maximum allowable torque value shown in the following table .
section num steel structures num table num anum maximum allowable torque bolt diameter inches torque ftlb num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
matchmark the assembly as follows num .
place a mark on num corner of the nut .
num .
place a heavy reference line on the steel plate or girder that aligns with the mark on the nut .
num .
place a line that aligns with the mark on the nut across the flat end of the bolt shank or on the exposed portions of the threads of tension control bolts .
num .
place a mark on the outside of the turning socket that aligns with the mark on the nut .
this mark must be visible when the nut is being turned .
num .
make num additional small marks on the steel plate or girder one at num of a turn and one at num of a turn clockwise from the heavy reference line on the steel plate or girder .
num .
tighten the nut to the rotation value shown in table num .
measure the rotation from the heavy reference line on the steel girder or plate .
do not allow the bolt head to turn during tightening .
table num nut rotation required for turnofnut installation ab bolt lengthc required rotation turn num bolt diameters or less num anut rotation is relative to bolt regardless of the element being turned .
for bolts installed by num turn or less the tolerance is num degrees .
bapplicable only to connections in which all material within the grip of the bolt is steel .
cmeasured in step num .
num .
record in ftlb the moving torque required to turn the nut when the rotation value shown in table num is attained .
num .
tighten the nut further to the rotation value shown in table num .
measure the rotation from the heavy reference line on the steel girder or plate .
the line on the end of the bolt shank or on the exposed threads of tension control bolts must remain in alignment with the start line .
table num required nut rotation for rotational capacity test bolt lengtha required rotation turn num bolt diameters or less num ameasured in step num .
num .
remove the nut and examine the threads on the nut and bolt .
acceptance criteria are as follows num .
moving torque recorded from step num must be less than or equal to the maximum allowable torque shown in table num .
num .
nut is removed from the bolt with no signs of thread stripping or galling on the bolt or nut after the rotation in step num has been attained .
num .
bolt must not shear or fail during the test .
num .
assembly must not seize before the final rotation in step num is attained .
section num steel structures num numdnumc field quality control numdnumci general perform job site hs fastener testing in the engineers presence .
if the bolt head is the turned element during installation perform installation tension testing and verification tension testing including determining inspection torque by turning the bolt head .
the engineer rejects uninstalled fasteners in the same rotational capacity lot as fasteners that fail a job site installation tension test or rotational capacity test .
perform additional rotational capacity tests installation tension tests and tests to determine new inspection torques on rotational capacity lots if any of the following occur num .
any fastener is not used within num months after arrival on the job site .
num .
fasteners are improperly handled stored or subjected to inclement weather before final tightening .
num .
changes are noted in the original surface condition of threads washers or nut lubricant .
num .
required inspections are not performed within num hours after all fasteners in a joint have been tensioned .
numdnumcii rotational capacity testing perform rotational capacity testing on each rotational capacity lot under section numdnumbiii at the job site before installation .
numdnumciii installation tension testing perform installation tension testing on each rotational capacity lot before installation .
test num representative hs fastener assemblies under section num of specification for structural joints using highstrength bolts of the rcsc .
for short bolts test num representative hs fastener assemblies under preinstallation verification procedures of structural bolting handbook of the steel structures technology center .
if using direct tension indicators perform installation verification tests under appendix xnum of astm fnum except that bolts must be initially tensioned to a value num percent greater than the minimum required bolt tension .
numdnumciv verification tension testing perform fastener tension testing to verify minimum tension in hs bolted connections no later than num hours after all fasteners in a connection have been tensioned .
the engineer selects fasteners to be tested .
perform testing such that the engineer can read the torque wrench or access direct tension indicator gaps during testing .
test num percent of each type of fastener assembly in each hs bolted connection for minimum tension using the procedure described in section num of specification for structural joints using highstrength bolts of the rcsc .
check at least num assemblies per connection .
for short bolts determine the inspection torque using steps num through num of arbitration of disputes torque methodshort bolts in structural bolting handbook of the steel structures technology center .
determine and use a separate inspecting torque for each different rotational capacity lot of fasteners .
numdnum department acceptance the department inspects structural steel at the fabrication site .
notify the engineer when materials are delivered to the fabrication site .
allow at least num days between giving notice and starting fabrication .
results of check testing are delivered to you within num days of receipt of samples at mets .
for multiple samples submitted on the same day an additional day is added for every num samples submitted and the test report is made for the group of samples .
section num steel structures num num materials numa general reserved numb delivery storage and handling mark the weight of any member weighing over num lb on the member .
do not bend scrape or overstress members during handling and shipping .
the engineer rejects bent or damaged members .
keep structural material clean during loading transporting and unloading .
store structural material above ground on supports .
keep material clean drained and protected from corrosion .
store girders upright and shored .
support long members on skids placed to prevent deflection .
numc design requirements connection details for highway bridges must comply with aashto lrfd bridge design specifications with california amendments .
design details fabrication and workmanship for railway bridges must comply with chapter num of arema manual for railway engineering .
numd materials numdnum general materials must comply with the requirements shown in the following tables structural steel material specification carbon steel astm anumanumm grade num or astm anumanumma hs low alloy columbium vanadium steel astm anumanumm grade num or astm anumanumm or astm anumanumm grade numa hs low alloy structural steel astm anumanumm grade numw or grade hps numw or astm anumanumma hs low alloy structural steel plate astm anumanumm grade hps numw highyield strength quenched and tempered alloy steel plate suitable for welding astm anumanumm grade num grade numw or grade hps numw or astm anumanumma agrades you may substitute for the equivalent astm anum steel subject to the modifications and additions specified and to the requirements of astm anum .
section num steel structures num fasteners material specification steel fastener components for general applications bolts and studs astm anum anchor bolts astm fnum a hs bolts and studs astm anum type num a hs threaded rods astm anum type num a hs nonheaded anchor bolts astm fnum grade num class numa a nuts astm anum including appendix xnumb washers astm fnum hardened washers astm fnum type num including snum supplementary requirements components of hs steel fastener assemblies for use in structural steel joints bolts astm anum type num tension control bolts astm fnum type num nuts astm anum including appendix xnumb hardened washers astm fnum type num circular including snum supplementary requirements direct tension indicators astm fnum type num zinccoated ause hardened washers .
bzinccoated nuts tightened beyond snug or wrench tight must be furnished with a dry lubricant complying with supplementary requirement snum in astm anum .
other materials material specification carbon steel for forgings pins and rollers astm anumanumm class d alloy steel for forgings astm anumanumm class g pin nuts astm anumanumm or astm anum including appendix xnuma carbonsteel castings astm anumanumm grade num class num malleable iron castings astm anumanumm grade num gray iron castings astm anum class numb carbon steel structural tubing astm anumanumm grade b astm anum astm anumanumm or astm anum steel pipeb astm anum type e or s grade b astm anum grade b or astm anum grade b stud connectors astm anum azinccoated nuts tightened beyond snug or wrench tight must be furnished with a dry lubricant complying with supplementary requirement snum in astm anum .
bhydrostatic testing will not apply .
numdnum charpy vnotch requirements structural steel plate used for the following components must comply with longitudinal cvn impact values shown in the following table num .
tension members tension flanges eyebars and hanger plates num .
splice plates of tension members tension flanges and eyebars section num steel structures num material complying with astm anumanumm cvn impact value ftlb at temperature grade num num at num f grade numa thickness up to num inches num at num f grade numwa thickness up to num inches num at num f grade numa thickness over num inches up to num inches num at num f grade numwa thickness over num inches up to num inches num at num f grade hps numwa thickness up to num inches num at num f grade hps numw thickness up to num inches num at num f grade num thickness of num inches or less num at num f grade numw thickness over num inches up to num inches num at num f grade hps numw thickness of num inches or less num at num f grade hps numw thickness over num inches up to num inches num at num f aif the material yield strength is more than num psi reduce the temperature for the cvn impact value num f for each increment of num psi above num psi .
for fracture critical members minimum cvn impact values are specified in the special provisions .
numdnum structural steel unless otherwise described structural steel plates shapes and bars must comply with astm anumanumm grade num .
you may increase girder flange plate thickness and length if the change does not decrease any portion of the plates in detailed thickness .
for continuous girders increases in the length of girder flange plates that change locations of butt welds between different thicknesses of flange plates must be authorized before fabrication .
studtype shear connectors longer than num inches may consist of multiple shorter studs connected with complete joint penetration welds .
all structural steel that is precut before arrival at the fabrication site must be cut so that the primary direction of rolling is parallel to the direction of the main tensile or compressive stress in the member .
do not use coiled steel plate for num .
flanges or eyebars num .
hanger plates num .
splice plates for flanges or eyebars you may substitute rolled shapes for the welded sections and welded sections for the rolled shapes shown if the substituted members comply with the following num .
depth width and average thicknesses are at least equal to the replaced shape or section .
num .
for welded sections the flanges are welded to the web with continuous fillet welds on each side of the web .
num .
strength classification of the material is not reduced .
numdnum bearing pads elastomeric bearing pads must comply with section num .
numdnum castings steel gray iron and malleable iron castings must have continuous fillets cast in place in reentrant angles .
the radius of curvature of the exposed surface of a fillet will define the fillet size .
the size of fillets must be at least onehalf the thickness of the thinnest adjoined member but not less than num inch .
section num steel structures num finished casting dimensions must be at least equal to the dimensions shown .
castings must not be more than num percent overweight .
numdnum unidentified stock material you may use unidentified stock material on nonfracture critical members if num .
no more than num pounds is used num .
unidentified stock material is segregated from all other materials used in the work num .
material is authorized before fabrication the engineer may select samples for testing from each piece of unidentified stock material proposed for use .
testing of samples must be performed by an authorized laboratory under the applicable astm .
numdnum miscellaneous materials caulking must be polysulfide or polyurethane caulking complying with astm cnum type s grade ns .
nume fabrication numenum general section numenum applies to work performed at the source and at the job site .
cut and fabricate steel plates for flanges eyebars hanger plates and splice plates for flanges and eyebars such that the primary direction of rolling is parallel to the direction of the main tensile or compressive stress in the member .
mechanically cut edges must be clean cut without torn or ragged edges .
ends of girder stiffeners shown as tightfit must bear on the girder flange with at least point bearing .
local clearances between the end of the stiffener and the girder flange must be at most num inch .
fabricate floor beams stringers and girders having end connection angles to exact length back to back of connection angles .
if end connections are faced the finished angle thickness must be at least that shown on the shop drawings .
finished members must be true to line and free from twists bends and open joints .
matchmark connecting parts that are preassembled for setting up for welding or for drilling or reaming holes for field connections .
use lowstress stamps for fracture critical members and tension members .
where galvanizing is described galvanize structural steel under section numb .
neatly finish exposed parts of the work .
slightly round edges and sharp corners including edges marred cut or roughened during handling or erection .
clean and paint iron and steel surfaces under section num .
numenum flatness of faying and bearing surfaces surfaces of bearing and base plates and other metal surfaces that contact each other or ground concrete surfaces must be flat to within num inch in num inches and num inch overall .
surfaces of bearing and base plates and other metal bearing surfaces that contact mortar preformed fabric pads or elastomeric bearing pads must be flat to within num inch in num inches and num inch overall .
instead of machining you may heat straighten steel slabs not in contact with other metal bearing surfaces if the above tolerances are met .
numenum bent plates coldbent loadcarrying rolled steel plates must comply with the following num .
direction of bending must be at right angles to the direction of rolling .
num .
radius of bend measured to the concave face must comply with manual of steel construction of the aisc .
num .
before bending the corners of the plate must be rounded to a numinch radius throughout that portion of the plate where bending is to occur .
section num steel structures num plates to be bent to a smaller radius than specified in manual of steel construction of the aisc must be bent hot .
hot bent plates must have the direction of bending at right angles to the direction of rolling .
numenum fastener threads fastener threads for general applications must comply with the following num .
external threads must comply with the unified coarse thread series requirements in ansi bnum with class numa tolerances before coating with zinc num .
internal threads must comply with astm anum threads for pin ends and pin nuts num inches or more in diameter must comply with the following num .
external threads must be unified inch screw threads un series with num threads per inch complying with ansi bnum with class numa tolerances num .
internal threads must be unified inch screw threads un series with num threads per inch complying with ansi bnum with class numb tolerances numenum pin connections pins must num .
be turned to the dimensions shown num .
be straight smooth and free from flaws num .
have the final surface produced by a finishing cut in pins more than num inches in diameter bore a full length hole at least num inches in diameter along the pin axis after cooling and before annealing .
holes for pins must be num .
true to the diameter specified .
num .
at right angles to the member axis .
num .
parallel with each other except for pins where nonparallel holes are required .
num .
smooth and straight with the final surface produced by a finishing cut .
coat machined surfaces of pins and holes with an easily removed rust inhibitor .
the distance between holes for pins must not vary by more than num inch from that shown when measured outsidetooutside for tension members and insidetoinside for compression members .
the diameter of holes for pins must not exceed the pin diameter by more than num inch for pins num inches or less in diameter or num inch for larger pins .
bore holes for pins in builtup members after assembly .
if authorized you may bore holes before assembly if the same degree of accuracy is achieved as boring after assembly .
bore pinconnected hanger plates in pairs or in stacks bolted or clamped together such that each pair of hanger plates is matched .
use pilot and driving nuts for driving pins .
drive pins such that the members will bear fully on them .
for field assembly use a positive locking device to tighten and secure pin nuts .
numenum bolted connections numenuma general bolted connections in structural steel joints must be made with hs steel fastener assemblies consisting of one of the following num .
hs steel bolt nut and hardened washer .
you may use a direct tension indicator with the bolt nut and hardened washer .
num .
tension control bolt nut and hardened washer .
section num steel structures num each length and diameter of fastener assembly used in any single joint of a hs bolted connection must be from the same rotational capacity lot .
keep a record of which lots are used in each joint .
numenumb bolt holes numenumbi general bolt holes must be one of the following num .
punched full size num .
drilled full size num .
subpunched and reamed num .
subdrilled and reamed finished holes for bolts must be num .
cylindrical and perpendicular to the plane of the connection num .
at most num inch larger than the nominal bolt diameter num .
clean cut without torn or ragged edges num .
without irregularities that prevent solid seating holes punched full size subpunched or subdrilled must pass a pin num inch smaller than the nominal hole size without drifting in at least num percent of the holes for each connection after assembling and before any reaming .
all holes must pass a pin num inch smaller in diameter than the nominal hole size .
do not correct mispunched or misdrilled holes by welding unless authorized .
numenumbii punching do not punch or subpunch astm anumanumm structural steel thicker than num inch .
do not punch or subpunch hs structural steel thicker than num inch .
the diameter of the punching die must not exceed the punch diameter by more than num inch .
subpunch holes to be reamed to a diameter num inch smaller than the finished hole .
numenumbiii drilling drill fullsized holes with the parts assembled or to a steel template with hardened bushings .
if authorized you may drill fullsized holes with gang drill equipment .
the engineer may request a proof assembly to check the fit of major field connections .
subdrill holes to be reamed to a diameter num inch smaller than the finished hole .
drill through templates after the templates have been firmly clamped or bolted .
if members are drilled while assembled hold the parts together securely during drilling .
you may stack drill plates using gang drills if num .
parts are firmly clamped during drilling num .
drill bits remain perpendicular to the work during drilling numenumbiv reaming perform reaming after builtup members are assembled and firmly bolted together or after templates are securely located over the member .
remove shavings after reaming .
mark pieces reamed together so that they may be reassembled in the same position .
do not interchange reamed parts .
reaming templates must num .
have hardened steel bushings num .
have accurately dimensioned holes num .
have reference lines for locating templates on members num .
be firmly clamped or bolted in position section num steel structures num templates used for reaming of matching members or the opposite faces of one member must be exact duplicates .
for reaming holes in assembled material do not mix fullsized holes with subpunched or subdrilled holes .
numenumc installation bolted connections using hs fastener assemblies must comply with specification for structural joints using highstrength bolts of the rcsc .
tension hs bolted connections as slip critical .
use the same bolt head orientation within a single hs bolted connection .
install the hardened washer under the element turned in tightening .
locate nuts on the side of the member not visible from the traveled way .
locate nuts for bolts partially embedded in concrete on the side of the member to be encased in concrete .
if surface moisture is present at a hs bolted connection num .
do not install hs fastener assemblies having components furnished with water soluble lubricants .
num .
the engineer may require you to perform additional fastener testing if fastener assemblies are furnished with lubricants not soluble in water .
seal the sheared ends of tension control bolts with caulking .
caulking must be gray and at least num mils thick .
apply caulk to a clean surface the same day the splined end is sheared off .
for all bolts thread stickout after tensioning must be at least flush with the outer nut face .
at least num full threads must be located within the grip of the connection .
you may use num additional hardened washer under the nonturning element to correct excessive thread stickout .
thread stickout of studs rods and anchor bolts must be at least flush with the outer nut face and at most num inch .
you may use bolts with diameters up to num inch larger than the specified bolt diameter if num .
authorized num .
you comply with the spacing and edge distance requirements for the larger bolt num .
net section is adequate if using direct tension indicators num .
install num indicator under each bolt head .
the protrusions must contact the bolt head .
num .
hold the bolt head stationary and turn the nut .
num .
follow the manufacturers installation procedures .
num .
tension bolts in not less than num stages until at least num percent of the gaps on each indicator are between num and num inch .
indicators with all protrusions completely crushed are rejected .
do not torque the splined end of tension control bolts before final tensioning .
numenum welding numenuma general welding must comply with aws dnum .
replace table num of aws dnum with the following table section num steel structures num base metal thickness of the thicker part joined inches minimum effective partial joint penetration groove weld sizea inches over num to num inclusive num over num to num inclusive num over num to num inclusive num over num to num inclusive num over num to num inclusive num over num num aweld size need not exceed the thickness of the thinner part joined .
dimensional details and workmanship for welded joints in tubular and pipe connections must comply with part a common requirements for design of welded connections and part d specific requirements for design of tubular connections in section num of aws dnum .
the flat side of buttwelded joints must not deviate from flatness by more than num inch in a numfoot length centered over the weld .
do not weld or tack brackets clips shipping devices or other material not described to any part of the girders unless shown on the shop drawings .
grind weld surfaces smooth and flush when ndt is required .
for welds indicated to be subject to tensile forces that are to receive rt grind smooth and flush on both sides of welds before testing .
for groove weld surface profiles that interfere with ndt procedures grind welds smooth and blend with the adjacent material .
for fillet weld surface profiles that interfere with ndt procedures grind welds and blend the toes smoothly with the adjacent base metal .
numenumb backing for welds reserved numenumc steel pedestrian bridges reserved numenum curved girders reserved numenum shop assembly prepare and paint contact surfaces of hs bolted connections before assembly .
thoroughly clean all other surfaces of metal in contact to bare metal before assembly .
remove all rust mill scale and foreign material .
preassemble completed subassemblies for structures or units of structures before erection to verify geometry and to verify or prepare field connections .
bolted trusses skew portals skew connections rigid frames bents and towers must be completely preassembled adjusted to line and camber and prepared for welding or checked for bolt fit before erection .
preassemble truss work in lengths of at least num abutting panels and adjust members for line and camber .
prepare joints for welding or drill or ream holes for field connections during preassembly .
for holes previously drilled full size check holes for bolt fit .
preassemble bolted splice joints for plate girders in lengths of at least num abutting sections and adjust abutting sections for line and camber .
drill or ream holes for field connections during preassembly .
preassemble prepared splice joints for welded girders with abutting members and adjust for line and camber .
section num steel structures num preassembly methods must be compatible with the erection methods used .
preassemble all machinery completely .
fit bearings to the clearances and alignments specified .
gear reductions and line gears must have gear center distances set and the gears matchmarked .
num construction numa general field welding must comply with section numenum .
assemble parts into final positions without damage .
follow all matchmarks .
do not damage or distort members when hammering .
drifting done during assembly must not enlarge bolt holes or distort the metal .
numb falsework falsework must comply with section num except that dead loads consist of the weight of the structural steel and portions of the structure supported by the falsework .
construct falsework and concrete forms on steel structures such that loads applied to girder webs num are applied within num inches of a flange or stiffener and num do not produce local distortion of the web .
provide temporary struts and ties to num resist lateral loads applied to girder flanges and num prevent appreciable vertical movement between the edge of deck form and the adjacent steel girder .
numc erection numcnum general reserved numcnum continuous members unless otherwise shown structural steel girders are designed for continuity in supporting girder dead load .
if erection procedures provide girder continuity for dead load preassemble members with field joints in a noload condition in a horizontal or an upright condition .
you may erect structural steel girders such that deadload girder continuity is not provided .
if erection procedures do not provide girder continuity for dead load num .
you may increase crosssectional areas or change grades of steel to provide the specified capacity if authorized .
num .
the erected structure must have a loadcarrying capacity at least equal to the structure shown .
numcnum bearings and anchorages set bearing assemblies level .
the engineer provides adjustments to horizontal positions of bearing assemblies due to temperature .
attain full bearing on the concrete under bearing assemblies .
immediately before setting bearing assemblies or masonry plates on ground concrete surfaces thoroughly clean and apply caulking to all contact surfaces .
during welding protect bearings and bearing surfaces using authorized methods .
the embedded end of each anchor bolt must terminate with a head or a nut and washer .
anchor bolts must allow true positioning of bearing assemblies .
mortar placed num under masonry plates or bearing assemblies or num in anchor bolt sleeves or canisters must comply with section numf except the cement to sand ratio must be num to num .
mortaring and constructing mortar pads under masonry plates must be done after girder erection and before placing deck concrete .
if anchor bolts are installed in pipe sleeves or metal canisters fill the pipes or canisters completely with mortar .
section num steel structures num numcnumcnum reserved num payment the payment quantity for structural steel is the weight determined from the dimensions shown using the following rules and assumptions num .
density of structural and cast steel is num lbcu in .
the density of cast iron is num lbcu in .
num .
weight of rolled shapes and structural plate is computed using nominal weight and dimensions with no deduction for copes cuts and holes .
num .
weight of fillet welds is as shown in the following table size of fillet weld inches weight lblf num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
weight of galvanizing is added to the calculated base metal weight using the table of weights of zinc coatings in astm anumanumm .
num .
weight of bolts nuts and washers is added to obtain the weight of completed members .
the weight of oversize bolts and nuts is not included .
num .
weight of nuts bolts washers cap screws anchor bolts and anchor pipe sleeves in the finished structure is based on nominal weight and dimensions .
num .
weight of paint is not included .
num reserved num num overhead sign structures standards and poles num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing overhead sign structures standards and poles .
num materials reserved num construction welding of steel members must comply with aws dnum .
dispose of surplus excavated material .
backfill under section num .
num payment not used num overhead sign structures num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing overhead sign structures .
furnishing sign structures includes furnishing anchor bolt assemblies removable sign panel frames sign structure hardware and fabricated sign structures at the job site ready for installation including welding and painting or galvanizing as required .
installing sign structures includes installing anchor bolt assemblies removable sign panel frames and sign panels and performing any welding and painting or galvanizing required during installation .
types of overhead sign structures include num .
truss num .
bridge mounted num .
tubular numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general allow num days for the departments review .
numcnum shop drawings submit num copies of shop drawings for sign structures .
include num .
sign panel dimensions num .
span lengths num .
post heights num .
anchorage layouts num .
proposed splice locations num .
snugging and tensioning pattern for anchor bolts and hs bolted connections num .
details for permanent steel anchor bolt templates num .
details of clips eyes or removable devices for preventing damage to the finished galvanized or painted surfaces used for num securing the sign during shipping num lifting and moving during erection section num overhead sign structures standards and poles num numcnum quality control program submit a qc program for sign structures .
include methods equipment and personnel to be used during fabrication and installation .
submit the qc program with the shop drawing submittal .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb nondestructive testing numdnumbi general perform ndt of steel members under aws dnum and the requirements shown in the following table nondestructive testing for overhead sign structures weld location weld type minimum required ndt circumferential splices around the perimeter of tubular sections poles and arms .
cjp groove weld with backing ring num ut or rt longitudinal seam cjp or pjp groove weld random num mt longitudinal seam within num inches of a circumferential splice .
cjp groove weld num ut or rt welds attaching base plates flange plates or pole or mast arm plates to poles or arm tubes cjp groove weld with backing ring and reinforcing fillet t num inch num ut and num mt t num inch num mt after root weld pass and final weld pass external top fillet weld for socket type connections num mt note t pole or arm thickness numdnumbii ultrasonic testing for ut of welded joints with any members less than num inch thick or tubular sections less than num inches in diameter the acceptance and repair criteria must comply with clause num of aws dnum .
for ut of other welded joints the acceptance and repair criteria must comply with table num of aws dnum for cyclically loaded nontubular connections .
when performing ut use an authorized procedure under aws dnum annex s. numdnumbiii radiographic testing the acceptance criteria for radiographic or real time image testing must comply with aws dnum for tensile stress welds .
numdnumbiv longitudinal seam welds the engineer selects the random locations for ndt .
grind the cover pass smooth at the locations to be tested .
if repairs are required in a portion of a tested weld perform ndt on the repaired portion and on num percent of the untested portions of the weld .
if more repairs are required perform ndt on the entire weld .
section num overhead sign structures standards and poles num numdnumc walkway safety railing the assembled and raised walkway safety railing must have less than num inch of wobble when a numlb horizontal load is applied alternating each way at the top center of each railing section .
numdnum department acceptance the department inspects structural materials for sign structures at the fabrication site .
you must num .
notify the engineer when the materials are delivered to the fabrication site num .
allow at least num days after delivery of the material for inspection before starting fabrication num materials numa general materials must comply with section num .
do not use weathering steel .
numb bars plates shapes and structural tubing numbnum general bars and plates must be structural steel complying with one or more of the following num .
astm anumanumm num .
astm anumanumm grade num or num num .
astm anumanumm grade num other open shapes must be structural steel complying with one or more of the following num .
astm anumanumm num .
astm anumanumm grade num or num num .
astm anumanumm light fixture mounting channel must be continuous slot channel made from one of the following num .
steel complying with astm anumanumm designation ss grade num num .
extruded aluminum of alloy numtnum complying with astm bnum or bnumm structural tubing and hollow structural sections must be structural steel complying with astm anumanumm grade b or astm anum .
surface flatness after galvanizing must comply with astm anumanumm for the following num .
base plates that are to come in contact with concrete grout or washers and leveling nuts num .
plates in highstrength bolted connections numbnum charpy vnotch impact reserved numc sheets sheets must be carbon steel complying with astm anumanumm designation ss grade num .
numd bolted connections bolts nuts and washers must comply with section numdnum .
components of hs bolts must comply with section num for high strength steel fastener assemblies unless the bolts are shown to be snug tight .
bolts nuts and washers for hs bolts shown to be snug tight must comply only with section numdnum .
anchor bolts must comply with astm fnum grade num weldable steel .
use a permanent steel template to maintain the proper anchor bolt spacing .
provide num top nut num leveling nut and num washers for the upper threaded portion of each anchor bolt .
section num overhead sign structures standards and poles num nume anchorages anchorages for bridge mounted sign structures must comply with the specifications for concrete anchorage devices in section num .
numf pipe posts pipe posts must be welded or seamless steel pipes .
pipe posts must comply with one of the following num .
astm anumanumm grade b num .
astm anumanumm grade b num .
api specification numl pslnum grade b grade xnumr or grade xnumm using nominal pipe sizes for threaded end pipe you may fabricate posts from structural steel complying with astm anumanumm .
spiral seam welds are not allowed .
numg steel walkway gratings steel walkway gratings must comply with the following num .
gratings must be the standard product of an established grating manufacturer num .
material for gratings must be structural steel complying with astm anumanumm as specified for designation cs type b or designation ss grade num type num num .
for welded type gratings each joint must be full resistance welded under pressure to provide a sound completely beaded joint num .
for mechanically locked gratings num .
method of fabrication and interlocking of the members must be authorized num .
fabricated grating must be equal in strength to the welded type num .
gratings must be accurately fabricated and free from warps twists or defects affecting their appearance or serviceability including num .
ends of all rectangular panels must be square num .
tops of the bearing bars and cross members must be in the same plane num .
gratings distorted by the galvanizing process must be straightened numh elastomeric bearing pads elastomeric bearing pads must comply with section num .
numi safety chain at walkways safety chain at walkways must comply with astm anumanumm grade num .
the nominal chain size must be num inch .
use the minimum length that allows lockup of safety railing .
numj safety cable at walkways safety cable at walkways must num .
be constructed of type num or num stainless steel num by num wire strand core cable num .
have a cable breaking strength of at least num lb num .
not be prestretched numk fabrication numknum general sign structures must be num .
free from kinks twists or bends num .
uniform in appearance fabricate sign structures into the largest practical sections before galvanizing .
assemble the completed sections in the shop .
check sections for straightness alignment and dimension .
correct any variation .
section num overhead sign structures standards and poles num affix clips eyes and removable brackets to all signs and all posts for securing the sign during shipping lifting moving and erection .
secure the sign as necessary to prevent damage to the finished galvanized or painted surfaces .
do not make any holes in members unless the holes are shown or authorized .
form the posts for tubular sign structures to the radii shown by heat treatment or by fabrication methods that will not num .
crimp or buckle the interior radius of the pipe bend num .
change the physical characteristics of the material numknum welding pjp longitudinal seam welds for tapered tubular members must have at least the minimum penetration shown but not less than num percent penetration .
within num inches of circumferential welds longitudinal seam welds must be cjp groove welds .
longitudinal seam welds on structures with telescopic splices connecting pole segments must be cjp groove welds on the female end with a length equal to the designated slipfit splice length plus num inches .
except for welds at posts shown as pjp welds longitudinal seam welds of fabricated pipe posts must be cjp groove welds .
the length of telescopic slipfit splices must be at least num times the inside diameter of the exposed end of the female section .
without authorization you may make num repair to circumferential welds and to base platetopost welds .
obtain authorization before making any additional repairs .
numknum bolted connections except for hs bolts shown to be snugtight hs bolted connections must be hs assemblies complying with section numenum except assemblies must consist of num .
hs steel bolts num .
nuts num .
hardened washers num .
direct tension indicators hs fastener assemblies and any other bolts nuts and washers attached to sign structures must be zinc coated by the mechanical deposition process .
nuts for hs bolts at joints designated as snugtight must not be lubricated .
use an alternating snugging and tensioning pattern for anchor bolts and hs bolted splices .
once tensioned do not reuse hs fastener components .
for bolt diameters less than num inch the diameter of the bolt hole must be not more than num inch larger than the nominal bolt diameter .
for bolt diameters greater than or equal to num inch the diameter of the bolt hole must be not more than num inch larger than the nominal bolt diameter .
numknum walkway safety cable at walkways must be continuous between lugs .
before tightening cable clips at the end anchorage remove the slack in the cable .
safety cable at walkways must not be kinked knotted deformed or spliced .
install clips at safety cables under the manufacturers instructions .
numknum handholes the edges of handholes and other large pole openings must be ground smooth .
the roughness of edges must be less than num inch .
section num overhead sign structures standards and poles num numknum identification plate permanently attach an aluminum identification plate near the base using either stainless steel rivets or stainless steel screws .
attach the plate adjacent to the traffic side on num of the vertical posts .
the information on the plate must include num .
name of the manufacturer num .
date of manufacture num .
contract number numl surface finish numlnum general galvanize all ferrous metal parts of the following sign structure types num .
truss num .
bridge mounted num .
tubular except for tubular type sign structures do not paint sign structures .
clean and paint all ferrous metal parts of tubular sign structures after galvanizing including the areas to be covered by sign panels .
do not treat galvanized surfaces with chemicals before cleaning and painting .
galvanize and do not paint walkway gratings walkway brackets gutters safety railings steel mountings for light fixtures and all nuts bolts and washers for sign structures after fabrication .
numlnum galvanizing galvanizing must comply with section numb except surfaces may be coated with zinc by the thermal spray coating process if authorized .
if authorized to use thermal spray coating apply the coating under section num .
the thickness of the sprayed zinc coat must be at least num mils .
do not use zinc solders or zinc alloys that contain tin to repair a damaged galvanized surface .
numlnum cleaning and painting where specified clean and paint sign structures under section num .
num construction numa general do not fasten any bridgemounted sign to concrete elements of bridges or railings before the concrete attains a compressive strength of num psi .
after erection remove the brackets used to secure tubular sign structures during shipping and lifting .
install sign panels as shown .
install laminated and formed sign panels on sign structures using fastening hardware of the type and sizes shown .
complete the cidh concrete pile foundation at least num days before erecting the sign structure .
numb existing sign structures numbnum general work involving existing sign structures must comply with section num .
numbnum remove sign structure reserved numbnum reconstruct sign structure reserved section num overhead sign structures standards and poles num numbnum modify sign structure reserved numbnum relocate sign structure reserved numbnum salvage sign structure reserved num payment the payment quantity for install sign structure does not include the weight of sign panels .
for determining the payment quantity for furnish sign structure and install sign structure the weight of extruded aluminum used for steel slot channel for the light fixture mounting channel is the computed weight of the steel channel .
num standards and poles num general numa general section num includes general specifications for fabricating and installing standards and poles .
numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum fabrication numbnuma general configure each mast arm as a smooth curving arm .
you may change the mast arm configuration if the mounting height and stability are maintained .
numbnumb bonding jumper for standards with handholes a ullisted lug and numinch or larger brass or bronze bolt must be included for attaching the bonding jumper .
for slip base standards a ullisted lug must be attached to the bottom slip base plate with a numinch or larger brass or bronze bolt if a ullisted ground clamp on each anchor bolt is not used for attaching the bonding jumper .
numc construction numcnum general holes left in the shaft of an existing standard due to the removal of equipment or mast arm must be sealed by fastening a galvanized steel disk to cover the hole .
fasten using a single central galvanized steel fastener .
seal edges of the disk and hole with a polysulfide or polyurethane sealing compound complying with astm c num type s grade ns class num use o .
if an existing standard is ordered to be relocated or reused remove large dents straighten shafts and replace parts that are in poor condition .
furnish anchor bolts or bars and nuts required for relocating or reusing standard .
repair and replacement work is change order work .
if a standard or mast arm is relocated or the department furnishes a used standard or mast arm furnish num .
new bolts nuts cap screws and washers num .
new keeper plate if the standard has a slip base numcnum foundations numcnuma general except for concrete for cidh concrete pile foundations concrete must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
section num overhead sign structures standards and poles num construct concrete foundations on firm ground .
after each post standard and pedestal is properly positioned place mortar under the base plate .
finish the exposed portion to present a neat appearance .
mortar must comply with the specifications for mortar in section num except mortar must have num .
num part by volume of cement num .
num parts by volume of clean sand form exposed portions of the foundation to present a neat appearance and true to line and grade .
the top of the foundation for posts and standards must be finished to curb or sidewalk grade .
forms must be rigid and braced securely in place .
conduit ends and anchor bolts must be placed at the proper height and position .
anchor bolts must be installed a maximum of num from vertical and held in place by rigid top and bottom templates .
use a steel bottom template at least num inch thick that provides proper spacing and alignment of anchor bolts near the embedded bottom end .
install the bottom template before placing footing concrete .
for relocated standards construct new foundations and furnish anchor bolts of the proper type and size .
galvanize steel parts under section numb .
provide num nuts and washers for the upper threaded part of each anchor bolt .
provide num nuts and washers for each anchor bar or stud .
do not weld hs steel used for anchor bolts anchor bars or studs .
before placing concrete moisten the forms and ground .
keep the forms in place until the concrete sets for at least num hours and is strong enough to prevent damage to the surface .
except when located on a structure construct foundations for posts standards and pedestals monolithically .
apply ordinary surface finish under section numfnum .
if a foundation must be extended for additional depth the extension work is change order work .
do not erect posts poles standards pedestals or cabinets until the concrete foundation has cured for at least num days .
the engineer selects either the plumbing or raking technique for posts poles standards and pedestals .
plumb or rake by adjusting the leveling nuts before tightening nuts .
do not use shims or similar devices .
after final adjustments of both top nuts and leveling nuts on anchorage assemblies have been made and each post standard and pedestal on the structure is properly positioned tighten nuts as follows num .
tighten leveling nuts and top nuts following a crisscross pattern until bearing surfaces of all nuts washers and base plates are in firm contact .
num .
use an indelible marker to mark the top nuts and base plate with lines showing relative alignment of the nut to the base plate .
num .
tighten top nuts following a crisscross pattern an additional numth of a turn .
in unpaved areas construct a raised concrete pad in front of each controller cabinet pedestal .
if a foundation is shown to be abandoned remove the top of the foundation anchor bolts and conduits to a minimum depth of num foot below the sidewalk surface or original ground .
backfill the resulting hole with material equivalent to the surrounding material .
a foundation must be completely removed if not shown to be reused or abandoned .
dispose of foundations that are removed .
numcnumb castindrilledhole concrete pile foundations reinforced cidh concrete pile foundation must comply with section num except num .
dispose of material resulting from drilling holes section num overhead sign structures standards and poles num num .
concrete for cidh concrete piles will not be considered as designated by compressive strength concrete must contain not less than num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
for standards and poles located in sidewalk areas the pile foundation must be placed to final sidewalk grade before the sidewalk is placed .
the top num inches must be square shaped .
if shown use sleeve nuts on type numa and numb standards .
the bottom of the base plate must be flush with the finished grade .
numcnum identification tags except for type num standards and wood poles attach rectangular corrosionresistant metal identification tags on all standards and poles using stainless steel rivets as follows num .
for standards and poles attach a tag above the handhole near the base of the standard or pole .
num .
for signal standards attach num tag above the handhole near the base of the pole and num tag on the underside of the signal mast arm near the arm plate .
the lettering on each identification tag must be num .
either depressed or raised num .
num inch tall num .
legible num .
readable after the support structure is coated and installed include the following information on the tag num .
name of the manufacturer num .
date of manufacture num .
identification number num .
contract number num .
unique identification code num .
assigned by the manufacturer num .
traceable to a particular contract and the welds on that component numd payment not used num steel standards poles pedestals and posts numa general numanum general section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing steel standards poles pedestals and posts .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals numanuma general the engineer selects random samples of fastener components from each production lot .
the engineer determines sample sizes for each fastener component .
submit selected sample fasteners to mets for qa testing .
include test reports specified in astm with the test sample submittal .
numanumb test reports for standards and poles with shaft lengths of num feet or more submit certified test reports verifying compliance with minimum yield strength requirements .
test reports may be the mill test report for the as received steel .
if the asreceived steel has a lower yield strength than required provide test data assuring that your method of cold forming will consistently increase the steel tensile properties to meet the specified minimum yield strength .
test data must include tensile properties of the steel after cold forming for specific heats and thicknesses .
section num overhead sign structures standards and poles num numanum quality assurance numanuma general reserved numanumb quality control for cast slip bases for standards and poles with shaft lengths over num feet perform rt on num casting from each lot of a maximum of num castings under astm enum .
castings must comply with the acceptance criteria for severity level num or better for the types and categories of discontinuities specified in astm enum and enum .
if the casting fails testing num additional castings must be radiographed .
if the num additional castings fail the inspection the lot is rejected .
numanumc department acceptance reserved numb materials numbnum general type num standards and steel pedestals for controller cabinets must be manufactured of one of the following num .
at least numinchthick galvanized steel num .
numinch standard weight galvanized steel pipe complying with astm anumanumm num .
numinch type num conduit with the top designed for posttop slip fitter material for push button posts pedestrian barricades and guard posts must comply with astm anumanumm .
handhole reinforcement rings must be continuous around the handholes .
galvanize standards poles pedestals posts fasteners and other ferrous materials under section num numb .
numbnum bolted connections anchor bolts must comply with astm fnum grade num for weldable steel .
hs anchor bolts nuts and washers must comply with section numdnum .
bolts nuts and washers for general applications must comply with section numdnum .
hs bolts shown to be snug tight must comply with section numdnum for general applications .
hs bolts nuts and flat washers used to connect slip base plates must comply with the requirements for hs fastener assemblies for use in structural steel joints in section numdnum except rotational capacity testing and tension testing are not required .
zinccoated nuts used on fastener assemblies having a specified preload obtained by specifying a prescribed tension torque value or degree of turn must be provided with a colored lubricant that is clean and dry to the touch .
the lubricant color must contrast the zinc coating color on the nut such that the presence of the lubricant is visually obvious .
the lubricant must be insoluble in water or the fastener components must be shipped to the job site in a sealed container .
plate washers must be manufactured by saw cutting and drilling steel plate .
steel plate must comply with aisi num .
before galvanizing remove burrs and sharp edges and chamfer both sides of holes to allow the bolt head to make full contact with the washer without tension .
hs cap screws for attaching arms to standards must comply with astm anum or anum and the mechanical requirements in astm anum after galvanizing .
coat threads of cap screws with a colored lubricant that is clean and dry to the touch .
the lubricant color must contrast the zinc coating color on the cap screw such that the presence of the lubricant is visually obvious .
the lubricant must be insoluble in water or the fastener components must be shipped to the job site in a sealed container .
section num overhead sign structures standards and poles num before manufacturing details must be adjusted to ensure that cap screw heads can be turned using conventional installation tools .
during manufacturing properly locate the position of the luminaire on the arm plate to avoid interference with the cap screw heads .
numbnum standards and poles numbnuma general standards and poles with shaft lengths of num feet or more must comply with sections num and num numbnum .
tapered tubes must be manufactured from sheet steel of a weldable grade having a minimum yield strength of num psi after manufacturing .
numbnumb fabrication when a singleply numinchthick pole is specified a numply pole with equivalent section modulus may be substituted .
standards may be manufactured of fulllength sheets or shorter sections .
each section must be manufactured from num or num pieces of sheet steel .
if num pieces are used the longitudinal welded seams must be directly opposite from one another .
if the sections are buttwelded together the longitudinal welded seams of adjacent sections must be placed to form continuous straight seams from the base to the top of the standard .
standards with an outside diameter of num inches or less must be round .
standards with an outside diameter greater than num inches may be round or multisided .
multisided standards must num .
be convex num .
have a minimum of num sides num .
have a minimum bend radius of num inches manufacture mast arms from material specified for the standard .
standards and poles must be straight with a maximum variation of num .
num inch measured at the midpoint of a num to numfoot standard num .
num inch measured at the midpoint of a num to numfoot standard exposed edges of the plates that make up the base assembly must be finished smooth .
exposed corners of the plates must be broken .
provide shafts with slipfitter shaft caps .
surface flatness requirements specified in astm anumanumm apply to plates meeting one or more of the following num .
in contact with concrete grout or washers and leveling nuts num .
in hs bolted connections num .
in joints where cap screws are used to secure luminaire and signal arms num .
used for breakaway slip base assemblies do not make additional holes in structural members .
manufacture the cast steel option for slip bases from material of grade num complying with astm anumanumm .
you may use other comparable material if authorized .
casting tolerances must comply with the steel founders society of americas recommendations for green sand molding .
numbnumc welding buttwelded circumferential joints of tubular sections requiring cjp groove welds must be made using a metal sleeve backing ring inside each joint .
the sleeve must have at least a numinch nominal thickness and be manufactured from steel having the same chemical composition as the steel in the tubular sections to be joined .
if the sections to be joined have different specified minimum yield strengths the sleeve must have the same chemical composition as the tubular section having the higher minimum yield strength .
the width of the metal sleeve must be consistent with the type of ndt selected and must be a minimum width of num inch .
at fitting time the sleeve must be centered at the joint and in contact with the tubular section at the point of the weld .
section num overhead sign structures standards and poles num welds must be continuous .
weld metal at the transverse joints must extend to the sleeve making the sleeve an integral part of the joint .
during manufacturing longitudinal seams on vertical tubular members of cantilevered support structures must be within num degrees circumferentially of the center of the longest mast arm connection .
longitudinal seams on horizontal tubular members including signal and luminaire arms must be within num degrees of the bottom of the arm .
longitudinal seam welds in steel tubular sections may be made by the electric resistance welding process .
longitudinal seam welds must have a num percent minimum penetration except num .
within num inches of a circumferential weld the longitudinal seam weld must be a cjp groove weld .
num .
longitudinal seam welds on lighting support structures having a telescopic pole segment splice must be cjp groove welds on the female end for a length on each end equal to the designated slipfit splice length plus num inches .
except for fillet and fatigueresistant welds exposed circumferential welds must be ground flush with the base metal before galvanizing or painting .
ground flush is specified as num numinch .
circumferential welds and base platetopole welds may be repaired only num time .
numc construction assemble and tighten the slip base when the pole is on the ground .
threads of heavy hex nuts for each slip base bolt must be coated with additional lubricant that is clean and dry to the touch .
tighten hs slip base bolts to within num ftlb of torque shown in the following table slip base bolt tightening requirements standard type torque ftlb numsb num num num num num bolted connections attaching signal or luminaire arms to poles are considered slip critical .
galvanized faying surfaces of plates on luminaire arms signal arms and poles must num be roughened by hand using a wire brush before assembly and num comply with requirements for class c surface conditions for slip critical connections in specification for structural joints using highstrength bolts of the rcsc .
coatings for faying surfaces must comply with the rcsc specification for class b coatings .
numd payment not used num reserved num high mast lighting assembly poles reserved num wood poles numa general section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing wood poles .
numb materials each wood pole must num .
be class num or larger as specified in ansi o num num .
have not more than numdegree twist in grain over the full length num .
have a sweep of not more than num inches num .
have a beveled top section num overhead sign structures standards and poles num num .
be placed in the ground at least num feet num .
unless otherwise specified have a length of num .
num feet for a service pole num .
num feet for other poles after fabrication pressuretreat poles under section numbnum and awpa unum use category ucnumb commodity specification d. if poles are specified to be painted use a waterborne wood preservative .
numc construction after each pole is set in ground backfill the space around the pole with selected earth or sand free of rocks and other deleterious material placed in numinchthick layers .
moisten each layer and thoroughly compact .
manufacture the mast arm from standard pipe free from burrs .
each mast arm must have an insulated wire inlet and wood pole mounting brackets for the mast arm and tierod cross arm .
manufacture tie rod from structural steel and pipe .
mount the mast arm for luminaires to provide a numfoot mounting height for a num w highpressure sodium luminaire and a numfoot mounting height for a num w highpressure sodium luminaire .
traffic signals and flashing beacons on the mast arm must provide a minimum vertical clearance of num feet from bottom of equipment to pavement .
numd payment not used num reserved num num wood and plastic lumber structures num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for constructing wood and plastic lumber structures .
numb definitions hardware bolts with necessary nuts and washers timber connectors drift pins dowels nails screws spikes wire rope for wrapping lag screws and other metal fastenings .
structural metal structural shapes eyebars castings rods with necessary nuts and washers metal shoes and plates but not including hardware .
numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general deliver store and handle timber and lumber as follows num .
store in piles at the job site unless it is to be placed in the structure immediately num .
stack neatly on dunnage above ground so that it can be readily inspected num .
store and handle such that injury and breakage are avoided num .
protect from the sun to prevent warping numb structural metal structural metal must comply with section num .
hotdip galvanize structural metal under section numb .
numc hardware hardware must comply with section num .
except for malleable iron washers hotdip galvanize hardware under section numb .
bolts and nuts must comply with astm anum .
machine bolt heads and nuts must be regular square series and threads must be coarse thread series class num tolerance all complying with ansi standard .
washers must be cast iron ogee malleable iron plate or cut washers .
nails must be common wire nails .
wire rope must be commercialquality galvanized steel wire rope .
splices and end connections of wire rope must be made with metal clips .
num construction not used num payment for a bid item with a mfbm measurement unit the payment quantity is the volume determined from num nominal widths and thicknesses and num lengths shown .
section num wood and plastic lumber structures num num wood structures num general numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for constructing wood structures .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit a certificate of compliance for timber and lumber stating the species of the material to be shipped and including a certified grading report .
if timber is treated include a certified treating report .
submit a certificate of compliance for glued laminated timbers and glued laminated decking .
numanum quality assurance treated and untreated timber and lumber must comply with the grading specifications when delivered to the job site .
numb materials numbnum general grease used to fill bolt holes must be recommended by the manufacturer for corrosion protection and must not melt or run at a temperature of num degrees f. numbnum structural timber and lumber structural timber and lumber must be one of the species shown in the following table type species douglas fir pseudotsuga menziesii hemfir abies magnifica abies grandis abies procera abies amabillis abies concolor tsuga heterophylla redwood sequoia sempervirens southern yellow pine one of the species recognized by the southern pine inspection bureau structural timber and lumber must be inspected and grade marked under the rules and specifications shown in the following table timber and lumber grading type rulesspecifications and publisher douglas fir and hemfir standard no .
num grading rules for west coast lumber published by west coast lumber inspection bureau or western lumber grading rules published by western wood products association redwood standard specifications for grades of california redwood lumber published by redwood inspection service southern yellow pine standard grading rules for southern pine lumber published by southern pine inspection bureau stressgraded lumber must comply with the following num .
wood must be sound and free from decay .
num .
green timber must be protected from uneven seasoning during transit .
num .
douglas fir must be end coated with a protective coating during manufacturing to retard checking .
for all stress grades the sizes described for timber and lumber are nominal sizes under american softwood lumber standard ps num published by nist .
section num wood and plastic lumber structures num plywood must be numinchthick grade bc douglas fir plywood manufactured with adhesives for wet use and must be preservative treated .
each glued laminated timber or decking unit must bear the american institute of timber construction quality mark .
glued laminated timbers must be architectural grade with glue for wet use and sawtextured exposed surfaces .
glued laminated timbers must comply with ansiaitc anum and aitc num published by the american institute of timber construction .
glued laminated decking units must be num .
douglas fir white pine or hemfir num .
kilndried solid stock lumber num .
factory laminated using adhesive for wet use num .
at least num plies thick with tongue and groove edges num .
at least num inches in width and thickness the surface of glued laminated decking units at exposed faces must be saw textured .
numbnum preservative treatment where preservative treatment is specified treat timber lumber and piling after millwork is completed .
preservatives treatment and treatment results must comply with awpa standards unum and tnum and the specified awpa use category .
if a use category is not specified the preservative treatment must comply with awpa unum use category ucnumb .
the treating plant must imprint legible symbols in the ends of all treated timber and lumber .
the symbols must indicate the name of the treating company and the type and year of treatment under awpa standards mnum and mnum .
where timber is specified to be kiln dried before treatment the moisture content after drying and immediately before treating must not exceed num percent .
measure the moisture content under astm dnum at the midpoint of the piece in the outer num inch .
use an authorized type of moisture meter .
timber and lumber treated with waterborne preservatives must be dried after treatment and have a moisture content of no more than num percent when shipped to the job site .
for treated wood that is to be painted use a waterborne wood preservative .
manually applied wood preservative must be creosote or copper naphthenate complying with awpa standard mnum .
numc construction numcnum general reserved numcnum framing timber and lumber must be accurately cut and framed to a close fit and must have even bearing over the entire contact surface .
do not use shimming in making joints .
bore fastener holes as shown in the following table section num wood and plastic lumber structures num fastener bore holes fastener type member type boring requirement drift pin or dowel untreated timber hole diameter a minimum of num inch less than the pin or dowel diameter treated timber hole diameter the same as the pin or dowel diameter bolt all cases hole diameter a maximum of num inch larger than the bolt diameter lag screw all cases bit diameter a maximum of the root diameter of the lag screw thread boat or wire spike small member if necessary to prevent splitting bit diameter the same as the spike diameter or the smallest dimension of the spike fit each bolt num inch or less in diameter with a cut washer .
fit each bolt or lag screw over num inch in diameter with a cast or malleable iron washer .
framed bents must comply with the following num .
mud sills must be firmly and evenly bedded in solid material .
num .
sills must have full even bearing on the pedestals mud sills or piles .
num .
posts must be framed true and must have full bearing on pedestals sills and caps .
align bents before placing bracing .
provide a minimum of num inches between the outside bolt and the end of the brace .
for bridge deck stringers place the better edge down .
after placing stringers the tops of the stringers must not vary from a plane more than will allow bearing of the floor on all the stringers .
wheel guards and railings must be accurately framed and aligned .
numcnum treated timber numcnuma general section numcnum applies to treated timber .
preservativetreated timber must be douglas fir or hemfir .
chromated copper arsenate must not be used for preservative treatment .
do not remove bolts and hardware using flametype or airarc cutting equipment .
predrill for bridge spikes within num foot of the ends of existing timbers and new planking .
predrill elsewhere if necessary to avoid splitting the timber or bending the spikes .
if authorized you may relocate holes for new bolts and drift pins to avoid conflicts with existing hardware embedded in existing wood .
for lumber treated with ammoniacal copper arsenate ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate ammoniacal copper quat or copper azole num .
fill bolt holes with grease before inserting bolts num .
use nylon spacers polyethylene tape or other authorized corrosionresistant barrier on surfaces of hardware that will be in contact with treated wood numcnumb manual treatment do not manually apply preservative to unprotected wood in wet or damp weather or to wood with a moisture content exceeding num percent or with free surface moisture .
if manually applying preservative use suitable brushes for exposed surfaces use swabs for holes or use other means that result in adequate coverage .
section num wood and plastic lumber structures num if treated timber is framed cut or bored after treatment thoroughly swab each cut dap or hole with num applications of the same preservative specified for the timber treatment or of copper naphthenate .
manually treat the following items with num applications of wood preservative num .
portions of rail posts to be embedded in earth or concrete num .
faces of timber bulkheads to be in contact with earth except those of treated douglas fir numcnumc handling handle and care for pressuretreated wood materials under awpa standard mnum .
handle treated timber with rope slings .
do not use cant hooks peaveys or other sharp instruments to handle treated timber .
numcnum painting for painted timber and lumber comply with section num .
paint the following items with num application of latexbase wood primer and num applications of white exterior latexbased paint num .
rails num .
portions of rail posts not embedded in earth or concrete num .
wheel guards or timber curbs except the bottom faces over an earth surface num .
exposed faces of posts numd payment not used num timber lagging numa general section num includes specifications for installing timber lagging .
numb materials timber members must be num preservativetreated douglas fir and num full sawn to the dimensions shown .
chromated copper arsenate must not be used for preservative treatment .
numc construction if no concrete facing is shown num .
install lagging members num inches thick or less with a numinch gap between members num .
install lagging members greater than num inches thick with a numinch gap between members if a concrete facing is shown install lagging members with mortartight joints .
numd payment not used num timber catwalk numa general section num includes specifications for constructing timber catwalks .
a timber catwalk consists of a walkway of two num by numinch planks bolted to steel supports and a cable handrail if shown .
numb materials numbnum general reserved section num wood and plastic lumber structures num numbnum timber planks the timber planks must be untreated douglas fir dense no .
num rough sawn on top optional surfaced on bottom .
numbnum cable handrail the cable for the cable handrail must be wire rope with a minimum diameter of num inch and a minimum breaking strength of num lb .
the wire rope must be furnished with class a weight zinccoated wire under astm anum .
the turnbuckles ubolts and thimbles must be commercial quality .
the turnbuckles must be steel pipe type or drop forged steel and must have jaw or eye ends .
the turnbuckles and ubolts must have a minimum breaking strength of num lb .
the cable clamps and other required fittings must be commercialquality steel malleable iron or wrought iron .
galvanize hardware turnbuckles ubolts cable clamps and other fittings under section numb .
numc construction tension the handrail cables to provide taut railings between supports .
steel surfaces to be covered by timber must be painted the full number of applications specified before placing timber .
painting of timber planks is not required .
numd payment not used num abutment lumber blocking reserved num timber retaining walls reserved num reserved num plastic lumber structures num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing plastic lumber structures .
numb definitions postconsumer waste finished material not including manufacturing waste that has completed its life cycle as a consumer item and would have been disposed of as a solid waste .
production lot of plastic lumber quantity of num cu yd or less that is ready for shipment to the job site and is of the same type manufactured by the same method and made of the same material .
recycled product material good or supply of which at least num percent of its total mass consists of secondary waste and at least num percent of its total mass consists of postconsumer waste .
secondary waste finished products or fragments of finished products of a manufacturing process including postconsumer waste but not including excess virgin resources of the manufacturing process .
numc submittals numcnum general submit the following product data num .
manufacturers material test reports num .
manufacturers performance data num .
sdss section num wood and plastic lumber structures num num .
num copies of the printed literature for the product submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of plastic lumber .
the certificate must be accompanied by a laboratory test report .
submit test samples for void testing .
submit results of stiffness tests .
numcnum shop drawings submit num copies of shop drawings for the plastic lumber for initial review .
after review submit from num to num copies as requested for authorization and use during construction .
shop drawings must show num .
details for component layout and connections num .
sequence of shop and field assembly num .
installation procedures numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control numdnuma general start a new production lot if any production parameter changes before the maximum production lot size is reached .
numdnumb stiffness test before shipment to the job site perform stiffness tests for the plastic lumber in the presence of the engineer at an authorized laboratory .
notify the engineer at least num days before conducting the tests .
the engineer randomly selects num test samples from each production lot for stiffness testing .
determine the stiffness and the yield stress in bending under astm dnum except the test samples must have a minimum length of num feet and tests must be performed on a numfoot span length at a crosshead motion of num inch per minute .
calculate the stiffness using the secant modulus at the flexural strain of num inch per inch .
if the stiffness or the yield stress in bending of either of the num test samples does not comply with section numa perform a retest on num additional test samples selected by the engineer .
if the stiffness or the yield stress in bending of either of the num additional test samples does not comply with section numa in the retest the entire production lot of plastic lumber represented by the test samples is rejected .
numdnum department acceptance numdnuma general the engineer selects num test samples of each size from each production lot of plastic lumber delivered to the job site for void testing .
numdnumb void testing numdnumbi general before use in the work the plastic lumber must be tested for both exterior and interior voids .
allow num days for void testing .
numdnumbii exterior void test the engineer examines the test samples for exterior voids .
if the exterior voids of either of the num test samples do not comply with section numa the engineer selects num additional test samples and performs a retest .
if the exterior voids of either of the num additional section num wood and plastic lumber structures num test samples do not comply with section numa in the retest the entire production lot of plastic lumber represented by the test samples is rejected .
numdnumbiii interior void test after acceptance under the exterior void test cut the test samples into numfootlong segments .
the engineer examines the cut sections for interior voids .
if the interior voids of a cut section of either of the num test samples do not comply with section numa the engineer selects num additional test samples and performs a retest .
if the interior voids of a cut section of either of the num additional test samples do not comply with section numa in the retest the entire production lot of plastic lumber represented by the test samples is rejected .
num materials numa general plastic lumber must num .
be produced continuously and homogeneously without joints num .
be straight and true and free from twist curvature bulging or other deformations num .
have a smooth outer layer with no visible voids num .
not vary from the dimensions shown by more than num inch for crosssectional dimensions or num inch for the length num .
have total resistance to marine borers and dry rot num .
not swell shrink or crack num .
comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement density kgmnum min astm dnum test method a skin num core num water absorption weight increase percent max astm dnum num at num hours num at num hours brittleness at num c astm dnum skin no break hardness astm dnum type d skin num uv deterioration hardness change percent after num hours of exposure max astm dnuma astm dnum type d skin num abrasion astm dnum cycles num wheel csnum load num kg skin weight loss num mg wear index num chemical resistance weight increase percent astm dnum practice a procedure num sea water num gasoline num no .
num diesel num coefficient of thermal expansion per degree c max astm dnum num ignition temperature c astm dnum num aastm dnum using uva num bulbs operating at a uv intensity of num wmnumnm measured at num nm .
the exposure cycle must be num hours of ultraviolet uv exposure at num c and num hours of condensate con exposure at num c. stiffness and yield stress in bending of plastic lumber must have at least the values shown in the following table section num wood and plastic lumber structures num cross section size inches stiffness ei kipsq ft yield stress in bending psi num x num num num num x num num num num x num num num num x num num num num x num num num note these values are for the weak axis of rectangular sections .
for the exterior voids at each exposed end of plastic lumber num .
maximum dimension of any void must not exceed num inch .
num .
total number of voids with a maximum dimension greater than num inch must not exceed num .
for the interior voids in the cut sections of each segment of plastic lumber num .
maximum dimension of any void in a cut section must not exceed num inch .
num .
total area of voids in a cut section must not exceed num percent of the total crosssectional area .
permanently mark each piece of plastic lumber with the manufacturers name .
ship and store plastic lumber in a way that minimizes scratching or damage to the outer surfaces .
numb reinforced recycled plastic lumber reinforced rpl must consist of recycled plastic reinforced with fiberglass reinforcing bar elements fiberglass filaments or a combination of both .
reinforced rpl must be a recycled product .
fabricate reinforced rpl from one or more of the following thermoplastics num .
highdensity polyethylene num .
mediumdensity polyethylene num .
lowdensity polyethylene num .
highdensity polypropylene reinforced rpl must have a dense outer skin at least num inch thick surrounding a less dense core .
the plastic for the outer skin must be mixed with colorants to match color no .
num or num of fedstd num and must contain a uv inhibitor and antioxidants .
fiberglass reinforcing bar elements must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement flexural strength psi min astm dnum num compression modulus psi min astm dnum num tensile strength psi min astm dnum num fiberglass filaments must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement density kgmnum astm dnum num mechanical single filament tensile strength mpa astm dnum num tensile modulus of elasticity mpa astm dnum num all reinforced rpl must contain the same type of reinforcement .
numc composite plastic lumber cpl may be substituted for reinforced rpl .
section num wood and plastic lumber structures num fabricate the shell for cpl from polyester or epoxy resin reinforced with eglass and mixed with colorants uv inhibitors and antioxidants .
the cpl coating must match color no .
num or num of fed stdnum .
the core material for cpl must be lightweight aggregate polymer concrete .
cpl must comply with the physical quality characteristics specified for reinforced rpl and the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement density of concrete core kgmnum min astm dnum num numday compressive strength of concrete core psi min astm cnum num structural strength of shell tensile strength tensile modulus percent loss flexural strength flexural modulus percent loss astm dnum astm dnum less than num after uv deterioration test specified for plastic lumber dry film thickness of coating mils min num color change of coating astm dnum test cycle num no visible color change when tested for num hours initial adhesion of coating psi min astm dnum num decrease in initial adhesion of coating decrease percent astm dnum astm dnum test condition da no more than num following num exposure cycles ause a low temperature phase at num num f and high temperature phase at num num f. seal the cut ends of cpl with a cap securely held in place with an adhesive recommended by the manufacturer .
the adhesive must show no more than a num percent decrease in strength when tested under astm dnum following num cycles of exposure under astm dnum test condition d with a low temperature phase of num num degrees c and a high temperature phase of num num degrees c. numd unreinforced recycled plastic lumber unreinforced rpl may be substituted for reinforced rpl for chocks filler blocks and other nonstructural members shown .
unreinforced rpl must comply with the specifications for reinforced rpl except fiberglass reinforcement is not required and stiffness tests do not apply .
num construction install plastic lumber under the manufacturers instructions .
cut bevel drill counterbore and otherwise fabricate plastic lumber under the manufacturers instructions .
fabricate lumber in the manufacturers plant to the greatest extent possible .
holes for bolts in plastic lumber must be bored num inch larger in diameter than the bolt to be placed .
holes for lag screws must be bored to a diameter under the manufacturers instructions .
recess bolts and lag screw heads num inch from the surface of the face of plastic lumber fenders .
coat holes drilled through cpl members with a concrete sealant approved by the cpl manufacturer .
plastic lumber elements that are split broken warped or otherwise damaged are rejected .
num payment not used num reserved num num sound walls num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing sound walls .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment sound walls are measured by the area of wall projected on a vertical plane between the elevation lines and wall length .
num masonry block num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing masonry block sound walls .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general reserved numcnum test data submit test data for num .
prepackaged mortar materials num .
compressive strength of masonry for preconstruction testing and field qc testing num .
grout compressive strength numcnum product data submit manufacturers descriptive data for each type of cmu accessory and manufactured material as an informational submittal .
numcnum mix design submit a mix design for each grout mix proposed for use .
admixtures are not allowed unless authorized .
submit a mix design for the mortar cap .
numcnum samples submit samples of the cmus for each color and texture as specified in astm cnum .
numcnum qualification data submit qualification data for the authorized laboratory as an informational submittal .
numcnum certificates of compliance submit a certificate of compliance for cmus aggregate for grout and grout .
numcnum daily field report and final report submit a copy of the daily field report on the business day following the preparation of the report .
upon completion of the work requiring special inspection submit a copy of the final report .
section num sound walls num numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb preconstruction testing perform masonry preconstruction testing at an authorized laboratory .
the authorized laboratory must comply with astm enum .
determine the compressive strength of masonry for each grout mix to be used under one of the following num cbc test methods num .
unit strength method in section num except grout must comply with item num in the numst paragraph of section num num .
prism test method in section num if the prism test method is used to determine the compressive strength you must also test the grout compressive strength under astm cnum .
if prepackaged mortar materials are used perform the following preconstruction tests at an authorized laboratory num .
california test num .
test data must be from samples having a moist cure except that the samples must not be immersed in lime water .
the average numday compressive strength of mortar must be not less than num psi .
num .
california test num or num .
mortar must not contain more than num percent soluble chlorides when tested under california test num or more than num percent soluble sulfates as sonum when tested under california test num .
numdnumc field quality control numdnumci general you must employ a special inspector and an authorized laboratory to perform level num inspections and structural tests of masonry to verify the masonry construction complies with section num and section num of the num cbc .
masonry special inspection personnel used in the work must not be employed or compensated by any subcontractor or by other persons or entities hired by subcontractors who will provide other services or materials for the project .
numdnumcii special inspector the special inspector must be an icc certified structural masonry special inspector .
the special inspector must perform the inspections required in section num of the num cbc .
the special inspector must prepare a daily field report providing information regarding the specific activities witnessed including placing of cmus and bar reinforcing grouting fabrication of test specimens and other observations of importance to the work .
a daily field report is required for each day that the special inspector is on the job site .
the special inspector must prepare a signed final report stating whether the work requiring special inspection was to the best of the inspectors knowledge in compliance with the plans specifications and the applicable workmanship requirements of these specifications and the num cbc .
numdnumciii masonry compressive strength testing test the compressive strength of masonry for each num sq ft of sound wall area or portion thereof .
determine the compressive strength as specified for masonry preconstruction testing in section num numdnumb .
section num sound walls num numdnum department acceptance reserved num materials numa general reserved numb concrete masonry units obtain cmus of a uniform color and texture from a single source and from a single manufacturer .
cmus must comply with astm cnum for hollow load bearing lightweight or medium weight class units .
you may use standard or openend units .
if you use openended units do not reduce the spacing of the bar reinforcement shown .
the weight of a cmu for a sound wall on a bridge must not exceed num lb .
identify each hs cmu with a groove in an interior corner .
the groove must extend from a mortar surface for a length of about num inches and must have a depth of about num inch .
numc mortar mortar must comply with astm cnum except the cement must comply with section numbnum .
aggregate must comply with astm cnum .
hydrated lime must comply with astm cnum type s. obtain mortar ingredients of a uniform quality including color from a single manufacturer for cement and lime and from a single source or producer for each aggregate .
mortar for laying cmus must consist by volume of num part cement num to num part hydrated lime and num to num parts mortar sand .
add enough water to make a workable mortar .
accurately measure and thoroughly mix each batch of mortar .
do not retemper mortar more than num hour after mixing .
mortar color must match the cmu .
color pigments must be iron oxides complying with astm cnum .
the dosage must not exceed num percent by weight of cement in the mortar .
if authorized you may use prepackaged mortar materials and mortar containing admixtures complying with astm cnum .
packages of mortar materials must bear the manufacturers name brand contents weight and color identification .
numd grout the minimum compressive strength of the grout at num days must be num percent of the greater of num the masonry compressive strength shown or num num psi .
cementitious material must comply with section numb .
grout must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
grout for hs cmus must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
aggregate must comply with section numc except section numcnum does not apply .
aggregate for grout must be a mixture of fine and coarse aggregate .
at least num percent of the aggregate must be coarse aggregate .
one hundred percent of the combined grading must pass the numinch sieve .
mix the grout with enough water to produce a mix consistency suitable for pumping without segregation .
the grout must have a slump from num to num inches .
nume lightweight aggregate reserved section num sound walls num numf reinforcement ladder type joint reinforcement must comply with astm anum hotdip galvanized .
numg expansion joint filler expansion joint filler must comply with astm dnum or astm dnum mnumaanum .
numh access gates timber members must be tongue and groove douglas fir subflooring free of knotholes .
timber members steel frames channels anchorage devices mounting hardware gate rollers corrugated steel pipe nylon washers and neoprene tubing must be commercial quality .
the ladder rungs must be no .
num deformed bar reinforcing steel with a nonskid surface .
gate rollers must be rigid casters with selflubricating bearings and hard rubber wheels .
metal parts and hardware must be hotdip galvanized under section numb .
primer and stain must be top grade primer and stain from a manufacturer who has manufactured industrial paints and stains complying with custom specifications for at least num years .
if the back side of the masonry wall is constructed of splitfaced or roughsurface blocks the bond beam above the gate opening where the upper gate guide is to be mounted must have smoothsided blocks .
aggregate filling the inside of corrugated steel pipe landings must be a coarse concrete aggregate of commercial quality .
compaction of the aggregate is not required .
num construction numa general construct sound wall with hand laid cmus .
vertical lines and surfaces must not vary from plumb by more than num inch in num feet .
provide bond beam units or recesses for horizontal reinforcement .
construct walls in numfootmaximumheight lifts .
complete grouting of each lift before starting construction of the next lift .
the top course of each lift must be a bond beam .
bond beams must be continuous .
cover the top of unfilled cells under horizontal bond beams with metal or plastic lath .
roughen clean and lightly wet contact surfaces where fresh masonry joins masonry that is partially or totally set .
the roughened surface must be at least as rough as a wood troweled surface .
remove laitance curing compounds debris dirt and any substance that decreases bond to the fresh masonry .
roughen and clean concrete surfaces on which masonry walls are to be constructed exposing the aggregate .
immediately before laying the cmus flush the surface with water and allow to dry to a surface dry condition .
use a masonry saw to cut cmus to neat and true lines .
protect masonry as specified for protecting concrete in section numi .
during erection in inclement weather keep cells dry by covering partially completed walls .
the covering must be waterproof fabric plastic or paper sheeting or other authorized material .
do not use wooden boards or planks as covering materials .
extend the covering down each side of masonry walls approximately num feet .
remove splashes stains and spots from exposed faces of the wall .
numb mortar bedding and jointing mortar joints must be approximately num inch thick .
section num sound walls num walls and cross webs forming cells to be filled with grout must be full bedded in mortar to prevent leakage of grout .
all head and bed joints must be solidly filled with mortar for a distance in from the face of the wall or unit not less than the thickness of the longitudinal face shells .
shove head joints tight .
numc reinforcement before placing grout securely hold the reinforcement in position at the top and bottom and at intervals not exceeding num bar diameters with wire ties or spacing devices .
wire must be num gauge or heavier .
wooden aluminum or plastic spacing devices must not be used .
splice vertical reinforcement only at the locations shown .
numd grouting preserve the unobstructed vertical continuity of the grout during mortar placement in joints .
any overhanging mortar projecting more than num inch or other obstruction or debris must be removed from the inside of cells .
only fill cells containing reinforcement with grout .
consolidate grout in the cells by vibrating and reconsolidating after excess moisture has been absorbed and before plasticity is lost .
do not slice grout with a trowel .
if placing of grout in grout filled cells is stopped for more than num hour a construction joint must be made .
the construction joint must be approximately num inches below the top of the last course filled with grout .
nume access gates construct access gates with the tongue in the up position .
remove the tongue of the top board and the groove of the bottom board .
stagger knot locations of adjoining boards .
prime and stain timber surfaces of access gates with num coats of stain to match the adjacent sound wall .
for backfill outside of pipe landings you may use material from excavation .
num payment not used num precast concrete panels reserved num alternative sound wall systems num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing alternative sound wall systems .
you may only use an alternative sound wall system where specified in the special provisions .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general reserved numcnum shop drawings submit project specific shop drawings to the osd documents unit .
notify the engineer of your submittal .
for initial review submit num copies of shop drawings .
allow num days for the departments review .
after review and correction submit from num to num copies as requested to the osd documents unit for authorization and use during construction .
the shop drawings must include section num sound walls num num .
design firms name address and telephone and fax numbers num .
information required for the proper construction of the system at each location num .
design parameters material notes and wall construction procedures num .
calculations for each installation of the system submit asbuilt drawings at the completion of each sound wall .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials not used num construction construct the alternative sound wall system to the lines and grades shown except that the alternative sound wall system may have a height greater than that shown .
the construction must comply with the details shown on the authorized shop drawings and proprietary system details .
num payment not used num reserved num num structural steel coatings num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for coating structural steel .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance and sds for each shipment of blast cleaning material .
numd quality assurance measure coating dry film thickness with a calibrated type num magnetic film thickness gauge under sspc pa num except there is no limit to the number or location of spot measurements that may be requested by the engineer to verify coating thickness .
measure coating adhesion strength with a selfaligning adhesion tester under astm dnum .
measure levels of soluble salts on surfaces using a retrieval method specified in sspcguide num .
num materials numa general water for pressure rinsing and pressure washing must be fresh potable water with a chloride content of not more than num ppm and a sulfate content of not more than num ppm .
continuous recycling of rinse water is not allowed .
you may collect rinse water in a tank for reuse if test samples meet specified requirements and no water is added to the tank after sampling .
sealing compound must be a polysulfide or polyurethane type complying with astm cnum type s grade ns class num use m. numb abrasives abrasives for blast cleaning must be of a grading suitable to produce satisfactory results .
unless other abrasives are authorized use only num .
clean dry sand .
do not use unwashed beach sand containing salt or excessive silt .
num .
mineral grit .
num .
steel shot .
num .
steel grit .
mineral and slag abrasives must comply with the requirements for class a grade num to num abrasives in sspcab num and must not contain hazardous material .
steel abrasive must comply with sspcab num .
recycled steel abrasive must comply with sspcab num .
numc coatings coatings must comply with section num .
coatings selected for use must comply with the volatile organic compound concentration limits specified for the air quality district where the project is located .
num construction numa general notify the engineer at least num business days before starting work .
provide protective devices to prevent damage to the work property or persons .
numb weather conditions apply paint only to thoroughly dry surfaces during periods of favorable weather .
section num structural steel coatings num do not perform blast cleaning or apply solventborne paint if any of the following atmospheric conditions exist num .
atmospheric or surface temperature is below num degrees f num .
atmospheric or surface temperature is above num degrees f num .
relative humidity is more than num percent do not apply waterborne paint if any of the following atmospheric conditions exist num .
atmospheric or surface temperature is below num degrees f num .
atmospheric or surface temperature is above num degrees f num .
relative humidity is more than num percent except for work within enclosures do not apply paint if any of the following applies num .
freshly painted surfaces may become damaged by rain fog or condensation num .
atmospheric temperature or relative humidity will not remain within the specified application conditions during the drying period num .
steel surface temperature is less than num degrees f above the dew point repair or replace uncured paint damaged by weather .
if authorized you may use enclosures to allow painting during inclement weather .
enclosures must provide atmospheric conditions within the specified limits .
numc cleaning numcnum general prepare and clean surfaces before painting .
numcnum pressure rinsing pressure rinsing includes cleaning surfaces using a pressure wash system with a minimum nozzle pressure of num psi .
keep the nozzle tip from num to num inches from the surface .
the nozzle must have a maximum fan tip angle of num degrees .
numcnum pressure washing pressure washing includes cleaning surfaces using a pressure wash system with a nozzle pressure from num to num psi and a maximum fan tip angle of num degrees .
numcnum steam cleaning steam cleaning includes cleaning dirt grease loose chalky paint and other foreign material from surfaces using steam .
steam temperature at the nozzle must be from num to num degrees f. use a biodegradable detergent during steam cleaning .
after steam cleaning pressure rinse cleaned surfaces with water .
do not perform steam cleaning more than num weeks before painting or other phases of cleaning .
do not paint steamcleaned surfaces until they are thoroughly dry and at least num hours have elapsed .
numcnum blast cleaning blast cleaning includes abrasive blasting surfaces to be painted .
surfaces to be blast cleaned must be dry .
prime or treat blastcleaned surfaces on the same day blast cleaning is performed unless otherwise authorized .
numd painting each spray pot must have an authorized water trap installed .
do not thin paint unless authorized .
section num structural steel coatings num before applying mix paint using mechanical mixers to thoroughly blend pigment and vehicle together .
apply paint to clean dry surfaces in a neat and workmanlike manner .
apply by brush spray or roller in any combination .
gun extensions and aerosol cans are not allowed .
brushes must have sufficient bristle body and length to spread paint in a uniform film .
paint must be evenly spread and thoroughly brushed out .
rollers must not leave a stippled texture in the paint film .
apply paint to areas not accessible by regular means using daubers bottle brushes or other authorized methods .
thoroughly cure each application of paint and correct skips holidays thin areas or other deficiencies before the next application .
painted surfaces being covered must be free from moisture dust grease and deleterious material that would prevent bonding of succeeding coats .
in spot painting remove old paint that lifts after the first paint application by scraping and repaint the area before the next application .
pressure rinse painted surfaces before applying additional paint if num days or more elapse between paint applications unless otherwise authorized .
the engineer may require you to blast clean and reapply paint to areas with runs sags thin and excessively thick areas in the paint film skips holidays or areas of nonuniform appearance .
repair painted surfaces damaged during work activities with materials and to a condition equal to that of the specified coating .
remove paint or paint stains on surfaces not designated to be painted .
thoroughly clean painted surfaces after completing painting activities and other work that would deposit foreign material on the painted surfaces .
stencil the month and year of painting on structures at num locations selected by the engineer .
use block letters num inches high .
the paint used must contrast with the background .
num payment not used num painting structural steel num general numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for preparing and painting structural steel except galvanized or thermal spray coated surfaces .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals numanuma general submit certification showing the maximum allowable dry film thickness for inorganic zincrich coatings to be used on faying surfaces of hs bolted connections as determined under appendix a of specification for structural joints using highstrength bolts of the rcsc .
numanumb mandatory sspcqp certifications reserved numanumc painting quality work plan submit num copies of a painting quality work plan for each work item requiring structural steel painting or paint removal .
allow num days for the departments review .
submit the work plan after attending the prepainting meeting and include section num structural steel coatings num num .
names of the painting contractor and any subcontractors to be used .
num .
num copy of each applicable astm and sspc specification and qualification procedure .
num .
coating manufacturers guidelines and instructions for surface preparation painting drying curing handling shipping and storage of painted structural steel .
include testing methods and maximum allowable levels for soluble salts .
num .
materials methods and equipment to be used .
num .
proof of required sspcqp certifications or qualification statements showing compliance with sspc qp certification .
num .
methods to control environmental conditions .
num .
methods to protect the coating during curing shipping handling and storage .
num .
rinsewater collection plan .
num .
detailed paint repair plan for damaged areas .
num .
procedures for containing blast media and water .
num .
examples of proposed daily reports for testing to be performed including type of testing location lot size time weather conditions test personnel and results .
numanum quality assurance numanuma general reserved numanumb certifications you must hold sspc certifications in good standing throughout the contract to perform painting activities as shown in the following table sspc certifications painting activity sspc certification cleaning and painting structural steel in the field sspcqp num removing hazardous coatings from structural steel sspcqp num cleaning and painting structural steel in a permanent painting facility aiscnumsspcqp num enclosed shop numanumc prepainting meeting before starting painting activities conduct a prepainting meeting to discuss painting quality work plan requirements .
meeting attendees must include the engineer and all painting subcontractors .
numanumd quality control numanumdi general you must determine the sequence of testing .
the engineer selects test locations .
if repairs are required retest rejected areas after completing repairs .
test blastcleaned steel for soluble salts using a class a or b retrieval method before applying the undercoat .
levels of soluble salts must not exceed the lesser of the coating manufacturers recommendations or num gsq cm .
perform num tests for the first num sq ft prepared per shift and num test for each additional num sq ft or portion thereof .
perform at least num tests when less than num sq ft is prepared in a shift .
clean and retest areas represented by soluble salt tests exceeding specified limits .
numanumdii inorganic zinc coatings test the inorganic zinc undercoat before applying final or finish coats .
perform adhesion and hardness testing at least num hours after application .
test the inorganic zinc undercoat as follows num .
perform num adhesion tests per girder or num sq ft of painted surface whichever is less .
if less than num sq ft is painted in a work shift perform num tests .
the coating must have an adhesion to steel of at least num psi .
if num or more locations fail adhesion requirements the area represented by the tests is rejected .
if num of the locations fails adhesion requirements test num additional locations .
if any of the additional locations fail the area represented by the tests is rejected .
repair rejected areas by blast section num structural steel coatings num cleaning and repainting .
repair test locations meeting adhesion requirements by applying organic zincrich primer to the specified dry film thickness .
num .
test surfaces where finish coats are to be applied for soluble salts .
soluble salt levels must not exceed the lesser of the coating manufacturers recommendations or num gsq cm .
perform num tests for the first num sq ft prepared per day and num test for each additional num sq ft or portion thereof .
perform at least num tests when less than num sq ft is prepared in a shift .
clean and retest areas represented by soluble salt tests exceeding specified limits .
num .
the inorganic zinc coating must exhibit a solid hard and polished metal surface when firmly scraped with the knurled edge of a quarter before final or finish coats are applied .
repair areas that are powdery soft or do not exhibit a polished metal surface by blast cleaning and repainting .
perform the following additional testing for aashto m num type ii inorganic zinc primers num .
determine the drytosolvent insolubility under astm dnum except use water as the solvent .
the resistance rating must be at least num .
the test rate is num test per num sq ft or portion thereof .
repair inorganic zinc coating represented by tested areas that fail to meet solvent insolubility requirements by blast cleaning and repainting .
num .
before applying finish coats test the surface ph .
wet the surface with deionized water for num to num minutes .
apply ph paper with measuring increments of num ph units .
take at least num ph readings for every num sq ft or portion thereof .
if less than num sq ft is coated in a single shift take at least num ph readings .
do not apply finish coats until the surface ph is num or less .
perform the following additional testing for aashto m num type i inorganic zinc primers num .
determine the drytosolvent insolubility under astm dnum .
the resistance rating must be at least num .
the test rate is num test per num sq ft or portion thereof .
repair inorganic zinc coating represented by tested areas that fail to meet solvent insolubility requirements by blast cleaning and repainting .
num .
determine surface hardness under astm dnum .
hardness must be numh or harder .
the test rate is num test per num sq ft or portion thereof .
repair inorganic zinc coating represented by tests that fail to meet surface hardness requirements by blast cleaning and repainting .
numb materials numbnum general inorganic zincrich primer used on faying surfaces must comply with the slip coefficient specifications for class b coatings on blastcleaned steel in appendix a of specification for structural joints using high strength bolts of the rcsc .
numbnum design criteria numbnuma general reserved numbnumb ventilated containment systems ventilated containment systems must comply with the specifications for scaffolding in section num numknume .
the minimum total design load for the ventilated containment system must consist of the sum of the dead and live vertical loads .
dead and live loads are as follows num .
dead load must consist of the actual load of the ventilated containment system num .
live loads for bridges with only spot blast cleaning work must consist of num .
uniform load of at least num psf applied over the supported area num .
moving concentrated load of num lb to produce maximum stress in the main supporting elements of the ventilated containment system num .
live loads for bridges with num percent blast cleaning to bare metal must consist of num .
uniform load of at least num psf which includes num psf of sand load applied over the supported area num .
moving concentrated load of num lb to produce maximum stress in the main supporting elements of the ventilated containment system section num structural steel coatings num assumed horizontal loads do not need to be included in the design of the ventilated containment system .
maximum allowable stresses must comply with section numbnum .
numc construction numcnum general clean and paint all exposed structural steel and other metal surfaces .
you must provide enclosures for cleaning and painting structural steel .
maintain atmospheric conditions inside enclosures within specified limits .
cleaning and painting of new structural steel must be performed in an enclosed shop as defined in aisc numsspcqp num .
except for blast cleaning within closed buildings perform blast cleaning and painting during daylight hours .
numcnum containment systems numcnuma general construct containment systems when disturbing existing paint systems during bridge rehabilitation .
the containment system must be one of the following num .
ventilated containment system num .
vacuumshrouded surface preparation equipment and drapes and ground covers num .
equivalent containment system if authorized the containment system must contain all water resulting debris and visible dust produced when the existing paint system is disturbed .
properly maintain the containment system while work is in progress and do not change the containment system unless authorized .
containment systems over railroad property must provide the minimum clearances for the passage of railroad traffic specified in the information handout in the document titled railroad relations and insurance requirements .
numcnumb ventilated containment systems numcnumbi general if flexible framing is used support and fasten it to num prevent the escape of abrasive and blast materials due to whipping from traffic or wind and num maintain clearances .
if the wind speed reaches num mph or greater relieve the wind pressure on the containment system using an authorized method .
scaffolding or supports for the ventilated containment system must not extend below the vertical clearance level nor to the ground line at locations within the roadbed .
for trusstype bridges all connections of the ventilated containment system to the existing structure must be made through the deck girder stringer or floor beam system .
no connections are allowed that will cause bending stresses in a truss member .
numcnumbii ventilation the ventilation system in the ventilated containment system must be of the forced input airflow type with fans or blowers .
negative air pressure must be employed within the ventilated containment system and will be verified by visual methods by observing the concave nature of the ventilated containment system while taking into account wind effects or by using smoke or other visible means to observe airflow .
the input airflow must be properly balanced with the exhaust capacity throughout the range of operations .
section num structural steel coatings num the exhaust airflow of the ventilation system in the ventilated containment system must be forced into wet or dry dust collectors or bag houses .
numcnum surface preparation numcnuma general corners must be chamfered and without sharp edges .
condition thermalcut edges before blast cleaning by shallow grinding or other authorized method to remove the thin hardened layer resulting from resolidification during cooling .
remove visuallyevident base metal surface irregularities and defects under astm anum before blast cleaning new structural steel .
after removing material defects exposed by blast cleaning restore the blast profile by blast cleaning or using mechanical tools under sspcsp num .
numcnumb cleaning numcnumbi general clean previously painted surfaces by pressure washing or steam cleaning before performing other cleaning or painting activities .
remove gloss from existing paint without removing sound paint .
lightly roughen remaining areas of gloss using num to numgrit sandpaper .
paint that becomes loose curled lifted or that loses its bond after cleaning must be removed to sound paint or metal .
after pressure washing or steam cleaning spot blast clean painted surfaces having rust or foreign material remaining that would hinder bonding of new paint .
if there is no bid item for spot blast cleaning this is change order work .
spot blast clean surfaces under sspcsp numnace no .
num .
for small areas the engineer may allow cleaning under sspcsp num .
remove dirt loose rust mill scale or paint not firmly bonded to surfaces under sspcsp num .
feather edges of remaining paint .
do not use pneumatic chipping hammers unless authorized .
numcnumbii blast cleaning blast clean steel surfaces to be coated with inorganic zinc under sspcsp numnace no .
num .
after blast cleaning surfaces must have a dense uniform angular anchor pattern of num to num mils when measured under astm dnum .
where shown spot blast clean existing painted steel surfaces under sspcsp numnace no .
num .
after blast cleaning surfaces must have a dense uniform angular anchor pattern of at least num mils when measured under astm dnum .
seal journals bearings motors and moving parts before blast cleaning near machinery .
reblast cleaned surfaces that rust or become contaminated before paint is applied .
do not expose blastcleaned steel to relative humidity exceeding num percent before painting .
numcnum painting numcnuma general paint new structural steel as follows num .
apply the total thickness of undercoats before erection .
apply finish and final coats after erection .
if a concrete deck is placed on steel members apply finish and final coats after deck placement .
num .
after erection and deck placement clean and spot paint areas of damaged or deteriorated coating and exposed unpainted surfaces with undercoats to the specified thickness before applying subsequent coatings .
num .
clean and paint surfaces exposed to the atmosphere and inaccessible for painting after erection with the full number of coats before erection .
paint existing structural steel as follows num .
apply a stripe coat of undercoat paint on all edges corners seams crevices interior angles junctions of joining members weld lines and similar surface irregularities .
the stripe coat must section num structural steel coatings num completely hide the surface being covered .
if spot blast cleaning portions of the bridge apply the stripe coat of undercoat paint before each undercoat and follow with the undercoat as soon as practical .
if removing all existing paint from the bridge apply the undercoat first as soon as practical and follow with the stripe coat of undercoat paint for each undercoat .
num .
apply the finish coats after the total dry film thickness of undercoat has been applied .
num .
apply all undercoats and the numst finish coat within num days of initial cleaning activities .
caulk contact surfaces of stiffeners railings builtup members or open seams more than num mils wide with sealing compound or other authorized material .
apply the sealing compound at least num hours after the last application of undercoat unless otherwise authorized .
cure the sealing compound under the manufacturers instructions before performing subsequent painting activities .
if no finish coats are applied the sealing compound color must be gray .
limit the thickness of each paint application to allow uniform drying throughout the paint film .
paint ungalvanized anchor bolt assemblies with num applications of organic zincrich primer before installation .
you do not need to paint other metal surfaces to be embedded in concrete .
prepare and paint num the bottom surfaces of masonry plates and num structural steel surfaces contacting elastomeric bearing pads or preformed fabric pads with the full number of applications before erection .
except for num abutting chord and column splices and num column and truss shoe bases coat machine finished surfaces with an easily removed rust inhibitor .
paint machinefinished surfaces of iron and steel castings with num coat of shop paint .
where bridge deck drains are located over steel girders paint the top and edges of top flanges beneath drains and for num inches on each side of drains before installing the drains .
paint surfaces of machinery exposed to air with num coats of organic zincrich primer before installation .
paint exposed surfaces after installation with num finish coats of commercialquality gray gloss enamel .
numcnumb zinc coating system numcnumbi general coatings for new structural steel and connections between new and existing structural steel must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num structural steel coatings num zinc coating system requirements description coating dry film thickness mils all new surfaces undercoat inorganic zinc primer aashto m num type i or ii num finish coata exterior grade latexb num coats num minimum each coat num total total thickness all coats num connections to existing structural steelc undercoat inorganic zinc primer aashto m num type i or ii num finish coata exterior grade latexb num coats num minimum each coat num total total thickness all coats num aif no finish coats are described num .
a final coat of inorganic zinc primer is required num .
total thickness of undercoats and final coat must be from num to num mils bexterior grade latex must comply with section numb unless otherwise specified .
cincludes the following locations num .
new and existing contact surfaces num .
existing member surfaces under new hs bolt heads nuts or washers num .
bare surfaces of existing steel after trimming cutting drilling or reaming num .
areas within a numinch radius from the point of application of heat for welding or flame cutting strain inorganic zinc primer after mixing through a num to nummesh screen immediately before or when pouring into the spray pot .
use an agitating spray pot .
the agitator or stirring rod must reach to within num inches of the bottom of the spray pot and be moving at all times during painting .
the agitator must keep the coating well mixed .
apply inorganic zinc primer by spray .
on areas inaccessible to spray application you may make limited applications if authorized by brush dauber or roller .
zinc coatings must be free from dust dirt salt and other deleterious deposits and thoroughly cured before applying subsequent coats .
numcnumbii undercoat use inorganic zinc primer within num hours of initial mixing of components .
apply the undercoat in num or more applications within num hours of starting blast cleaning .
blast clean and repaint areas where mudcracking of the undercoat occurs .
protect surfaces coated with type ii inorganic zinc from conditions that may cause the coating film to dissolve .
blast clean and repaint areas of dissolved coating .
remove dry spray by screening or other methods that minimize surface polishing before applying additional coats or final acceptance .
dry film thickness after dry spray removal must comply with the specified thickness .
if damaged areas of the undercoat is num .
more than num percent of the total undercoated surface blast clean and repaint damaged areas with inorganic zinc num .
num percent or less of the total undercoated surface you may wire brush the damaged surfaces to remove loose or cracked coating and apply num coats of organic zincrich primer section num structural steel coatings num at faying surfaces the total undercoat dry film thickness must be from num mil to the maximum allowable for class b coatings as determined by certified testing under appendix a of specification for structural joints using highstrength bolts of the rcsc .
complete the field testing of the undercoat and correct deficiencies before applying subsequent coats .
numcnumbiii final coat apply a final coat of inorganic zinc primer to undercoated surfaces that do not receive finish coats .
use the same coating as used for the undercoat .
lightly roughen areas to receive a final coat by abrasive blasting .
use an abrasive no larger than num mesh .
protect undersurfaces of girder flanges from abrasive blasting .
apply the final coat in num application within num hours of roughening .
the final coat dry film thickness must be from num to num mils .
numcnumbiv finish coats pressure rinse undercoated surfaces to receive finish coats .
perform pressure rinsing at least num hours after the final application of the undercoat .
apply the numst finish coat within num hours of pressure rinsing .
apply the numst finish coat in num applications .
the numst application consists of a sprayapplied mist application .
apply the numnd application after the mist application has dried to a settotouch condition as determined using the procedure in section num of astm dnum .
apply the numnd finish coat after the numst finish coat has dried num hours unless authorized .
you may apply the numnd finish coat in a single application .
the numst finish coat color must match color no .
num of fedstdnum .
the numnd finish coat color must match color no .
num of fedstdnum .
numcnumc state specification paint waterborne coating system the state specification paint waterborne coating system for existing structural steel must comply with the requirements shown in the following table state specification paint waterborne coating system requirements surface description state specification pwb coating dry film thickness mils surfaces cleaned to bare metala numst undercoat num num numnd undercoat num num numst finish coat num num numnd finish coat num num total thickness all coats num existing painted surfaces to be topcoated undercoat num num numst finish coat num num numnd finish coat num num total thickness new coats num aincludes locations of spot blast cleaning allow at least num hours of drying time before applying the subsequent undercoat or finish coats unless otherwise authorized .
numcnumd moisturecured polyurethane coating system reserved numd payment not used section num structural steel coatings num num painting steel soldier piles numa general section num includes specifications for preparing and painting steel soldier piles .
where shown prepare and paint steel soldier piles under the specifications for painting new structural steel in section num .
numb materials not used numc construction repair damaged areas of the undercoat before installing piles .
protect the exposed exterior flange and flange edges of undercoated piles from lean concrete backfill to minimize undercoating repairs .
after removing lean concrete backfill repair damaged or deteriorated undercoat by blast cleaning and repainting with the same inorganic zinc coating as used for the undercoat .
apply final or finish coats after installation and excavation are complete .
caulk open joints between concrete and steel soldier piles with sealing compound or other authorized material .
numd payment not used num reserved num painting galvanized surfaces num general section num includes specifications for preparing and painting galvanized metal surfaces .
num materials coatings must comply with either state specification pwbnuma or with section num .
num construction clean galvanized surfaces by pressure washing or steam cleaning .
roughen galvanized areas after cleaning by abrasive blasting .
use an abrasive no larger than num mesh .
do not remove galvanizing .
apply num finish coats in at least num applications .
apply the numst finish coat the same day abrasive blasting is performed unless otherwise authorized .
apply the numnd finish coat after the numst finish coat has dried at least num hours unless otherwise authorized .
the dry film thickness of each finish coat must be at least num mils .
the dry film thickness of all coats must be from num to num mils .
the numnd finish coat color must match color no .
num of fedstdnum .
num payment not used num painting sign structures num general section num includes specifications for preparing and painting sign structures .
preparing and painting of sign structures must comply with sections num and num .
instead of submitting proof of the certification complying with sspcqp num you may submit documentation with the painting quality work plan showing compliance with the requirements in section num of sspcqp num .
section num structural steel coatings num instead of submitting proof of the certification complying with sspcqp num you may submit documentation with the painting quality work plan showing compliance with the requirements in sections num through num of sspcqp num category a .
instead of submitting proof of the certification complying with aiscnumsspcqp num enclosed shop you may submit documentation with the painting quality work plan showing compliance with the requirements in sections num through num of aiscnumsspcqp num .
num materials not used num construction numa general you may prepare and paint sign structures before or after erection .
after erection repair any damaged paint .
the total dry film thickness of finish coats on contact surfaces of galvanized hs bolted connections num must be from num to num mils and num may be applied in num application .
numb undercoating of ungalvanized surfaces blastcleaned surfaces must receive a single undercoat consisting of an inorganic zinc coating as specified in aashto m num type i or type ii except num .
the first num sentences of section num do not apply .
num .
section num does not apply .
if you propose to use a coating that is not on the authorized material list for inorganic zincrich primer submit the required documentation specified in section num of aashto m num .
allow num days for the engineers review .
numc testing of inorganic zinc coating perform adhesion and hardness testing at least num hours after application of the single undercoat of inorganic zinc coating .
numd finish coats the exposed area of inorganic zinc coating must receive at least num finish coats of exterior grade latex paint .
the numst finish coat color must match no .
num of fedstdnum .
the numnd finish coat color must match no .
num of fedstdnum .
num payment not used num thermal spray coat structural steel num general numa summary section num includes specifications for coating steel surfaces with a thermal spray coating .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of wire feedstock .
numcnum coating quality work plan submit num copies of a coating quality work plan for thermal spray coating activities .
allow num days for the departments review .
section num structural steel coatings num submit the work plan after attending the precoating meeting and include num .
names of the coating contractor and any subcontractors to be used num .
num copy each of applicable astm and sspc specifications or qualification procedures num .
materials methods and equipment to be used num .
proof of certification for each thermal spray coating operator num .
methods to control environmental conditions num .
methods to protect the coating during shipping handling and storage num .
procedures for containing blast media num .
examples of proposed daily reports for testing to be performed including type of testing location time weather conditions test personnel and results numd quality assurance numdnum general each thermal spray coating operator must be certified under aws cnumcnumm .
numdnum precoating meeting before starting coating activities conduct a precoating meeting to discuss coating quality work plan requirements .
meeting attendees must include the engineer and all coating subcontractors .
numdnum test coupons thermal spray coating operators must prepare num test coupons for bend testing before each work shift .
test coupons must num .
be num by num inches by numinch thick num .
be of the same material as the surface to be coated num .
pass bend test requirements before the operator starts production work bend test coupons under section num of sspccs numaws c nummnace no .
num .
coupons must exhibit no cracking with lifting from substrate .
numdnum quality control the engineer selects the test locations .
if repairs are required retest rejected areas after completing repairs .
test the surface profile of blastcleaned steel under astm dnum method c. perform num tests for the first num sq ft of blastcleaned steel and num test for every num sq ft thereafter .
test blastcleaned steel for soluble salts before coating .
levels of soluble salts must not exceed num gsq cm .
perform num tests for the first num sq ft placed during a shift and num test for every num sq ft thereafter .
inspect surfaces for visual cleanliness under sspcsp numnace no .
num before applying coating .
test coating thickness under section num of sspccs numaws c nummnace no .
num .
perform num test for every num sq ft of coating and num test for each faying surface .
perform cut testing under sspccs numaws c nummnace no .
num .
perform num tests of num cuts for every num sq ft of coating .
surfaces must exhibit no peeling or delamination .
test coating adhesion to steel before applying seal coating .
thermal spray coating must have an adhesion to substrate of at least num psi .
perform num tests for every num sq ft of coating .
repair areas represented by tests failing adhesion or cut testing by removing and reapplying coating .
num materials abrasives must be num slag or mineral abrasive or num steel or recycled steel .
wire feedstock must be num znal complying with astm bnum .
seal coat paint must be authorized before use .
section num structural steel coatings num num construction do not apply coating when the steel surface temperature is less than num degrees f. prepare the surfaces under section numcnuma .
blast clean surfaces under sspcsp numnace no .
num .
surfaces must have a sharp angular anchor pattern of from num to num mils .
reblast surfaces that rust or become contaminated before coating is applied .
apply coating using arcspray equipment within num hours of starting blast cleaning .
coating thickness must be num num mils .
coating thickness on faying surfaces must be not more than num mils .
apply a seal coating to thermal spraycoated surfaces .
apply the seal coat within num hours of applying the thermal spray coating .
dry film thickness must be from num to num mils .
do not apply the seal coating to faying surfaces .
you may field weld thermal spraycoated surfaces if authorized in advance .
remove thermal spray coating from weld locations by blast cleaning under sspcsp numnace no .
num or with power tools under sspcsp num immediately before welding .
recoat welded connections after fabrication .
repair test areas of thermal spray coating that meet adhesion and cut test requirements with num coats of organic zincrich primer .
num payment not used num reserved num num existing structures num general num general section num includes specifications for performing work on existing structures .
work performed on existing structures must comply with section num .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num structure removal num general numa general section num includes specifications for removing structures or portions of structures .
design and construct temporary support shoring temporary bracing and protective covers under section num .
numb materials not used numc construction before removing portions of monolithic concrete elements make a numinchdeep saw cut to a true line along the limits of removal on faces of the element that will be visible in the completed work .
remove piling piers abutments footings and pedestals to num foot below the ground line or num feet below finished grade whichever is lower .
protect existing reinforcement to be incorporated into the new work from damage .
thoroughly remove all material adhering to the existing reinforcement before embedding the existing reinforcement in new concrete .
do not use explosives .
do not use the following for breaking or removing concrete attached to or supported by bridges num .
tools with a manufacturersrated striking energy of more than num ftlb per blow num .
freely falling mass num .
falling mass attached to a cable rope or chain do not use a freely falling mass or a falling mass attached to a cable rope or chain above any public space .
do not use falling masses within num feet horizontally of any public space without protective covers .
design and construct protective covers shoring and falsework with sufficient strength and rigidity to support all imposed loads .
covers must be at least equal to numinch douglasfir planking on posts spaced at numfoot centers the engineer may require you to remove existing footing concrete that is below ground and outside of the footing limits .
this work is change order work .
numd payment not used section num existing structures num num bridge removal numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for removing bridges or portions of bridges .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals if a daily inspection report is required submit the daily inspection report as an informational submittal .
submit a bridge removal work plan for each bridge .
include details for the following num .
removal sequence including staging of removal activities and equipment locations num .
temporary support shoring or bracing num .
locations where work is performed over traffic utilities or railroad property num .
locations and types of protective covers num .
protection of people property utilities and improvements num .
methods for preventing material equipment and debris from falling onto traffic or railroad property if protective covers are required or superstructure removal work is performed bridge removal work plans must be num accompanied by substantiating calculations and num signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
calculations for bridge removal work plans must demonstrate the stability of the structure during each stage of removal and must include dead and live loads used in the design of the protective covers .
a stage is removal of num the deck soffit or girders in any span or num walls bent caps or columns at support locations .
if an unplanned event occurs or the removal activities deviate from the authorized work plan immediately submit procedures proposed to correct or remedy this occurrence .
the procedures must be signed by an engineer who is registered as a civil engineer in the state .
allow num days for review of the bridge removal work plan .
numanum quality assurance numanuma general reserved numanumb quality control for bridge removal work plans signed by a registered engineer the engineer signing the work plan must num .
be present at all times during bridge removal activities .
num .
prepare a daily inspection report for removal activities .
the daily inspection report must describe work activities for each day and the condition of the remaining structure .
a copy of the report must be available at the job site at all times .
numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum design criteria for temporary support shoring and temporary bracing the horizontal load to be resisted in any direction for temporary support shoring and temporary bracing must be num the sum of actual horizontal loads due to equipment construction sequence or other causes plus an allowance for wind and num not less than num percent of the total dead load of the structure being removed .
section num existing structures num numc construction numcnum general the engineer may require you to perform additional exploratory work of bridge members for unforeseen damage .
this work is change order work .
you may use flame and saw cutting for removing widening or modifying bridges .
if complete bridges are removed do not start removal activities until traffic is no longer carried on the bridge .
for bridge removal activities over or adjacent to roadways that are only closed to traffic when removal work is being performed num .
have all necessary personnel materials and equipment to complete the work onsite before closing the roadway .
perform activities without interruption until the roadway is reopened .
num .
perform bridge removal activities only when the roadway is closed to traffic except as specified for preliminary work .
num .
during roadway closures debris from bridge removal activities may fall directly onto the roadway if protection is furnished for highway facilities .
minimum protection for paved areas is a numfootthick earthen pad or a numinchthick steel plate placed over the impact area .
before reopening the roadway all debris protective pads and devices must be removed and the roadway swept clean with wet power sweepers or equivalent methods .
num .
for girder bridges completely remove each girder within a span before starting removal of the adjacent girder .
num .
for slab bridges perform removal activities within a span along a front parallel with the primary reinforcing steel .
temporary support shoring temporary bracing and protective covers must not encroach within num feet horizontally or num feet vertically of traffic lanes or shoulders open to traffic .
temporary support shoring temporary bracing and protective covers over railroad property must num conform to guidelines of the railroad company involved and num provide the minimum clearances specified for railroad traffic .
numcnum protective covers provide protective covers for removal work over traffic or railroad property .
protective covers must num .
be constructed before starting removal activities .
num .
prevent any materials equipment or debris from falling onto traffic or railroad property .
num .
be supported using shoring falsework or the existing structure .
num .
provide the openings specified in section num .
if no openings are specified for removal work provide a vertical opening of num feet and a horizontal opening of num feet for traffic .
num .
be cleaned of debris and fines before being removed .
at locations where only bridge railing is removed protective covers must extend from the face of the exterior girder or at least num feet inside of the railing to be removed to at least num feet beyond the outside face of the railing .
at locations where entire girders are removed protective covers must extend at least num feet beyond the outside face of the bridge railing .
a separate protective cover is not required during removal of bridge segments if portions of the bridge satisfy the requirements for protective covers .
numcnum preliminary work preliminary work is limited to activities that num will not reduce the structural strength or stability of the bridge or bridge elements to a hazardous level as determined by the engineer or num do not cause debris or any other material to fall onto the roadway .
you may perform preliminary work if you use protective covers .
protective covers must num .
support all loads section num existing structures num num .
prevent dust and fine material from falling onto the traveled way num .
extend at least num feet beyond the limit of the work being performed .
bottom slabs of box girders may be considered as protective covers for preliminary work performed on top slabs inside the limits of the exterior girders .
use temporary support shoring and bracing during preliminary work if needed to ensure the stability of the bridge .
numd payment not used num reserved num structure rehabilitation num general numa general section num includes specifications for rehabilitating structures .
numb materials not used numc construction not used numd payment not used num bridge deck repair and preparation numa general section num includes specifications for num repairing concrete deck surfaces and num preparing concrete deck surfaces to receive an overlay or a deck treatment .
numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum rapid setting concrete rapid setting concrete must comply with the specifications for bonding materials in section numc .
you may extend rapid setting concrete using a clean uniform and rounded aggregate filler with a moisture content of no more than num percent .
aggregate gradation must comply with the requirements shown in the following table sieve size percentage passing num num no .
num num the amount of aggregate filler must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
concrete strengths for extended concrete must be at least as specified for magnesium phosphate concrete .
combine components of dualcomponent magnesium phosphate by mixing only complete units supplied by the manufacturer .
do not add water to dualcomponent magnesium phosphate .
numc construction numcnum general before starting deck rehabilitation activities complete the removal of any traffic stripes pavement markings and pavement markers .
section num existing structures num coarse aggregate remaining above the removal depth must be firmly embedded .
highpressure water jet equipment must num have rotating or oscillating jets and num be rated at num psi minimum .
cold milling equipment must num .
have a minimum concrete removal depth of num inch num .
provide a surface relief of at most num inch num .
provide a numinch grade tolerance cold milling equipment must have num .
num or num riding tracks num .
automatic grade control system with electronic averaging with num sensors on each side num .
conveyer system that leaves no debris on the bridge num .
drum that operates in an upmilling direction num .
bullet tooth tools with tungsten carbide steel cutting tips num .
maximum tool spacing of num inch num .
maximum operating weight of num lb num .
maximum track unit weight of num lbft num .
new tooth tools at the start of the work provide personnel on each side of the milling drum to monitor milling activities .
maintain constant radio communication with the operator during milling activities .
numcnum removing concrete deck surface remove the concrete deck surface to the depth described .
before the removing concrete sweep the deck surface and blow the deck clean with highpressure air .
remove the deck surface by cold milling or highpressure water jetting .
numcnum removing asphalt concrete surfacing where shown remove asphalt concrete surfacing and reinforced concrete expansion dams from concrete bridges and approaches .
before removing asphalt concrete surfacing verify the depth of the surfacing at the supports and midspans of each structure num in each shoulder num in the traveled way and num at the roadway crown if a crown is present .
remove asphalt concrete surfacing by cold milling .
at least num inch of asphalt concrete surfacing must remain after milling activities .
remove the remaining asphalt surfacing using other authorized means .
do not damage the concrete slab .
numcnum removing seals where shown remove bituminous chip seals bituminous slurry seals and polymer chip seals from bridge decks by grinding .
grinding must comply with section num .
remove no more than num inch of concrete deck surface .
numcnum removing unsound concrete where shown remove unsound portions of bridge decks curbs and railings .
unsound concrete is concrete that emits a dead or hollow sound when chained or tapped with a metal tool .
the engineer determines the soundness of concrete .
equipment and tools that in the engineers opinion remove excess quantities of sound concrete are not allowed .
section num existing structures num for bridges over railroads stop removal activities when trains pass under the bridge .
reinforcing steel exposed after removing unsound concrete must be restored to position and blocked and tied under section num .
replace or repair reinforcing steel damaged and rendered useless during removal .
numcnum rapid setting concrete patch before placing rapid setting concrete patches abrasive blast clean the contact surfaces of existing concrete and reinforcing steel .
remove at least num inch of concrete and all foreign material .
immediately before placing new concrete clean surfaces by sweeping and pressure jetting or other authorized means to remove debris .
the surface temperature of the existing concrete must be at least num degrees f during placement of the rapid setting concrete .
contact surfaces to receive magnesium phosphate concrete must be dry .
contact surfaces to receive modified highalumina concrete or portlandcementbased concrete may be damp but not saturated .
magnesium phosphate concrete must not be mixed in containers or worked with tools containing zinc cadmium aluminum or copper .
modified highalumina based concrete must not be mixed in containers or worked with tools containing aluminum .
do not retemper concrete .
finishing tools cleaned with water must be thoroughly dried before working concrete .
the engineer may require that you use a flowcontrolled modified concrete on slopes greater than num percent .
cure modifiedhighaluminabased concrete and portlandcement based concrete using the curing compound method .
do not cure magnesium phosphate concrete .
numcnum prepare concrete deck surface prepare concrete bridge decks num after the removal of any unsound concrete and placement of any rapid setting concrete patches and num before applying deck treatments or placing deck overlays .
perform the following activities in the order listed num .
abrasive blast the deck surface with steel shot .
steel shot must comply with sspcab num .
recycled steel shot must comply with sspcab num .
num .
sweep the deck surface .
num .
blow the deck surface clean using highpressure air .
the deck surface must be dry when abrasive blasting is performed .
remove all laitance surface contaminants and foreign material from the deck surface .
if the deck surface becomes contaminated before placing the deck treatment or overlay abrasive blast clean the contaminated area and sweep the deck clean .
numcnumcnum reserved numd payment the payment quantity for rapid setting concrete patch is the volume determined from scale weights divided by a plastic density of num lbcu ft .
if rapid setting concrete is used to fill voids from the removal of unsound concrete the payment quantity for remove unsound concrete is the same as the payment quantity for rapid setting concrete patch .
no deduction is made for concrete used to fill spalls that existed before the work began .
num bridge deck treatment numa general numanum general section num includes specifications for treating bridge decks .
section num existing structures num numanum materials not used numanum construction not used numanum payment not used numb methacrylate resin bridge deck treatment numbnum general numbnuma summary section numb includes specifications for treating bridge decks with a highmolecularweight methacrylate resin .
numbnumb definitions reserved numbnumc submittals submit a work plan for applying the methacrylate resin treatment .
include in the plan num .
schedule of work for the test area and for each bridge num .
description of equipment for applying resin num .
range of gel time and final cure time for resin num .
description of absorbent material to be used num .
description of equipment for applying and removing excess sand and absorbent material num .
procedure for removing resin from the deck and equipment to be used num .
procedure for storing and handling resin components and absorbent material num .
procedure for disposing of excess resin and containers submit an sds for each resin component and diatomaceous earth shipment before use .
submit test samples of methacrylate resin components at least num days before use .
numbnumd quality assurance complete a test area before starting deck treatment activities .
notify the engineer at least num days before treating the test area .
the test area must be num .
at least num sq ft num .
located within the project limits outside the traveled way at an authorized location num .
constructed num using the same materials equipment and construction methods to be used in the work and num under conditions similar to those anticipated when the work will be performed .
the completed test area must demonstrate num compliance with these specifications and num work will be completed within the time allowed .
the engineer performs friction testing of the treated test area under california test num .
allow num days after completion of the test area for the engineer to perform the test .
do not perform deck treatment activities until the test area is authorized .
the authorized test area is the standard of comparison in determining the acceptability of treated deck surfaces .
the engineer may perform testing under california test num to verify the coefficient of friction of the treated deck surfaces .
the coefficient of friction of the treated surface must be at least num when tested under california test num .
numbnum materials highmolecularweight methacrylate resin consists of resin promoter and initiator .
section num existing structures num highmolecularweight methacrylate resin must be low odor and comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement volatile contenta max astm dnum num viscositya max cp brookfield rv with ul adaptor num rpm at num c astm dnum num specific gravitya min at num c astm dnum num flash pointa min c astm dnum num vapor pressurea max mm hg at num c astm dnum num tackfree time max minutes at num c prepare specimens under california test num num pccsaturated surfacedry bond strength min psi at num hours and num num f california test num num aperform test before adding the initiator .
sand for the abrasive sand finish must be a commercialquality dryblast sand .
the size of the sand must be such that not less than num percent passes the no .
num sieve and not less than num percent is retained on the no .
num sieve when tested under california test num .
absorbent material must be diatomaceous earth abrasive blast dust or an authorized substitute recommended by the resin supplier .
numbnum construction notify the engineer at least num days before delivery of methacrylate resin components in containers larger than num gallons to the job site .
the engineer determines the exact methacrylate resin application rate at time of placement .
highmolecularweight methacrylate resin applied by machine must be num combined in volumetric streams of promoted resin to initiated resin by static inline mixers and num applied without atomization .
you may apply resin manually .
mix at most num gallons of resin at a time .
the deck must be dry before applying resin .
the concrete surface must be from num to num degrees f. relative humidity must be not more than num percent during the work shift .
thoroughly mix all resin components .
apply resin to the deck within num minutes of mixing at an approximate application rate of num sq ftgal .
resin that thickens during application is rejected .
uniformly spread the resin .
completely cover surfaces to be treated and fill all cracks .
redistribute excess resin using squeegees or brooms within num minutes of application .
for textured or grooved deck surfaces remove excess resin from the texture indentations .
apply the abrasive sand finish no sooner than num minutes after applying the resin .
the sand application rate must be at least num lbsq yd or until saturation as determined by the engineer .
apply absorbent material before opening the lane to traffic .
remove excess sand and absorbent material by vacuuming or power sweeping .
traffic or equipment is not allowed on the treated surface until you have verified that the following conditions have been met and the engineer has authorized the opening of the treated surface to traffic and equipment num .
treated deck surface is tack free and not oily num .
sand cover adheres and resists brushing by hand num .
excess sand and absorbent material has been removed num .
no material will be tracked beyond the limits of treatment by traffic remove resin from the deck surface if the engineer determines num the conditions listed above have not been met and num the allowable lane closure time will be exceeded .
section num existing structures num numbnum payment the payment quantity for furnish bridge deck treatment material is the volume of mixed highmolecular weight methacrylate resin placed .
numcnumj reserved num deck overlays numa general numanum general section num includes specifications for overlaying concrete bridge decks .
numanum materials not used numanum construction not used numanum payment not used numb polyester concrete overlays numbnum general numbnuma summary section numb includes specifications for placing polyester concrete overlays on concrete bridge decks .
placing polyester concrete overlay includes placing a prime coat of methacrylate resin to the bridge deck before placing the polyester concrete overlay .
furnishing polyester concrete includes furnishing and placing the trial overlay and concrete base for the trial overlay .
numbnumb definitions reserved numbnumc submittals submit a work plan for the placement of the deck overlay .
include the following in the work plan num .
schedule of overlay work for each bridge and a schedule of work for any trial overlays num .
description of equipment for applying methacrylate resin num .
description of equipment for measuring mixing placing and finishing the polyester concrete overlay num .
method for isolating expansion joints num .
cure time for polyester concrete num .
description of equipment for applying sand num .
method for storage and handling of methacrylate resin and polyester concrete components num .
method for disposal of excess methacrylate resin polyester concrete and containers for each shipment of methacrylate and polyester concrete submit an sds for each component .
submit test samples of methacrylate and polyester resins at least num days before use .
submit aggregate and resin volumes recorded from the volumetric mixer at the end of each work shift .
numbnumd quality assurance complete a trial polyester concrete overlay before starting overlay activities .
notify the engineer at least num days before constructing the trial overlay .
the trial overlay must be num .
at least num by num feet and the same thickness as the overlay shown num .
constructed on a prepared concrete base within the project limits at an authorized location section num existing structures num num .
constructed num using the same materials equipment and construction methods to be used in the work and num under conditions similar to those anticipated when the work will be performed use the trial overlay to determine the initial polyesterconcrete set time .
the engineer performs friction testing of the trial overlay under california test num .
allow num days after completion of the trial overlay for the engineer to perform the testing .
the completed trial overlay must demonstrate num compliance with these specifications and num that the work will be completed within the time allowed .
do not perform overlay activities until the trial overlay is authorized .
the authorized trial overlay is the standard of comparison in determining the acceptability of the overlay .
the engineer may perform testing under california test num to verify the coefficient of friction of the overlay surfaces .
dispose of the trial overlay and concrete base after acceptance of all polyester concrete overlay surfaces .
numbnum materials polyester concrete consists of polyester resin binder and aggregate .
polyester resin binder must num .
be an unsaturated isophthalic polyesterstyrene copolymer num .
contain not less than num percent by weight gammamethacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane an organosilane ester silane coupler num .
be used with a promoter compatible with suitable methyl ethyl ketone peroxide and cumene hydroperoxide initiators num .
comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement viscositya cp rv no .
num spindle num rpm at num c astm dnum num specific gravitya at num c astm dnum num elongation min type i specimen num num inch thick rate num inmin astm dnum num sample conditioning num astm dnum tensile strength min psi type i specimen num num inch thick rate num inmin astm dnum num sample conditioning num astm dnum styrene contenta by weight astm dnum num pcc saturated surfacedry bond strength min psi at num hours and num num f california test num num static volatile emissiona max gramsq m loss scaqmd method num num atest must be performed before adding initiator .
aggregate for polyester concrete must num .
comply with sections numcnum numcnum and numcnum except fine aggregate must consist of natural sand num .
have not more than num percent crushed particles retained on the no .
num sieve when tested under california test num num .
have a weightedaverage aggregate absorption of not more than num percent when tested under california tests num and num section num existing structures num num .
at the time of mixing with resin have a moisture content of not more than one half of the weighted average aggregate absorption when tested under california test num num .
comply with the percentage passing limits for one of the aggregate gradations shown in the following table aggregate gradation sieve size percentage passing num inch maximum no .
num maximum num num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num highmolecularweight methacrylate for the resin prime coat must comply with section numb except num .
methacrylate resin must be free of wax num .
tackfree time requirements do not apply num .
friction testing is not required for the resin prime coat sand for abrasive sand finish must num .
be commercialquality blast sand num .
be graded such that not less than num percent passes the no .
num sieve and not less than num percent is retained on the no .
num sieve when tested under california test num num .
have an average absorption of not more than num percent when tested under california test num numbnum construction numbnuma general notify the engineer at least num days before delivery of methacrylate resin components in containers larger than num gallons to the job site .
the engineer provides the final grade and cross slope before the start of overlay work .
the engineer tests existing deck surface smoothness under section numdnumbii and may require you to modify the existing deck smoothness under section num .
modifying the existing deck smoothness is change order work .
complete the construction of approach slabs before placing polyester overlay .
new concrete deck surfaces must comply with section numfnum before starting overlay work .
numbnumb placing methacrylate resin the engineer determines the exact percentage of polyester resin binder at the time of placing .
the deck must be dry before placing the methacrylate prime coat .
the concrete surface must be from num to num degrees f and the relative humidity must be not more than num percent .
sweep the deck and blow it clean with compressed air .
thoroughly mix all components of the methacrylate resin .
apply the resin to the deck surface within num minutes of mixing .
apply the resin uniformly and spread to completely cover surfaces to be overlaid .
apply methacrylate resin at an approximate rate of num sq ftgal .
section num existing structures num place methacrylate prime coat on magnesium phosphate concrete patches no sooner than num hours after final set or on modified highalumina based concrete patches no sooner than num minutes after final set .
numbnumc placing polyester concrete use a continuous mixer to mix polyester concrete .
the continuous mixer must num .
employ an auger screw device with a discharge chute num .
be equipped with an automatic metering device that measures and records aggregate and resin volumes num .
have a visible readout gage that displays volumes of aggregate and resin being recorded num .
be certified under california test num before use num .
produce a satisfactory mix consistently during a demonstration record polyester concrete volumes at least every num minutes including time and date .
finishing equipment for polyester concrete must num .
have grade control capabilities resulting in a roadway surface that meets the smoothness requirements of section numdnumbii and is capable of adjusting for a variable thickness overlay along and across the existing deck surface .
the use of fixed height skidsupported strike off equipment is not allowed .
num .
be used to consolidate the polyester concrete num .
have a numfoot minimum paving width place polyester concrete num .
immediately after applying the methacrylate prime coat num .
before gelling occurs num .
within num minutes of adding the initiator the weight of resin binder must be approximately num percent of the weight of the aggregate .
polyester concrete must have an initial set time from num to num minutes when tested using an initialsettingtime gillmore needle under astm cnum .
consolidate and finish the overlay to the required grade and cross section using finishing equipment .
polyester concrete must be consolidated to a relative compaction of not less than num percent when tested under california test num .
texture the polyester concrete surface before gelling occurs by longitudinal tining under num numfnumbiii except do not perform initial texturing .
apply a sand finish of not less than num lbsq yd before gelling occurs .
protect the overlay from moisture for at least num hours after finishing .
do not allow traffic or equipment on the overlay for at least num hours after final finishing .
completed polyester concrete deck surfaces must have a uniform surface texture with a coefficient of friction of at least num when tested under california test num and a surface smoothness complying with section numdnumbii .
taper the polyester concrete overlay edges if the overlay num is not completed within the allowable lane closure time and num is more than num inch higher in elevation than the adjacent pavement .
taper the edges that are transverse to the direction of traffic at a num horizontalvertical slope .
taper the edges that are longitudinal to the direction of traffic at a num horizontalvertical slope .
tapers may remain and be overlaid with polyester concrete overlay .
numbnum payment the payment quantity for furnish polyester concrete overlay is the volume determined using num .
quantity of resin binder used num .
percentage by weight of resin binder in the polyester concrete num .
unit weight of num lbcu ft section num existing structures num numc polyester concrete expansion dams numcnum general numcnuma summary section numc includes specifications for constructing polyester concrete expansion dams .
polyester concrete expansion dams must comply with the specifications for polyester concrete overlays in section numb except a trial overlay is not required .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
numcnumb definitions reserved numcnumc submittals reserved numcnumd quality assurance reserved numcnum materials not used numcnum construction for new asphalt concrete overlays place the asphalt concrete overlay before starting polyester concrete activities .
saw cut and remove asphalt concrete at expansion dam locations .
for existing asphalt concrete overlays remove expansion dams and asphalt concrete to the limits shown .
removing expansion dams must comply with section num except a bridge removal work plan is not required .
where a portion of the asphalt concrete overlay is to remain saw cut a numinchdeep true line along the edge to remain in place before removing the asphalt concrete .
do not damage the existing surfacing to remain in place .
prepare the deck surface under section numcnum .
you may use a mechanical mixer to mix the polyester concrete for expansion dams .
the mixer capacity must not exceed num cu ft unless authorized .
initiate the resin and thoroughly blend it immediately before mixing it with the aggregate .
mix the polyester concrete for at least num minutes before placing .
the application rate of methacrylate resin must be approximately num sq ftgal .
you may place and finish expansion dams using hand methods .
protect expansion dams from moisture traffic and equipment for at least num hours after finishing .
for expansion dams over num feet long install numinchwide joint material at numfoot intervals across the width of the expansion dam .
joint material must be either expanded polyurethane or expanded polyethylene .
numcnum payment the payment quantity for polyester concrete expansion dam is the volume determined from the dimensions shown .
numd concrete overlays numdnum general section numd includes specifications for overlaying bridge decks with concrete .
constructing concrete overlays must comply with section num .
section num existing structures num numdnum materials not used numdnum construction not used numdnum payment not used nume multilayer polymer overlays reserved numfnumm reserved num repairing structures numa general numanum general section num includes specifications for repairing structures .
numanum materials not used numanum construction not used numanum payment not used numb repairing spalled surface areas numbnum general numbnuma summary section numb includes specifications for repairing spalled concrete surfaces except on bridge decks .
numbnumb definitions reserved numbnumc submittals for alternative filler material submit a test sample of at least num complete unit of all materials for repairing the concrete surfaces .
allow num days for testing .
for a contract with less than num original working days submit certificates of compliance for the filler material and bonding agents .
numbnumd quality assurance reserved numbnum materials mortar must comply with section numf .
shotcrete must comply with section num .
alternative filler materials and bonding agents must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num existing structures num quality characteristic test method requirement abrasion resistance max grams at num days california test num num modulus of elasticity psi at num days california test num num x num to num x num water soluble chlorides max mgkg california test num num water soluble sulfates max mgkg california test num num for a contract with less than num original working days alternative materials must be authorized before use .
numbnum construction remove unsound concrete under section numcnum .
clean concrete surfaces and existing reinforcing steel by abrasive blasting before placing filler material .
place reinforcing steel where shown .
fill spalled surface areas under section numfnum or you may use an authorized alternative filler material and bonding agent .
if using an alternative filler material apply a bonding epoxy before placing the filler material .
place the filler material under the manufacturers instructions .
if using shotcrete you may apply the shotcrete using a drymix process with a hydration liquid applied immediately after placing the shotcrete .
the final surface finish of the patched concrete surface must comply with section numf .
patched concrete must emit a ringing sound similar to adjacent sound concrete when struck with a metal tool num days after placement .
removing and patching spalled concrete more than num inches deep is change order work .
numbnum payment the payment quantity for repair spalled surface area is the area measured of the completed repaired surface .
measured areas are recorded daily by the engineer and agreed upon by you .
numc epoxy crack injection numcnum general numcnuma summary section numc includes specifications for filling cracks in concrete structures with pressureinjected epoxy .
numcnumb definitions reserved numcnumc submittals reserved numcnumd quality assurance before starting injection activities and at hourly intervals when requested take a numounce sample of mixed epoxy from the injection gun .
if samples show improper proportioning or mixing stop injection activities and correct deficiencies .
numcnum materials epoxy must comply with the specifications for epoxy resin adhesive for injection grouting of concrete pavement .
multiple formulations may be required for cracks of varying widths .
section num existing structures num numcnum construction the engineer selects cracks having widths from num to num mils for injection and filling .
clean cracks of material that would impair bonding of epoxy using oilfree compressed air .
remove any remaining material by flushing with water under pressure .
after flushing blow cracks clean with oilfree compressed air .
insert injection ports into cracks .
space the ports not more than a distance equal to the thickness of the concrete being injected .
spacing at ends of cracks must be equal to half the concrete thickness .
adjust port spacing to ensure epoxy substantially fills the cracks .
seal the crack surfaces between ports with tape or other temporary sealant capable of retaining epoxy in cracks during pressure injection and until epoxy has hardened .
concrete temperature must be from num to num degrees f during injection activities .
pressure inject epoxy adhesive into cracks through injection ports .
use the lowest practical pumping pressure .
injection equipment must maintain epoxy proportion and mix consistency .
fill cracks completely .
do not allow epoxy to run down the face of the concrete from the head of the injection gun .
start injection at the numst port at the end of a crack .
pump epoxy into the port until epoxy runs substantially from the adjacent port .
seal the numst port and start injection from the next port .
continue in this manner until the crack is filled .
for slanting or vertical cracks start injecting at the lower end of the crack .
where vertical and horizontal cracks intersect inject the vertical crack below the intersection first .
seal ports by removing the fitting filling the void with epoxy and covering the void with tape or surface sealant .
leave the sealing tape and temporary surface sealant in place until the epoxy has hardened .
clean excess epoxy from concrete surfaces exposed to public view after removing sealant .
numcnum payment for cracks extending around corners of members the payment quantity for inject crack epoxy is the crack length measured on both faces including the crack length shown to be filled on the opposite side of a member that is completely filled after injection from only num side .
numd heatstraighten steel girders reserved numenumj reserved num reserved num modifying structures num general numa general section num includes specifications for modifying structures .
numb materials not used numc construction not used numd payment not used num refinishing bridge decks numa general section num includes specifications for refinishing bridge decks .
the engineer determines the exact area to be refinished .
section num existing structures num numb materials concrete for refinishing bridge decks must be either portland cement concrete or rapid setting concrete .
portland cement concrete must comply with section num and the following num .
concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
num .
free water must not exceed num lbcu yd .
num .
aggregate must contain from num to num percent fine aggregate .
the remaining portion must be pea gravel .
grade pea gravel such that num percent passes the numinch sieve and at most num percent passes the no .
num sieve .
num .
engineer may request that admixtures be used .
rapid setting concrete must comply with section num .
epoxy adhesive must comply with the specifications for epoxy adhesive for bonding freshly mixed concrete to hardened concrete .
numc construction numcnum general for removal work performed within num feet of a traffic lane or over a traffic lane remove the dust and residue using an authorized vacuum a water spray or a shield method .
make a numinchdeep saw cut around the perimeter of the deck to be refinished .
remove concrete in areas to be refinished to a depth of approximately num inch .
do not damage concrete to remain in place .
prepare existing deck areas more than num inch below adjoining deck surfaces by removing at least num inch of surface material to expose sound aggregate .
remove concrete by abrasive blast cutting abrasive sawing impact tool cutting machine rotary abrading or other methods .
removal methods must be authorized .
clean prepared areas of dust and loose and deleterious materials by brooming abrasive blast cleaning and using highpressure air .
reblast contaminated areas before starting concrete placement activities .
protect existing reinforcement exposed during concrete removal .
cut off dowels num inch below the existing deck surface or at the bottom of concrete removal whichever is lower .
where refinishing is not required cut dowels off num inch below the finished surface .
patch holes with rapid setting concrete complying with section num .
you may refinish isolated high areas by cutting the concrete down flush with adjoining deck surfaces .
use abrasive sawing grinding impact tool cutting or other authorized methods .
fill prepared areas flush with the plane of the adjoining deck using concrete .
transversely score fresh concrete surfaces .
use a stiffbristled broom or other suitable device .
completed surfaces must have a uniform texture with a coefficient of friction of at least num when tested under california test num .
grind or groove surfaces having a coefficient of friction less than num under section num .
refinished surfaces must num be flush with the adjoining surface and num not vary more than num foot from the lower edge of a numfoot straightedge placed in the longitudinal direction .
numcnum placing portland cement concrete abrasiveblast clean concrete surfaces to be refinished .
sweep blastcleaned surfaces and blow them clean using highpressure air .
apply an epoxy adhesive to cleaned surfaces immediately after cleaning .
surfaces must be dry and have a temperature of at least num degrees f when applying the adhesive .
the engineer determines the application rate .
section num existing structures num place concrete on fresh epoxy adhesive .
consolidate concrete immediately after placement until voids are filled and free mortar appears on the surface .
strike off concrete to the required grade .
cure concrete under section numh .
do not apply loads of any type to the concrete until at least num days after placement .
numcnum placing rapid setting concrete blow surfaces to be refinished with highpressure air immediately before placing rapid setting concrete .
abrasiveblast clean concrete surfaces that are contaminated before the concrete is placed .
do not allow traffic on concrete until num hours after final set unless authorized .
numd payment the payment quantity for refinish bridge deck is the sum of num the area measured along the surface and num num square foot for patching around each dowel .
the department does not adjust the unit price for an increase or decrease in the refinish bridge deck quantity .
num access openings numa general section num includes specifications for constructing access openings and closing access openings when access is no longer required .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
steel plates hardware and threadlocking compound must comply with section num .
numb materials rapidsetting concrete must comply with section numbnum .
numc construction numcnum general removing portions of bridges must comply with section num .
limits of removal shown are approximate .
the engineer must authorize removal limits before you start removal activities .
paint exposed ends of the remaining reinforcement with num coats of organic zincrich coating as specified for exposed ends of prestressing steel in section numbnuma .
within cells where work activities are performed remove existing formwork and concrete that interfere with the work .
in cells that adjoin hinges bent caps or abutments remove existing forms and sharp projections in the cell between the adjoined element and num feet past the access opening .
numcnum deck access openings remove portions of existing bridge decks including bar reinforcing steel at the locations shown .
numcnum soffit access openings remove portions of the existing soffit including the bar reinforcing steel at the locations shown .
seal the access openings with access doors when cell access is no longer required .
numcnum soffit access opening extensions for bridge soffit access opening extensions remove and replace concrete to the limits shown .
you may reduce removal limits if authorized .
reconstruct and seal soffit access openings to the original dimensions when cell access is no longer required .
use concrete or rapidsetting concrete to reconstruct the access openings .
placing concrete must comply with section num .
placing rapidsetting concrete must comply with section numcnum .
section num existing structures num numcnum close deck access openings close deck access openings using rapidsetting concrete .
placing rapidsetting concrete must comply with section numcnum .
use water to flush dust from areas to be filled with concrete .
remove all water by air blasting before placing concrete .
do not allow traffic on the new concrete until at least num hour after final set unless authorized .
if the close deck access opening work has not been completed use temporary deck cover plates to temporarily close the deck access openings before opening the lane to traffic .
temporary deck cover plates must remain in place until the deck access opening is permanently closed .
numd payment not used num coring concrete numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for coring holes through concrete structures .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals if cored holes are greater than num feet in length submit num .
work plan for the coring activities including methods and equipment to be used num .
labeled cores if reinforcement shown not to be cut is cut during coring operations submit a work plan for num repairing the cut reinforcement and num preventing cutting of additional reinforcement .
allow num business days for review .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials water for coring activities must either num be from the local water supply or num contain num .
not more than num ppm chlorides as cl num .
not more than num ppm of sulfates as sonum num .
no impurities that discolor the concrete or etch the surface numc construction use coring methods that do not shatter or damage the concrete adjacent to the holes .
stop coring operations if reinforcement shown not to be cut is cut during coring operations .
do not resume coring operations until your work plan is authorized .
if cored holes are greater than num feet in length num .
alignment of the cored hole must not deviate from that shown by more than num inch per num feet of length with a total maximum deviation of num inches .
num .
label each core with the core location immediately after coring .
do not allow water from coring activities to fall onto traffic flow across shoulders or lanes occupied by traffic or flow into gutters or other drainage facilities .
section num existing structures num numd payment the payment quantity for core concrete is the length measured along the centerline of the hole .
the payment quantity includes the length of any expansion joints .
num coring and pressure grouting dowels numa general section num includes specifications for coring holes through concrete and grouting dowels into the cored holes .
coring must comply with section num .
numb materials grout must comply with astm cnum or astm cnum type k with a compressive strength of num psi at num days when tested under california test num .
dowels must comply with the specifications for bar reinforcing steel in section num .
water for grout must comply with the specifications for water in section numd .
admixtures must not contain more than num ppm of chlorides as cl when tested under california test num and not more than num ppm of sulfates as sonum when tested under california test num .
numc construction clean loose and foreign material from concrete and steel surfaces that will be in contact with the grout .
flush holes with water and let them dry to a surfacedry condition immediately before grouting .
seal the ends of holes after placing the dowels .
place a vent tube at one end of the hole and an injection feed tube at the other end of the hole .
for holes with only a single end place vent and injection feed tubes in the same end .
place tubes such that the air will vent and the hole will be completely filled with grout .
mix grout under the manufacturers instructions .
pump grout into holes .
use sufficient pressure so that the hole is free of voids .
continually waste grout until air and water eject from the vent tubes and there are no visible slugs .
numd payment payment for furnishing dowels is not included in the payment for core and pressure grout dowel .
num steel column casings numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for fabricating installing and cleaning and painting steel column casings .
column casings must comply with the specifications for structural steel in section num .
cleaning and painting column casings must comply with the specifications for cleaning and painting new structural steel in section num .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals reserved numanum quality assurance for field welding of column casings num .
only visual inspection is required num .
numnd sentence of clause num and the numst sentence of clause num of aws dnum do not apply .
section num existing structures num numb materials numbnum general steel for casings must comply with astm anumanumm or astm anumanumm grade num .
mortar must comply with section numf .
polyethylene must have a compressive strength of at least num psi at no more than num percent deflection when tested under astm dnum suffix b .
drain extension pipe must comply with the specifications for drainage piping in section num .
numbnum grout grout must consist of cement and water and may contain an admixture if authorized .
do not exceed num gallons of water per num lb of cement .
cement must comply with section numbnum .
water must comply with section numd .
admixtures must comply with section num except admixtures must not contain chloride ions in excess of num percent by weight .
for noncircular columns with a maximum gap greater than num inches extend the grout as follows num .
aggregate must consist of at least num percent fine aggregate and approximately num percent pea gravel by weight .
num .
fine aggregate must comply with section numcnum .
num .
size of pea gravel must be such that num percent passes the numinch sieve at least num percent passes the numinch sieve and not more than num percent passes the no .
num sieve .
num .
minimum cement content of the grout must not be less than num lbcu yd .
mix the grout as follows num .
add water to the mixer followed by cement and any aggregates or admixtures .
num .
mix the grout with mechanical mixing equipment that produces a uniform and thoroughly mixed grout .
num .
agitate the grout continuously until the grout is pumped .
num .
do not add water after initial mixing .
numc construction numcnum general remove and dispose of all material from the space to be occupied by column casing materials .
bond polyethylene to column surfaces where shown .
use an authorized waterproof adhesive .
apply adhesive to the entire contact surface .
use spacers to center casings around columns during placement .
you may weld spacers to the inside of casings .
do not use spacers in areas where polyethylene is used .
paint the information that is on existing columns onto casings under section numenum .
numcnum painting apply the undercoat before shipment to the job site .
do not paint surfaces that are to be thermal spray coated or covered with polyethylene .
apply final coats after installing the casing .
numcnum grouting grout the space between casing and column faces .
grouting equipment must comply with section numbnumdii .
section num existing structures num if hot weather conditions will contribute to quick stiffening of the grout cool the grout by authorized methods as necessary to prevent blockages during pumping activities .
if freezing weather conditions are anticipated during and following the placement of grout provide adequate means to protect the grout in the casings from damage by freezing .
do not num .
allow the grout temperature to rise above num degrees f during mixing and pumping num .
grout when the ambient or grout temperature is less than num degrees f limit the height of each grout lift to minimize casing undulations and displacements .
undulations in the casing surface must not exceed num inch in num inches .
total casing displacement from the position shown must not exceed num inches at any point .
you may use bracing or other means to restrain casing .
except where shown restraints may not pass through columns .
allow grout to harden before placing the next lift of grout unless a bracing system is used .
the maximum height of grout lifts for portions of casings with polyethylene is num feet .
install external injection valves for grouting casings .
begin filling casing from the bottom .
space valves so that grout fills the void between the casing and the column .
seal casings at the bottom .
pump grout such that a uniform grout head around the column is maintained and no visible water or air is ejected from the top of the grout .
cover grout at the casing top with mortar .
slope mortar to drain .
remove accessories from casings no sooner than num hours after placing grout .
voids must be filled with mortar and finished flush with the exterior casing surface .
numd payment not used num composite columns casings reserved num prestressing steel girders reserved num bridge joint restrainers numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing bridge joint restrainers .
bridge joint restrainers must comply with the specifications for miscellaneous bridge metal in section num .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals numanuma general reserved numanumb cabletype restrainers submit num certified copies of mill test reports for each manufactured length of cable .
submit num certified copies of the mill test and heat treating reports for each heat of bars used for cable yield indicators .
submit at the manufacturers plant section num existing structures num num .
num cabletype restrainer test sample for each num restrainers or fraction thereof produced .
the sample restrainer must num consist of a cable fitted with a swaged fitting and right hand thread stud at both ends num be num feet in total length num .
num turnbuckle fitted with an numinch stud at each end for each num turnbuckles or fraction thereof .
num .
greater of num percent or num of the cable yield indicators produced from each mill heat .
num .
num disc springs of each size produced from each mill heat .
items to be submitted at the manufacturers plant must be submitted with all manufacturers plantapplied coatings .
numanumc pipetype restrainers submit shop drawings showing the method of grouting pipetype restrainers .
numanum quality assurance bridge joint restrainer materials are inspected at the fabrication site .
notify the engineer num .
when materials have been delivered to the fabrication site num .
at least num days before starting fabrication numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum cable type restrainers numbnuma general cabletype restrainers consist of cables swaged fittings studs nuts cable yield indicators disc springs and if shown turnbuckles .
cables must be galvanized numinch preformed num by num wire strand core or independent wire rope core complying with federal specification rrwnum right regular lay manufactured of improved plow steel with a minimum breaking strength of num tons .
each swaged fitting must num .
be machined from hotrolled steel bars complying with aisi cnum num .
be annealed suitable for cold swaging num .
have a hole drilled through the head to accommodate the locking pin num .
have the manufacturers identifying mark stamped on the body the locking pin must be a numinchdiameter zincplated steel spring pin .
the pin must keep the stud in proper position .
before galvanizing mill a numinch slot for the locking pin in the stud end .
each stud must comply with astm anum after galvanizing .
nuts must comply with astm anum including appendix xnum except lubrication is not required .
each cable yield indicator must num .
be machined from hotrolled steel bars complying with aisi cnum num .
be annealed suitable for cold swaging num .
have the heat number and manufacturers identifying mark stamped on the end surface disc springs must be made from steel complying with astm anumanumm grade num .
turnbuckles must be steel pipe type .
pulls for turnbuckles must consist of a swaged fitting and stud assembly .
section num existing structures num steel parts must comply with astm anumanumm or anum grade num aisi num and must not be rimmed or capped steel .
pipe sleeves must be commercialquality welded steel pipe .
concrete for filling cable drum units must either num comply with the specifications for minor concrete or num be a concrete mix with a numinch maximum combined aggregate grading and at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
elastomeric bearing pads must comply with section num except pads may consist of only elastomer and laminated reinforcement is not required .
pvc must be commercial quality .
bond breaker on pvc pipe must be a mortartight wrapping of plastic or rubber sheet at least num inch thick .
expanded polystyrene and hardboard must comply with section numbnum .
neoprene sheets must comply with the specifications for neoprene in section num .
the sheets must be smooth free from pinholes and surface blemishes and show no evidence of delamination .
closedcell expanded neoprene material must be commercial quality and comply with the stiffness requirements in astm dnum for class sc grade scenum material or firmer .
numbnumb corrosion protection reserved numbnumc fabrication numbnumci general you are responsible for determining the required lengths of cabletype restrainers .
each swaged fitting turnbuckle stud and nut assembly must develop the specified breaking strength of the cable .
machine the wall of the reduced section of the cable yield indicator such that the indicator yields at a load of from num to num pounds when tested in compression along the major axis at a test speed of at most num inchminute .
clean and paint disc springs the described color using a paint recommended by the manufacturer of the disc springs .
disc springs do not need to be galvanized .
the minimum size of fillet welds must comply with aws dnum except as follows minimum fillet weld sizes base metal thickness of thicker part joined t inches minimum size of fillet weld inches num t num num num t num num num t num num num t num you may drill holes in steel parts after galvanizing if you repair the holes as specified for repairing damaged galvanized surfaces in section numb .
the finish coat must match color no .
num of fedstdnum .
securely wrap each free end of restrainerunit cables to prevent separation .
ship cabletype restrainers as complete units .
numbnumcii applying corrosion protection reserved section num existing structures num numbnum bar type restrainers bartype restrainers consist of hs bars bearing plates couplers anchorage devices and incidentals .
you must determine the required length of each bartype restrainer .
bartype restrainers must comply with the specifications for bar prestressing steel in section num .
each anchorage device and coupler must develop the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the steel bar and include locking devices to prevent turning or loosening .
bearing plates must comply with astm anumanumm .
elastomeric bearing pads must comply with section num and must be bonded to bearing plates with adhesive complying with federal specification mmmanum .
ship each bartype restrainer as a complete unit including anchorage device and coupler .
numbnum pipe type restrainers pipetype restrainers consist of double extrastrong steel pipe and associated hardware .
double extrastrong pipe for pipetype restrainers must comply with astm anumanumm grade b. grout for bonding the pipe to the existing concrete must comply with section numbnum .
numc construction numcnum general place new concrete adjacent to restrainers before installing them .
where removing and replacing restrainers remove at most num percent of the restrainers at any joint and replace them with an equal proportion of new restrainers before subsequent removal activities .
perform all removal and replacement symmetrically about the centerline of the existing bridge .
if paint removal or welding at connections to existing steel is not described at restrainer locations wash loose dirt and dust from existing contact surfaces of hs bolted connections without disturbing the existing paint .
clean and paint existing contact surfaces of hs bolted connections that contain rust loose paint or other foreign substances other than dirt and dust .
cleaning and painting existing contact surfaces is change order work .
repair painted areas of existing structural steel damaged num by your operations or num from drilling holes through existing steel members .
repairing painted areas must comply with the specifications for repairing damaged galvanized surfaces in section numb .
numcnum cable type restrainers notify the engineer at least num days before tightening and setting cabletype restrainer units .
numcnum bar type restrainers clean and paint new metal surfaces of bartype restrainer units after fabrication as specified for new structural steel in section num except num .
sspcqp num sspcqp num and aiscnumsspcqpnum certifications are not required num .
blastcleaned surfaces require only a single undercoat of inorganic zinc primer numcnum pipe type restrainers bond pipetype restrainers to existing concrete by completely filling the void between the pipe and the cored hole with grout within the limits shown .
provide filler material and seals along the sides of the pipe to prevent grout from entering the bridge hinge joints .
the filler material and seals must not restrict joint movement .
numd payment the payment quantity for miscellaneous metal restrainer does not include the weight of nonmetallic materials used in constructing the restrainers .
section num existing structures num num reserved num abandoning structures num general numa general section num includes specifications for abandoning structures .
numb materials not used numc construction not used numd payment not used num abandoning pedestrian undercrossings reserved num reserved num reserved num division vii drainage facilities num general num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing drainage facilities .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num culvert and drainage pipe joints num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing joint systems and couplers for culverts and drainage pipes .
joint systems and couplers for culverts and drainage pipes are classified as standard positive or downdrain .
numb definitions shear strength required joint shear strength expressed as a percentage of the calculated pipe shear strength at a transverse section remote from the joint .
moment strength moment strength required of the joint expressed as a percentage of the calculated moment capacity of the pipe on a transverse section remote from the joint .
tensile strength resistance to the longitudinal force that tends to separate adjacent pipe sections .
integral joint overlap projection of num pipe barrel into another pipe barrel .
sleeve joint overlap minimum sleeve width required to engage abutted pipe barrels .
watertightness ability of a joint to hold water under pressure without leaking .
joint connection point for num or more pipe sections .
numc submittals for watertight joints submit your analysis or test results performed on representative joints proposed for installation .
submit a certificate of compliance for each classification of joint systems and couplers .
where field leakage testing is shown for pipe systems submit num .
proposed field leakage test procedure for each portion of each pipe system at least num days before you start testing .
the submittal for each proposed field leakage test procedure must include num type of test exfiltration lowpressure air negative air pressure or other authorized method num .
specific joints or pipe sections to be tested num .
maximum and minimum pressures or hydrostatic head to be applied num .
duration of tests from location to location num .
date and time of each test num .
list of test equipment to be used num .
date of last calibration if applicable num .
leakage calculations for the exfiltration and infiltration tests section num general num num .
repair procedure for joints or pipe sections that fail the field leakage test numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control numdnuma watertightness test perform watertightness tests of the assembled joints .
the assembled joints must pass the tests without joint leakage .
the watertightness test must consist of testing the hydrostatic pressure on a joint by connecting num pipe sections under the manufacturers instructions .
provide suitable bulkheads within the pipe adjacent to and on either side of the joint or at the outer ends of the joined pipe sections .
do not place mortar or concrete coating filling or packing in addition to that normally required for the joint before conducting the watertightness test .
after the pipe sections are fitted together with the gasket or gaskets in place subject the assembly to a numfoot water pressure head above the pipe crown for num minutes .
moisture or beads of water appearing on the surface of the joint are not considered leakage .
perform the test on individual joints at the manufacturers plant .
test joint watertightness on pipe sections in straight alignment and on pipe sections deflected from straight alignment .
when you test joints on pipe sections not in straight alignment position the pipe sections to create a gap on one side of the outside pipe perimeter that is num inch wider than the gap for the pipe sections in straight alignment .
if you use coupling bands to test the pipe sections not in straight alignment and the maximum gap on one side of the outside pipe perimeter is less than num inch wider than that for the pipe sections in straight alignment position the coupling band and the pipe sections to provide the maximum gap .
numdnumb performance specifications for joint systems and couplers under section numdnumb determine the values for joint properties by mathematical analysis or an authorized test .
joint components subject to bending forces must not be stressed beyond the minimum specified yield strength of the material as determined by using the plastic section modulus .
joint systems or couplers must num .
perform their intended function num .
possess durability equivalent to that of the pipe num .
comply with the quality characteristics shown in the following table section num general num joint classification requirements requirement quality characteristic standard positivea downdrainb shear strength min num num num moment strength min num num num tensile strength num diac min lb num num num num diac min lb num num num joint overlapd integral num and smaller diae min in num num num diae min in num num num and larger diae min in num num sleeve width min in num num num watertightness where described where described required apositive joints must comply with either num shear strength moment strength and joint overlapsleeve properties or num shear strength and joint overlapintegral characteristics .
bjoints for downdrains have at least the specified values when tested with joints sealed to comply with the watertightness requirement .
climits for corrugated metal pipe arch depend upon the equivalent diameter of circular pipe under aashto m num for corrugated steel pipe and aashto m num for corrugated aluminum pipe .
djoints designed to comply with required values by means other than joint overlap as shown in the table may be used if authorized .
einside diameter of circular pipes or inside horizontal dimension of oval or arch pipes .
numdnum field leakage testing numdnuma general perform field leakage testing on culverts and drainage structures wherever field leakage testing is shown .
field leakage testing includes num .
cleaning and presoaking pipes num .
installing and removing bulkheads or plugs necessary to perform tests num .
removing and disposing of waste materials num .
retesting num .
repairing num .
changing the drainage system to comply with specifications for field leakage testing for pipe systems less than num feet in length test all joints for leakage .
for pipe systems num feet or greater in length test each pipe system for leakage at locations selected by the engineer at a rate of num .
num joints per num pipe joints for pipe systems less than num mile in length num .
num joints per num pipe joints for pipe systems from num mile to num miles in length num .
num joints per num pipe joints for pipe systems more than num miles in length for every selected joint or section that fails leakage requirements the engineer may select up to num more joint locations or sections between joints for testing .
clean the pipe and remove debris and sediment before you start testing .
section num general num clean and test each pipe system and appurtenances by using the exfiltration infiltration lowpressure air or negative air pressure method except the engineer must approve the use of the infiltration test if the groundwater table is low .
you may test installed pipe joints using air or water under low pressure .
field leakage testing is conducted after backfilling .
do not use your test equipment until it is authorized .
the engineer may require a calibration test of gauges or other instrumentation .
use only num leak test method on a contiguous pipe system unless the pipe type or diameter changes in the same run .
complete the cleaning and testing of each pipe system between inlets or ends within num days after backfilling for storm drain lines and structures .
perform each test in the presence of the engineer .
prevent joints from separating during a test .
repair any damage resulting from the field leakage test .
take corrective action and retest the line if the leakage exceeds the allowable quantity .
determine the leak source and repair or replace the defective pipe whenever an installed pipe system fails to comply with the requirements under the test method used .
the engineer does not accept a pipe installation if it fails to pass the field leakage test .
stop all obvious leaks even if the leakage is below the allowable quantity .
numdnumb exfiltration and infiltration testing exfiltration and infiltration tests must comply with astm cnum except num .
you may fill the pipe with clear water to allow normal absorption into the pipe wall before performing the exfiltration leakage test .
start the leakage test within num hours after filling the pipe and complete the field leakage test within num hours thereafter .
the test period must be at least num hour in duration .
for plastic and metal pipe the absorption period is not required .
num .
leakage must not be more than num gallons per inch of nominal pipe diameter per mile of pipe per day with a minimum test pressure of num feet of water column above the pipe crown at the upper end of the pipe or above the active groundwater table whichever is higher .
limit the length of pipe you test such that the pressure on the invert of the lower end of the section does not exceed num feet of water column .
increase the allowable leakage by num percent for each increase in pressure of num feet above the basic numfoot water column measured above the crown or at the lower end of the section .
num .
whenever a suitable head of groundwater exists above the pipe crown and if the pipe is large enough to work inside the engineer may accept the installed pipe on the basis of visible leakage repair during the infiltration leakage test .
num .
take into account all lateral or side storm drains included in the test section in computing the allowable leakage .
make an allowance of num gallons per hour per foot of head above the invert for each junction structure or drainage inlet included in the test section .
storm drains side storm drains and fittings must be open clean and free draining upon final completion of the work .
numdnumc lowpressure air test you may use the lowpressure air test instead of the exfiltration test or the infiltration test for pipes num inches in nominal diameter or less .
you may prewet the pipes .
test pipes from inlet to inlet or shorter lengths .
do not use the lowpressure air test for drainage pipes over num inches in nominal diameter regardless of the material type .
if you use a lowpressure air test perform the test immediately following pipe cleaning .
brace plugs and bulkheads to prevent release during the lowpressure air test .
locate gauges air piping manifolds and valves above the ground .
do not allow anyone to enter a manhole or inlet of a plugged pipe when it is under pressure .
equip the air testing apparatus with a pressure release device such as a rupture disk or a pressure relief valve designed to relieve pressure in the pipe at num psi when under test .
section num general num start the test after the pressure is stabilized at or above an internal pressure of num psi greater than the average back pressure of the groundwater that could submerge the pipe .
start recording the time when the internal pressure drops to num psi .
the tested portion of the pipe passes the field leakage test when the pressure drop is less than num psi for the time period calculated for the size and length of the pipe to be tested as shown in the following table minimum test time for pressure drop nominal pipe diameter inches time for pressure drop minutesnum feet num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numdnumd other allowable tests if authorized you may test num .
pipes over num inches in nominal diameter num joint at a time under astm cnum instead of the exfiltration test specified in section numdnumb .
num .
plastic pipe num inches or less in nominal diameter with the lowpressure air test specified in astm fnum .
num .
pipes num inches or less in nominal diameter with the negative num psi vacuum air pressure test specified in astm cnum instead of the exfiltration test or lowpressure air test specified in section numdnumb and numdnumc .
the minimum test times for pressure drop for pipes num .
num inches in nominal diameter and smaller must be the same as the lowpressure air test specified in section numdnumc num .
num inches in nominal diameter must be num minutes per num feet num .
num inches in nominal diameter must be num minutes per num feet numdnume joints or pipe section not passing leakage testing identify joints or pipe sections that exceed the maximum allowable leakage after you complete field leakage testing .
repair and retest the failed joints or pipe sections until they comply with the test requirements .
repair and retest the failed joints or pipe sections as specified in the repair procedures submitted under section numc .
if the same joint fails the leakage test a second time remove and replace the pipe sections on either side of the joint with new pipes .
replace any pipe section that fails .
retest the replaced pipe section for leaks .
numdnumf reserved num materials resilient joint material must be a neoprene expanded rubber or sheet rubber gasket o ring rubber gasket butyl rubber base joint sealant or other authorized resilient material .
all joints including any connection must be capable of transferring the required shear across the joint .
watertightness must be attained by use of an authorized durable highquality resilient joint material designed to perform the intended function .
num construction not used section num general num num payment the payment quantity for field leakage testing num .
is the length of the pipe that has passed field leakage tests num .
is measured num .
along the invert of the pipe num .
to the inside face of drainage inlets or similar structures that are within the length of the tested pipe num .
includes the length through elbows tees and other fittings that have passed field leakage tests num alternative culverts num general section num includes specifications for constructing alternative culverts .
choose from the types of alternative culverts shown .
reinforced concrete pipe must comply with section num .
corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches must comply with section num .
corrugated aluminum pipe and pipe arches must comply with section num .
hdpe pipe must comply with section num .
pvc pipe must comply with section num .
structural steel plate pipe arches and pipe arches must comply with section num .
structural aluminum plate pipe arches and pipe arches must comply with section num .
reinforced concrete box culverts must comply with section num .
alternative culverts include concrete collars and concrete tees and reinforcement for connecting new pipe to existing or new facilities .
num materials concrete for the collars and tees must be minor concrete .
reinforcement for the concrete collars or tee connections must comply with section num .
num construction not used num payment not used num alternative slotted pipe num general section num includes specifications for installing alternative slotted pipe .
choose from the types of alternative slotted pipe shown .
do not mix different types of slotted pipe in the same installation .
slotted plastic pipe must comply with section num .
slotted corrugated steel pipe must comply with the specifications for slotted corrugated steel pipe in section num .
num materials not used num construction not used section num general num num payment not used num concrete backfill for pipe trenches num general numa summary section num includes specifications for placing concrete backfill in pipe trenches .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals if rsc is used for concrete backfill submit the concrete mix design and test data from an authorized laboratory at least num days before excavating the pipe trench .
the laboratory must specify the cure time required for the concrete mix to attain a num psi compressive strength when tested under california test num .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials concrete backfill must comply with the specifications for minor concrete except the concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
you may use rsc for concrete backfill except num .
section num does not apply num .
rsc must comply with minor concrete sections numc numd numb numc numd and nume num construction for installation of plastic pipe where saturated clay peat or other unsuitable material is encountered immediately adjacent to the pipe trench the material must be removed to a distance at least equal to num of the pipe diameter but not less than num inches on each side of the pipe .
place concrete backfill in the trench against undisturbed material at the sides and bottom of the trench in a way that prevents num floating or shifting of the pipe and num voids or segregation of the concrete .
immediately remove foreign material that falls into the trench before or during placement of the concrete .
construct and compact earth plugs at the ends of the planned concrete backfill to contain the concrete within the trench where necessary .
wherever minor concrete is used do not place materials on top of the concrete backfill within num hours of placing the concrete backfill .
wherever rsc is used do not place materials on top of the concrete backfill before the required cure time to attain num psi has elapsed .
consolidate concrete backfill using highfrequency internal vibrators .
if hma is to be placed directly on the concrete backfill broom the surface with a heavy broom to produce a uniform rough surface .
num payment the payment quantity for concrete backfill pipe trench is the volume determined from the dimensions shown and the length of pipe if the limits of concrete backfill are shown .
if the limits of concrete backfill are not shown the payment quantity for concrete backfill pipe trench is the volume determined as follows section num general num num .
horizontal limits are determined from vertical planes num inches outside of each side of the pipe for a diameter or span of less than num inches and num inches outside of each side of the pipe for a diameter or span of num inches or greater .
num .
upper limit is determined from a horizontal plane num inches above the top of the pipe .
num .
lower limit is determined from a horizontal plane at the bottom of the pipe .
num .
if alternative pipe is shown the payment quantity for concrete backfill pipe trench is determined from the required trench width for the alternative pipe with the smallest outside diameter and the length of the pipe .
num .
volume occupied by the pipe is not included in the payment quantity .
concrete backfill placed outside of these limits is not included in the payment .
num temporary culverts num general section num includes specifications for constructing temporary culverts .
temporary culverts include pipe bends wyes tees and other branches .
excavation backfill and shaped bedding must comply with section num .
num materials you may install a removed undamaged temporary culvert in the permanent work if it complies with the specifications for the permanent culvert and it is new when installed as a temporary culvert on the project .
num construction install a size and type of temporary culvert capable of sustaining the intended load and discharging a quantity of water equivalent to the type and size of culvert shown .
obtain authorization for the strength and capacity of the culvert before its installation .
excavate and backfill the trench for a temporary culvert in a way that provides a firm nonsettling foundation for the roadbed to be constructed over the culvert .
num payment the payment quantity for temporary culvert num .
is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line .
num .
includes the length of pipe reducers bends wyes tees and other branches to the point of intersection .
the length of pipe reducer is included in the length of the larger diameter pipe connected to the reducer .
num .
is the length of pipe necessary to be placed before cutting measured in numfoot increments if the pipe is cut to fit a structure of slope .
num temporary slotted pipe reserved num reserved num reserved num num plastic pipe num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for fabricating and installing plastic pipe .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for plastic pipe including the average pipe stiffness resin material cell classification and date of manufacture .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num plastic pipe num general numa summary section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing plastic pipe .
installing plastic pipe includes excavation backfill connection of new pipe to new or existing facilities reinforcement concrete collars or tees and other connecting devices .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals for corrugated polyethylene pipe submit the manufacturers copy of plant audits and test results from the national transportation product evaluation program for the current cycle of testing for each pipe diameter furnished .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general plastic pipe must be type c or type s corrugated polyethylene pipe or corrugated pvc pipe with smooth interior .
the residue from the ignition of hdpe and pvc compounds must not exceed num percent as determined under astm dnum except the muffle furnace temperature must be num num degrees f. pipes and fittings must be homogenous throughout and uniform in color opacity density and other properties .
the inside and outside surfaces must be semimatte or glossy in appearance and free of chalky sticky or tacky material .
the pipe walls must be free of cracks holes blisters voids foreign inclusions or other defects affecting the pipe wall integrity or visible to the naked eye .
do not use pipes or fittings with abrasions or scratches deeper than num percent of the wall thickness .
the joint surfaces where section num plastic pipe num the gaskets bear must be smooth and free of imperfections ridges fractures or cracks that could adversely affect the joint seal .
store pipes in unit packages and protect the bell end of the pipes from damage .
support unit packages with racks or dunnage to prevent damage and bending .
if unit packages are stacked do not allow the weight of the upper units to cause deformation to the pipes in the lower units .
do not store pipes adjacent to heat sources .
do not allow pipes to overhang vehicles or storage areas unsupported by more than num feet .
cover pipes to provide temporary sun block protection .
provide adequate air circulation around the covered pipes to reduce excessive heat accumulation .
protect gaskets from exposure to weather heat ozone oil grease and sunlight for any time period exceeding num hours .
do not store gaskets near electrical or exhaust heat sources .
the department rejects pipes with cracked or split gaskets .
protect pipes and fittings from damage when handling and installing .
numb backfill structure backfill material for plastic pipe must comply with section num except the gradation of structure backfill must comply with the following table gradation of structure backfill for plastic pipe sieve size percentage passing num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num controlled lowstrength material and slurry cement backfill must comply with section num .
numc corrugated polyethylene pipe corrugated polyethylene pipe must be num inches or less in nominal diameter .
type c and type s corrugated polyethylene pipe must be manufactured from hdpe virgin compounds and comply with aashto m num .
hdpe compounds used in the manufacture of corrugated polyethylene pipe and fittings must comply with aashto m num except the mix must contain from num to num percent welldispersed carbon black .
the corrugated polyethylene pipe manufacturer must num .
participate in the national transportation product evaluation program for each plant supplying corrugated polyethylene pipe and fittings for the project num .
conduct and maintain a quality control program under national transportation product evaluation program numd corrugated pvc pipe with smooth interior corrugated pvc pipe must have smooth interior and be manufactured as a single extrusion .
the corrugated exterior profile must be annular and seamless .
the pipe dimensions wall thickness socket sizes and fitting tolerances must comply with astm fnum .
the minimum stiffness of corrugated pvc pipe must be num psi when tested under astm dnum .
corrugated pvc pipe and fittings must be manufactured from pvc virgin compounds except clean reworked recycled pvc materials generated from the manufacturers pipe or fitting fabrication may be reused .
corrugated pvc pipe must comply with astm fnum for cell classification num under astm dnum .
fillers that lower the tensile strength of the compound or change the minimum cell classification are not section num plastic pipe num allowed .
pvc compounds must contain at least num percent by weight rutile titanium dioxide or the quantity recommended by the pipe manufacturer .
the chemical resistance of corrugated pvc pipe and fittings must comply with astm dnum for cell classification snum .
the manufacturers code must include the day month year shift and plant of manufacture .
do not expose pipes to direct sunlight for more than num days .
nume joints plastic pipe joints must comply with section numdnumb for standard or positive joints .
where sleeve joint connections are used the sleeve width must be at least num inches and engage at least num corrugations of each pipe being joined .
joints for pipes shown as watertight must be watertight under pressure and all conditions of expansion contraction and settlement and must comply with section numdnuma for watertightness .
for corrugated polyethylene pipe num .
if watertight joints are shown use type s corrugated polyethylene pipe with gaskets .
if watertight joints are not shown use gasketed joints when specified .
gaskets for type c corrugated polyethylene pipe must be installed on each side of the joint .
gaskets must comply with astm fnum and be factoryinstalled .
num .
corrugated polyethylene pipe joints manufactured to comply with section numdnumb for integral joints must be laid to line and grade with sections closely jointed .
corrugated polyethylene pipe to be joined by sleeve joints must be laid to line and grade with the separate sections not more than num inches apart and then firmly joined together with at least num corrugations from each pipe section engaged in the coupler .
for corrugated pvc pipe with smooth interior num .
elastomeric gaskets must comply with astm fnum for lowhead applications .
use extruded or molded gaskets cured in a way so that any cross section will be dense homogeneous and free of pores blisters pitting or other imperfections .
double gaskets must be singlepiece gaskets that fit into the first num full corrugation valleys on the spigot end .
ship gaskets in containers that will prevent damage from uv exposure and handling .
num .
wyes tees reducers elbows couplings laterals and other fittings must be molded or fabricated under astm fnum for cell classification num or num as specified in astm dnum .
num .
lubricant must comply with the pipe manufacturers instructions .
the lubricant must not have a detrimental effect on gaskets or pipes .
num .
joints must comply with section numdnumb for integral joints except the joint overlap requirements are as shown .
pipe joints must be bell and spigot type with gaskets ready for field assembly .
install joints so that the elastomeric gasket will be compressed radially between the pipe bell and spigot to form a tight seal when assembled .
numfnumh reserved num construction numa general install type c corrugated polyethylene pipe wherever corrugated interior wall type is shown .
install type s corrugated polyethylene pipe or corrugated pvc pipe wherever smooth interior wall type is shown .
you may install corrugated or smooth interior wall pipe if the type of plastic pipe is not shown .
for pvc pipe whenever the atmospheric temperature is forecast to be num degrees f or less demonstrate to the engineer that the bar and block method or any other mechanical assistance method for assembling the pipes will not damage the pipes before proceeding with pipe assembly .
section num plastic pipe num numb earthwork excavation backfill and shaped bedding must comply with section num except num .
where saturated clay peat or other unsuitable material is encountered immediately adjacent to the pipe trench remove the material to a distance at least equal to the pipe diameter on each side of the pipe if compacted backfill is to be placed or a distance at least equal to num the pipe diameter but not less than num inches on each side of the pipe if slurry cement or controlled lowstrength material is to be placed .
num .
backfill corrugated polyethylene pipe greater than num inches in nominal diameter with either controlled lowstrength material under section numg or with slurry cement backfill under section nume .
num .
place controlled lowstrength material or slurry cement backfill used for structure backfill to a level at least num inches above the pipe crown .
lay plastic pipe in a trench excavated to the established lines and grades .
grade and prepare the bottom of the trench as shown throughout the entire length of the pipe .
removing unsuitable material and replacing it with suitable material is change order work .
numc pipe placement provide the necessary facilities for lowering and properly placing pipe sections in the trench .
lay plastic pipe to line and grade with sections closely jointed .
do not let the pipe trench flood before backfilling .
construct concrete collars or tee connections with minor concrete whenever concrete collars or tee connections are required to connect new plastic pipe to existing or new pipe .
reinforcement for concrete collars and tees must comply with section num .
for corrugated pvc pipe with smooth interior num .
install gaskets on pipe spigots after the pipe is placed into the trench and ready for joint connection .
place the gasket on the spigot end under the pipe manufacturers installation instructions .
the leading edge of the gasket must point toward the spigot end whenever a double gasket is used .
both the spigot and bell ends must be free of debris before connection .
apply the pipe manufacturers recommended lubricant to the inside of the bell and over the gasket .
insert the spigot end of the pipe into the bell end until the factory provided insertion line on the spigot end lines up with the bell edge .
num .
whenever the spigot end of a pipe is shortened cut the end square and bevel it to the same angle as provided on the factoryfinished spigot end so that burrs are not visible .
remark the shortened pipe with a new insertion line on the spigot using a factorymarked spigot insertion line as a guide .
num .
cover the ends of installed corrugated pvc pipe that were not backfilled after installation at the end of each day .
num .
pipes must not exhibit deflection in excess of num percent of the original inside diameter at any location after being backfilled to at least num feet above the top of the pipe or to the completed grade whichever is less .
num payment the payment quantity for plastic pipe num .
is the length designated by the engineer num .
is measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line num .
includes the length of pipe elbows wyes tees and other branches to the point of intersection num .
is the length of pipe necessary to be placed before cutting measured in numfoot increments if the pipe is cut to fit a structure or slope num slotted plastic pipe reserved num reserved num num concrete pipe num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing concrete pipe .
excavation backfill and culvert beddings must comply with section num .
num materials not used num construction where pipes are connected to inlet and outlet structures place the ends of the pipes flush or cut them off flush with the structure face .
lay and joint reinforced concrete pipe used for drainage purposes and dry conduits under generally accepted practices suitable for the purpose intended .
connect new reinforced concrete pipe to new or existing drainage facilities as shown .
furnish the necessary facilities for lowering and properly placing pipe sections in the trench .
clean and then seal each joint with the type of sealing material necessary to make a tight joint to prevent leakage and infiltration .
lay pipes to lines and grades with the sections closely jointed .
lay pipes upgrade .
fill any voids occurring in the outer and inner annular sealing material with the same type of sealing material and finish the inside of the joint smooth .
take every precaution to prevent flooding of the pipe trench before backfilling activities start .
num payment the payment quantity for concrete pipe is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line .
the payment quantity includes the length of bends wyes tees and other branches to the point of intersection .
if pipes are cut to fit a structure or a slope the payment quantity is the length of pipe necessary to be placed before cutting measured in numfoot increments .
if you construct cip connection instead of cutting off the pipe to fit the structure the payment quantity is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe to the inside face of the structure .
num reinforced concrete pipe num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing reinforced concrete pipe .
numb definitions modified designs designs that differ from direct designs shown with respect to reinforcement only .
oval shaped pipe pipes having major and minor internal axial dimensions described .
the minor axis length must be num to num percent of the major axis length .
the numst dimension designated represents the rise and the numnd dimension represents the span .
special designs designs that differ from direct designs in any respect from those shown .
numc submittals if you choose to use resilient joint materials submit them for testing and authorization .
for circular reinforced concrete pipe direct design method submit num .
shop drawings .
modified designs and special designs must comply with the departments bridge design specifications .
for modified designs do not change the clear coverage between the surface of section num concrete pipe num the concrete and the outside of the reinforcement or the thickness of the pipe barrel wall shown .
submit num sets of shop drawings for initial review by the office of design and technical services .
submit num sets of shop drawings after the initial review for use during construction and by the office of design and technical services .
shop drawings must include num .
wall thickness num .
type size location and configuration of the reinforcement num .
list of station locations for the pipes including the size wall type and maximum cover height num .
method of excavation bedding and backfill for each location num .
proof of adequacy for modified design and special design proposals .
the engineer will determine the adequacy of modified and special designs based upon compliance with crack requirements and structural design parameters .
the department will not be liable to you for failure to accept any modified design or special design you submit .
num .
a copy of the concrete mix design before using the concrete or revising the mix proportions num .
a certificate of compliance for each pipe shipment .
the certificate must num .
be signed by the manufacturers quality control representative num .
state that all materials and workmanship comply with the specifications and authorized shop drawings for nonreinforced concrete pipe substituted for circular reinforced concrete pipe described or chosen by class submit proof of adequacy for proposed modifications or special designs .
proof must consist of num edge bearing tests either num certified by an authorized laboratory or num the pipe manufacturers tests witnessed by the department .
the tests must demonstrate the adequacy of the proposed design .
a minimum of num proof tests will be required for each size and class you supply .
numd quality assurance numdnum general before hydrostatic testing reinforced concrete pipe must be tested under the numedge bearing method to a maximum dload that is num percent greater than the numinch cracking dload under aashto m num or to the actual dload required to produce a numinchwide crack whichever is less .
numdnum field testing of siphon and pressure pipe perform field leakage tests on siphons and lowhead conduits with internal hydrostatic heads not exceeding num feet .
fill the pipe with water to a hydrostatic head of num feet above the highest point in the line after the pipe has been laid and backfill has been placed and compacted to a minimum of num feet above the pipe .
conduct a hydrostatic test for a period of not less than num hours .
make accurate measurements of the water required to maintain the test pressure during that period .
any leakage developed by the test must not exceed the allowable leakage as computed by the following formula e numhnumld where e allowable leakage in gpm h difference in elevation in feet between the water surface at num feet above the highest point in the line and the invert elevation of the pipe at its lowest point l length of the culvert or drainage pipe in feet d internal diameter of the pipe in inches furnish all water materials and labor for the hydrostatic test .
conduct all hydrostatic tests in the presence of the engineer .
the department does not pay for hydrostatic testing .
stop any leakage in excess of the allowable leakage as authorized .
repeat the hydrostatic test until the total leakage does not exceed the allowable leakage .
stop all obvious leaks whether or not the leakage from the line exceeds the allowable leakage .
you may maintain the pipe line full of water for not more than num hours before you start hydrostatic testing .
section num concrete pipe num numdnum circular reinforced concrete pipe described or chosen by class the basis for acceptance of reinforced concrete pipe over num inches in nominal diameter is determined from results of the numedge bearing test for the load to produce a numinchwide crack .
testing to the ultimate load is not required except as necessary to obtain samples for the absorption test .
pipes num inches in nominal diameter and smaller do not need to be tested to the load to produce a num inchwide crack if the pipe is subjected to a load equivalent to the ultimate test load and complies with section num .
instead of broken pipe pieces obtained as specified above you may furnish numinch diameter cores from pipe sections selected by the engineer for performing the absorption test .
pipe sections that have been tested to the actual numinchwide crack will not be loadtested further and those sections that comply with or exceed the required strength and workmanship standards may be used in the work if authorized .
numdnum circular reinforced concrete pipe direct design method sample and test the concrete compressive strength under aashto m num at least once every production shift but not less than once daily .
the numedge bearing test does not apply to direct design method pipes .
numdnum oval shaped reinforced concrete pipe the basis for acceptance of oval shaped reinforced concrete pipe larger than an equivalent numinch nominaldiameter circular pipe must be determined by the results of the numedge bearing test for the load to produce a numinchwide crack .
testing to the ultimate load will not be required except as necessary to obtain samples for the absorption test .
oval shaped reinforced concrete pipe num inches in nominal diameter and smaller does not need to be tested to the load to produce a numinchwide crack if the pipe is subjected to a load equivalent to the ultimate test load and complies with section num .
instead of broken pipe pieces obtained as specified above you may furnish numinchdiameter cores from pipe sections selected by the engineer for performing the absorption test .
pipe sections that have been tested to the actual numinchwide crack will not be loadtested further and those sections that comply with or exceed the required strength and workmanship standards may be used in the work if authorized .
num materials numa general the cementitious material and aggregate for concrete pipe must comply with section num except num gradation requirements do not apply to the aggregate and num the use of scm must comply with aashto m num .
the concrete for reinforced concrete pipe must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard and have a water to cementitious material ratio that does not exceed num by weight .
you may use scm .
reinforcement must have a minimum cover of num inch except pipes with a nominal diameter of num inches or less must have a minimum cover of num inch .
special reinforced concrete pipe having concrete cover over the steel reinforcement greater than the cover under aashto m num must comply with section num except the crack width produced by the dload test under aashto m num must be determined by the following formula b t numd x num inch t numd c where b width of crack to be produced instead of numinch crack under aashto m num t wall thickness of pipe inches d effective depth of section to be tested feet c concrete cover over steel reinforcement in excess of cover under aashto m num section num concrete pipe num if concrete collars or tee connections are required to connect new concrete pipe to new or existing pipes the concrete collars or tee connections must be constructed of minor concrete .
reinforcement for the concrete collars or tee connections must comply with section num .
numb delivery storage and handling rubber gaskets must be stored at num degrees f or less .
do not expose rubber gaskets to direct sun rays for more than num hours .
sufficiently protect jointing materials from the air and sun to prevent drying or deterioration .
keep liquid types of sealing materials in molds or runners .
numc circular reinforced concrete pipe numcnum general circular reinforced concrete pipe described by class must comply with section numcnum for the class of pipe described .
if the class of pipe is not described and the nominal diameter is less than num inches choose the class of pipe .
the pipe chosen must comply with section numcnum .
pipes must be marked as specified in aashto m num except circular pipe sections with elliptical reinforcing must have the location of the minor axis of the reinforcing indicated by numinchwide waterproof painted stripes on the inside and outside of each pipe at the top and bottom at least num inches long at each pipe section end or you may provide a lift hole or lift holes at the top of each pipe along the minor axis of the reinforcement .
if the class of pipe is not described and the nominal diameter is num inches or greater choose either num .
the class of pipe .
the pipe chosen must comply with section numcnum .
num .
the wall thickness and reinforcement details under section numcnum .
if num lift hole is provided the lift hole must be located at the balance point if num lift holes are provided the lift holes must be spaced equidistant on each side of the balance point .
the lift holes must not interfere with the reinforcement .
after placing the pipe fill the open lift holes with cement mortar or concrete plugs before backfilling .
numcnum circular reinforced concrete pipe described or chosen by class circular reinforced concrete pipe described or chosen by class must comply with aashto m num .
if the class of circular reinforced concrete pipe is not described choose the class of pipe and corresponding method of backfill for the type of installation shown .
if the class of circular reinforced concrete pipe is described choose the method of backfill for the type of installation shown .
the dload to produce a numinchwide crack must be not less than the specified dload .
for pipe classes not specified under aashto m num but within the minimum and maximum size limits under aashto m num determine the wall thickness and steel area by interpolation from data given in the tables for pipes of the next smaller size and pipes of the next larger size .
for pipe classes except class i that are less than the minimum size for a particular class under aashto m num the minimum wall thickness must be not less than num inches and the steel area must be not less than num sq inlf of pipe barrel .
the department will grant the authorization required under aashto m num to extrapolate minimum wall thicknesses and steel areas beyond the limits for wall a or b in table num and for wall b in table num under aashto m num if you submit your pipe designs in advance and the pipes comply with all of the specified tests and performance requirements .
for reinforced concrete pipe sizes num inches in nominal diameter and smaller you may substitute nonreinforced concrete pipe if the nonreinforced concrete pipe complies with the following requirements section num concrete pipe num num .
minimum numedge bearing strength must be the dload to produce the ultimate load for the class of equivalent reinforced concrete pipe under aashto m num .
num .
pipes must comply with aashto m nummm num class num num or num as required to comply with the specified dload requirements .
you may request authorization for modified or special designs under aashto m nummm num .
num .
cementitious material and aggregate for nonreinforced concrete pipe must comply with specifications for cementitious material and aggregate under section num .
numcnum circular reinforced concrete pipe direct design method circular reinforced concrete pipe direct design method must comply with aashto m num .
the wall thickness and reinforcement you choose must comply with the details shown .
use the backfill method shown for the particular pipe design chosen .
the wall thickness of wall x circular reinforced concrete pipe must not vary by more than num inch from the wall thickness shown .
determine the mix proportions for the concrete to be used in direct design method pipes .
concrete must comply with the specifications for concrete designated by compressive strength .
the circumferential reinforcement for circular reinforced concrete pipe must be smooth or deformed with a minimum yield strength of num psi .
longitudinal reinforcement must be welded to circumferential reinforcement at not more than numinch spacing if the reinforcement is smooth or at not more than numinch spacing if the reinforcement is deformed .
splices of circumferential reinforcement must develop a strength at least equal to awr x fy .
where awr required area of reinforcement shown sq in fy specified yield strength of reinforcement psi spacers or stirrups may be welded to the longitudinal reinforcement .
the welding of spacers or stirrups will be allowed on not more than num percent of the circumferential reinforcement at not less than numinch spacing along the pipe length .
the strength of the circumferential reinforcement across the completed welds must be at least equal to num x awr x fy where spacers or stirrups are welded to the circumferential reinforcement in excess of the above requirements or where longitudinals are welded to the circumferential reinforcement .
if you determine that handling and installation stresses require additional reinforcement furnish and place additional reinforcement .
the department does not pay for additional reinforcement required for handling and installation stresses .
markings for circular reinforced concrete pipe direct design method must comply with aashto m num except the pipe class marking is not required .
the markings under aashto m num must be supplemented with the contract number maximum cover height and method of backfill .
numd oval shaped reinforced concrete pipe oval shaped reinforced concrete pipe must comply with aashto m nummm num .
the department will grant the authorization required under aashto m numm num to extrapolate the minimum wall thicknesses and steel areas beyond the limits in table num and table num under aashto m nummm num if you submit your pipe designs in advance and the pipes comply with the specified tests and performance requirements .
special oval shaped reinforced concrete pipe having concrete cover over the steel reinforcement greater than the cover specified under aashto m nummm num must comply with section numc except the crack width produced by the dload test under aashto m nummm num must be determined by the following formula section num concrete pipe num b t numd x num inch t numd c where b width of crack to be produced instead of numinch crack under aashto m num t wall thickness of pipe inches d effective depth of section to be tested feet c concrete cover over steel reinforcement in excess of cover under aashto m nummm num nume reserved numf joints joints for culvert and drainage pipes must be standard joints unless the classification is described .
at your choosing concrete pipe joints must comply with the details shown or section numdnumb .
unless described otherwise sealing materials must be one or more of the following num .
cement mortar composed of num part portland cement and num parts sand by volume and the following num .
well graded sand passing a no .
num sieve .
num .
mix materials to a consistency suitable for the purpose intended .
use the mortar within num minutes after you add the mixing water .
num .
you may use admixtures of hydrated lime fire clay diatomaceous earth or other authorized inert material in the mortar to facilitate workability .
obtain authorization for the quantity of admixture .
num .
rubber gasketed joints complying with astm cnum .
rubber gasketed joints must be num .
flexible and able to withstand expansion contraction and settlement .
num .
the type of rubber gaskets requiring lubrication .
lubricate the rubber gaskets with lubricant recommended and supplied by the pipe manufacturer .
num .
resilient joint materials consisting of polyvinyl chloride fiberglass impregnated with epoxy resin or other suitable resilient materials .
you may use other joint sealant materials that prevent leakage and infiltration if authorized .
joints for siphons and pressure pipes and joints for pipes shown as watertight must be watertight under pressure and all conditions of expansion contraction and settlement and must comply with section num numdnuma for watertightness .
num construction numa general reserved numb earthwork lay the pipe in a trench excavated to the lines and grades established by the engineer .
grade and prepare the bottom of the trench to provide a firm and uniform bearing throughout the entire pipe length .
you may partially or completely backfill culvert pipe trenches while the joint mortar is still plastic .
if the joint mortar sets before you place the backfill do not backfill the pipe trench within num hours after jointing the pipe sections .
numc laying pipe reinforced concrete pipe used for siphons and lowhead conduits with internal hydrostatic heads not exceeding num feet must have watertight joints under pressure and all conditions of expansion contraction and settlement .
place circular pipe with elliptical reinforcement with the minor axis of the reinforcement in the vertical position .
section num concrete pipe num pour or pump liquid materials into the joint space in a continuous operation and agitate until the joint is completely filled .
do not allow free water to come in contact with the pipeline until portland cement sealing materials have set at least num hours .
num payment not used num nonreinforced concrete pipe num general section num includes specifications for constructing nonreinforced concrete pipe .
nonreinforced concrete pipe must comply with the requirements in section num for substitution of nonreinforced concrete pipe for circular reinforced concrete pipe designated or selected by class .
num materials reserved num construction if you substitute nonreinforced concrete pipe for reinforced concrete pipe excavation and backfill for nonreinforced concrete pipe must comply with the details shown for reinforced concrete pipe .
num payment not used num reserved num num corrugated metal pipe num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for constructing corrugated metal pipe and pipe arches .
corrugated metal pipe arches must comply with section nume .
excavation backfill and shaped bedding must comply with section num .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for num .
corrugated steel materials num .
corrugated aluminum materials numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnumquality control numdnuma field testing of corrugated steel pipe siphons perform field leakage tests on corrugated steel pipe siphons .
fill the pipe with water to a hydrostatic head of num feet above the highest point in the line after the pipe has been laid and backfill has been placed and compacted to a minimum of num feet above the pipe .
conduct a hydrostatic test for a period of not less than num hours .
make accurate measurements of the water required to maintain the test pressure during the test period .
any leakage developed by the test must not exceed the allowable leakage as computed by the following formula e numhnumld where e allowable leakage in gpm h difference in elevation in feet between the water surface at num feet above the highest point in the line and the invert elevation of the pipe at its lowest point l length of the culvert or drainage pipe in feet d internal diameter of the pipe in inches furnish all water materials and labor for the hydrostatic test .
conduct all hydrostatic tests in the presence of the engineer .
the department does not pay for hydrostatic testing .
stop any leakage in excess of the allowable leakage as authorized .
repeat the hydrostatic test until the total leakage does not exceed the allowable leakage .
stop all obvious leaks whether or not the leakage from the line exceeds the allowable leakage .
num materials numa general corrugated metal pipe must be corrugated aluminum pipe or corrugated steel pipe as described .
do not mix aluminum and steel materials in any installation except coupling band fastening hardware .
ship handle and lay corrugated metal materials in a way that prevents bruising scaling or breaking of the galvanized surface aluminized surface or protective coating .
if concrete collars or tee connections are required construct the collars or tee connections with minor concrete .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
section num corrugated metal pipe num numb dimensions and thickness dimensions and thicknesses shown are nominal and must comply with aashto m num for corrugated steel pipe and aashto m num for corrugated aluminum pipe .
the nominal sheet thickness for corrugated metal pipe must be equal to or greater than the nominal thickness described .
lapped longitudinal seams of riveted pipe arches must be placed in the top arch and must be staggered so as to alternate on each side of the center of the top arch at least num inches .
numc protective coatings linings and paving where coating lining or paving is shown pipes must be protected with bituminous coating or bituminous lining or have the invert paved with one or more of the following materials num .
bituminous coating num .
polymeric sheet coating num .
bituminous lining num .
bituminous invert paving remove moisture dirt oil unbonded or incompatible paint grease alkalies or other foreign matter from the surface to be protected before application of the coating lining or paving material .
the bituminous coating for bituminous coated pipes must be applied to the inside and outside of pipes to a minimum thickness of num inch under aashto m num type a .
an asphalt mastic coating may be used instead of the bituminous coating on corrugated steel pipe if linings and paving are not required .
the asphalt mastic must be placed on the outside surface of the pipe .
the inside of the pipe does not need to be coated .
asphalt mastic coatings must comply with aashto m num except the asbestos fibers are not required .
the asphalt mastic material must be applied uniformly to the surface with a thickness of at least num inch at any point .
the asphalt mastic coating must be applied at the fabrication plant .
pinholes blisters cracks or lack of bond are cause for rejection .
polymeric sheet coatings must comply with aashto m num .
the polymeric sheet coating must be applied to both sides of the galvanized sheet before corrugating .
the thickness of the coating must be at least num inch .
pinholes blisters cracks or lack of bond are cause for rejection .
a bituminous lining must be applied to the inside of the pipe over the bituminous coating wherever bituminous lining is shown .
for bituminous lined corrugated metal pipe the rivet heads inside the pipe must be located in the valley of the corrugation .
provisions must be made at the ends of the pipes to retain bituminous material during the fabrication process .
both the inside and outside surfaces must be bituminous coated under aashto m num type a .
in addition to this coating the valleys on the inside periphery must be filled by the centrifugal process with the same type of bituminous material to the extent that the thickness on the crests of corrugations is at least num inch .
the lining must be smooth and uniform and its surface must be parallel to a line projected along the crests of the corrugations .
bituminous paving must be applied to the inside bottom portion of the pipe over the bituminous coating under aashto m num type c where bituminous paving is shown .
if protective coatings are applied to pipes clearly identify the thickness of the metal on each section of pipe and fittings on the inner surface with paint or by other authorized means .
repair damaged protective coatings linings and invert paving .
use bituminous material under aashto m num or other authorized materials to repair damaged bituminous coatings .
use asphalt mastic material under aashto m num to repair damaged asphalt mastic coatings .
use tar base material under aashto m num to repair damaged polymeric sheet coatings .
coupling bands and connecting hardware for coated pipes must have a protective coating .
coupling bands to be protected by coatings under aashto m num may be singledipped with the coating thickness requirement waived .
section num corrugated metal pipe num numd coupling bands coupling bands for corrugated metal pipe must comply with either section numd or section num numdnumb .
choose one of the types of corrugated metal pipe coupling bands shown .
the metal bands must be corrugated dimpled or otherwise formed in a way that will effectively engage the corrugations of the pipe ends .
coupling bands for corrugated steel pipe must comply with aashto m num .
coupling bands for corrugated aluminum pipe must comply with aashto m num .
if channel or wing channel coupling bands are used the interior bend radii of the pipe flange and the channel must be at least the thickness of the metal of which they are formed .
joints for siphons must consist of connections made with coupling bands shown for positive joints .
do not use universal coupling bands .
joints for siphons and joints for pipes shown as watertight must be watertight under pressure and all conditions of expansion contraction and settlement and must comply with section numdnuma for watertightness .
nume corrugated steel pipe numenum general corrugated steel materials must comply with aashto m num and be fabricated from either zinccoated steel sheet or aluminumcoated steel sheet as shown .
zinccoated steel sheet must comply with aashto m num except the coating weight is determined under astm anumanumm and anumanumm .
aluminumcoated steel sheet must comply with aashto m num .
numenum fabrication numenuma general corrugated steel pipe must be fabricated by one of the following methods num .
riveting num .
helically corrugated steel pipe with a continuous helical lock seam num .
continuous helical welded seam paralleling the corrugation pipes fabricated from numinchthick sheets must be helically corrugated steel pipe with a continuous helical lock seam or a continuous helical welded seam .
annular corrugated steel pipe must be fabricated from sheets having either numbynuminch or numbynum inch corrugations .
numenumb fabrication by riveting pipes fabricated by riveting must comply with aashto m num .
numenumc fabrication by continuous helical seam numenumci general helically corrugated steel pipe must comply with aashto m num .
helically corrugated pipe must be fabricated using corrugation profiles and continuous helical seam pitches as shown in the following table section num corrugated metal pipe num corrugation profile diameter inches nominal pitcha inches max .
pitcha inches nominal depth inches seam pitcha inches num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num apitch must be measured at right angles to the direction of corrugations .
a tolerance of num inch on seam pitch is allowable .
numenumcii fabrication by continuous lock seam you may use pipes fabricated with a continuous helical lock seam extending from end to end of each length for full circle and equivalent pipe arch sizes .
fabrication must comply with aashto m num .
numenumciii fabrication by continuous welded seam you may use pipes fabricated with a continuous helical welded seam parallel to the corrugations for full circle and equivalent pipe arch sizes .
control the welding process so that the combined width of the weld and adjacent spelter or aluminum coating burned by the welding does not exceed num times the metal thickness .
if the spelter is damaged by the welding outside the specified area repair the weld and damaged spelter adjacent to the weld under section numb if the metalizing is applied immediately in a continuous operation following the resistance welding apply a coating of aluminum to the welded area of aluminumcoated pipe using the metalizing process under aws cnum except surface cleaning will not be required .
numenum end finish helically corrugated steel pipe ends may be rerolled to form annular corrugations extending at least num corrugations from the pipe end or to form an upturned flange with or without reformed annular corrugations .
the diameter of the reformed ends must not exceed that of the pipe barrel by more than the depth of the corrugation .
all types of pipe ends whether rerolled or not must be matched in a joint so that the maximum difference in diameter of the abutting pipe ends is num inch .
if the ends of helically corrugated steel lock seam pipes have been rerolled the lock seam in the rerolled end must not contain visible cracks in the base metal and the tensile strength of the lock seam must be at least num percent of the tensile strength required for the remainder of the pipe .
this requirement does not apply to the lock seam located within a flange formed in rerolling .
the rerolled ends of the pipe and flanges must exhibit good workmanship and must not have open lock seams .
if corrugated steel pipe is rerolled for coupling with a wing channel coupling or a channel coupling band the maximum distance from any point on the end of the pipe to the plane normal to pipe axis and passing through the outermost portion of the pipe end must not exceed num the width of the channel minus the thickness of the pipe metal .
the difference between the minimum and maximum flange diameter must not exceed num inch .
fabricate pipes so that they can be joined effectively with the described standard coupling bands .
numenum damaged galvanizing repair damaged galvanized surfaces under section numb .
if you burn the galvanized surfaces by welding thoroughly clean all the surfaces of the welded connections by wire brushing and remove all traces of the welding flux and loose or cracked galvanizing before repair .
numenum damaged aluminum coatings repair damaged aluminum coatings under section numb .
section num corrugated metal pipe num numenum corrugated steel pipe siphons the thickness of siphons must be the described thickness .
if coating is required coated pipes must comply with section numc .
order pipes for siphons in lengths that will keep the number of field connections to a minimum .
if soldering is required the outside seams of pipe fabricated by riveting or continuous helical lock seam must be soldered the solder being sweated into the joints .
if the pipe is fabricated by riveting rivets on the circumferential seams must be spaced at approximately numinch centers with a maximum spacing of num inches .
if the pipe is fabricated by a continuous helical welded seam soldering is not required .
numf corrugated aluminum pipe numfnum general corrugated aluminum materials must comply with aashto m num and aashto m num .
numfnum fabrication numfnuma general corrugated aluminum pipe must be fabricated by riveting or with a continuous helical lock seam paralleling the corrugations .
annular or helically corrugated pipe must be fabricated from sheets having num numbynuminch or numbynuminch corrugations .
numfnumb fabrication by riveting pipes fabricated by riveting must be lap joint construction with annular corrugations .
fabrication must comply with aashto m num .
numfnumc fabrication by continuous helical lock seam for full circle and equivalent pipe arch sizes you may install pipes fabricated with a continuous helical lock seam extending from endtoend of each length .
fabrication must comply with aashto m num .
numfnum end finish helically corrugated aluminum pipe ends may be rerolled to form annular corrugations extending at least num corrugations from the pipe end .
the diameter of the reformed ends must not exceed the diameter of the pipe barrel by more than the corrugation depth .
all types of pipe ends whether rerolled or not must be matched in a joint so that the maximum difference in diameter of the abutting pipe ends is num inch .
if the ends of helically corrugated aluminum lock seam pipes have been rerolled the lock seam in the rerolled end must not contain visible cracks in the base metal and the tensile strength of the lock seam must be at least num percent of the tensile strength required for the remainder of the pipe .
the rerolled pipe ends must exhibit good workmanship and must not have open lock seams .
pipes must be fabricated so that they can be joined effectively with the described standard coupling bands .
num construction excavate a pipe trench to the lines and grades established by the engineer .
grade and prepare the trench bottom to provide a firm and uniform bearing throughout the entire pipe length .
lay annular corrugated pipe in a trench with num .
outside laps of circumferential joints upgrade num .
longitudinal laps positioned other than in the invert num .
separate sections spaced not more than num inches apart and then firmly joined together lay helical corrugated pipe in a trench with separate sections spaced not more than num inches apart and then firmly jointed together with corrugations in alignment .
corrugations or projections on the coupler must properly engage the corrugations of the pipe section before bolts are tightened .
connect new corrugated metal pipe to new or existing drainage facilities as shown .
section num corrugated metal pipe num wherever pipes are connected to inlet and outlet structures place the ends of the pipes flush or cut them off flush with the structure face .
num payment the payment quantity for corrugated metal pipe is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line .
the payment quantity includes the length of pipe reducers bends wyes tees and other branches to the point of intersection .
pipe reducers are paid for as pipe of the larger diameter connected to the reducer .
if pipes are cut to fit a structure or slope the payment quantity is the length of pipe necessary to be placed before cutting measured in numfoot increments .
num slotted corrugated steel pipe num general section num includes specifications for constructing slotted corrugated steel pipe .
num materials slotted corrugated steel pipe must be grateslot type as shown .
grate assemblies for slotted corrugated steel pipe must comply with section num but may be fabricated from any of the materials under section num for steel bars plates and shapes .
any damage to the galvanized surface of the pipe at the toe of the grate assembly fillet weld connection to the pipe must be repaired under section numb .
where a heel guard is shown the heel guard must be expanded metal and must comply with astm fnum type ii class num and grade b. galvanizing must comply with section numb .
coupling bands for slotted corrugated steel pipe must be galvanized or coated as shown .
joints must be watertight .
if you use a channel coupling band place a numinchthick closedcell sponge neoprene gasket or butyl rubber joint sealant in the channel interior for its full width .
if you use a modified hugger band place a butyl rubber joint sealant between the coupling band and the periphery of the pipe .
the butyl rubber joint sealant material must num .
be an extruded strip or bead compounded from a nondrying nontoxic synthetic resin base with butyl rubber and inorganic extenders and be num percent solid material with no shrinkage num .
be furnished in numbynuminch strips or numinchdiameter beads on numinchwide release paper and wound into rolls num .
have enough adhesion so that the strip or bead will adhere to the galvanized steel and be soft enough to allow cold flow if compressed during connection of the pipe sections num .
not flow or sag at temperatures up to num degrees f or become brittle crack or lose adhesion at num degrees f num .
contain no migrating components that could leach out or produce a chemical reaction with the galvanized steel you may use an alternative joint sealant or sealing method for slotted corrugated steel pipe to provide a watertight joint if authorized .
num construction do not start installation of slotted corrugated steel pipe until after paving of the traffic lanes adjacent to the pipe have been completed at the locations where the pipe is to be placed .
join slotted corrugated steel pipe with coupling bands as shown .
cover pipe slots with a heavy duty tape or other authorized covering during backfilling and paving activities to prevent material from entering the slots .
section num corrugated metal pipe num place cement treated structure backfill for slotted corrugated steel pipe under the details shown and section nume for soil cement beddings .
cover the completed cement treated structure backfill with a curing seal of asphaltic emulsion grade ssnum or cssnum .
do not place loads on the cement treated structure backfill within num hours after placement .
num payment not used num spiral rib pipe num general section num includes specifications for constructing spiral rib pipe .
the specifications for profile and fabrication in section num do not apply to spiral rib pipe .
num materials steel spiral rib pipe must be fabricated by continuous helical lock seam under section numenumcii .
aluminum spiral rib pipe must be fabricated by continuous helical lock seam under section numfnumc .
the fabricated rib configuration for spiral rib pipe must be one of the following num .
three rectangular ribs spaced midway between seams with ribs num inch wide by num inch high at a maximum rib pitch of num inches num .
two rectangular ribs and num halfcircle rib equally spaced between seams with ribs num inch wide by num inch high at a maximum rib pitch of num inches with the halfcircle rib diameter spaced midway between the rectangular ribs num .
for steel spiral rib pipes num rectangular ribs equally spaced between seams with ribs num inch wide by num inch high at a maximum rib pitch of num inches the rib pitch measured at right angles to the direction of the ribs may vary by num inch .
coupling bands for spiral rib pipes must comply with section numd .
you may use the coupling band shown or an authorized coupling band under section numdnumb for use on a pipe corrugation of num by num inch for corrugated metal pipe on spiral rib pipe having numby numinch rerolled annular ends .
num construction not used num payment not used num composite steel spiral rib pipe with smooth interior num general section num includes specifications for constructing composite steel spiral rib pipe with smooth interior .
composite steel spiral rib pipe must have a smooth interior and must comply with the specifications for corrugated metal pipe in section num except profile and fabrication .
num materials the precoated exterior of composite steel spiral rib pipe with polymeric sheet coating must comply with section numc .
the pipe interior must be lined with polyethylene polyolefin plastomer .
the pipe dimensions wall thickness and fitting tolerances must comply with astm anumanumm .
composite steel spiral rib pipe must be fabricated by continuous helical lock seam under section num numenumcii .
three rectangular ribs must be spaced midway between seams with ribs num inch wide by num inch high at a maximum rib pitch of num inches on center .
the rib pitch measured at right angles to the direction of the ribs may vary by num inch .
section num corrugated metal pipe num pipes formed from polymer precoated sheets must comply with astm anumanumm grade num except the sheet side for the pipe interior must have additives that will enhance the bond of the sheet to the extruded polyethylene liner .
before application of protective coatings the galvanized sheet must be cleaned with an alkaline cleaner followed by chrome pretreatment .
steel sheets coated with zinc metallic coating must comply with astm anumanumm .
the polyethylene for filling the ribs and the internal liner must be virgin resin .
the virgin resin quality characteristics must comply with the values in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement melt index min astm dnum inum numgnum min num flow rate ratio astm dnum inuminum density astm dnum num gcc num hardness shore d astm dnum num num ash content astm dnum num joint coupling bands fabricated from the steel sheets used to manufacture pipes must comply with section numc and section numd except steel sheets with polymetric coating on both sides .
coupling bands must be num inches wide for nominal pipe diameters less than num inches .
coupling bands must be num inches wide for nominal pipe diameters num inches and greater .
galvanized nuts bolts and washers must comply with section numb .
expanded rubber gaskets must comply with astm dnum type num class c and grade num .
protect gaskets from excessive exposure to heat direct sunlight ozone oil or grease .
gaskets placed over spiral ribs must have a groove routed to match the ribs depth and width before installation .
do not substitute orings for gaskets .
the gasket adhesive must be num part urethane elastomeric joint sealant under astm cnum type s grade ns class num use nt a and m. use the sealant within num months from the date of manufacture .
store the adhesive at an ambient temperature of num degrees f or below .
do not use any adhesive that has been stored at temperatures exceeding num degrees f. manufactured pipe joints must comply with section numdnumb for sleeve joints .
each standard and random length of pipe must be marked clearly in permanent letters not less than num inch in height at intervals of num feet or less with at least the following num .
manufacturers code and name or trademark num .
astm anumanumm num .
nominal pipe size each coupling band must be marked clearly with at least the following num .
manufacturers code and name or trademark num .
astm anumanumm num .
nominal size the manufacturers code must include the day month year shift and manufacturing plant .
store pipes in unit packages with the pipe ends protected from deformation and damage .
support unit packages with racks or dunnage to prevent damage and bending .
stack unit packages to ensure that the weight of the upper units will not cause deformation to pipes in the lower units .
do not store pipes adjacent to electrical or exhaust heat sources .
do not expose pipes to direct sunlight for periods exceeding num days .
cover pipes with an opaque sheeting material to provide sun protection .
arrange the opaque sheeting material so that it provides adequate air circulation around pipes to reduce excessive heat accumulation .
ship gaskets in containers section num corrugated metal pipe num that will prevent damage from uv exposure and handling .
do not store gaskets near electrical or exhaust heat sources or where they will be exposed to the sunlight for more than num hours .
num construction lay composite steel spiral rib pipe in the same way specified for helical corrugated pipe in section num num except the gap between pipe sections must not be more than num inch .
clean the pipe ends before applying the adhesive and installing the gaskets and the coupling bands .
cover the ends of installed composite steel spiral rib pipe that were not backfilled after installation at the end of each day .
repair damaged polymeric pipe coatings on pipe and pipe fittings .
for polymeric coatings with damaged areas less than num square inches in area repair breaks and scuffs under the manufacturers recommended repair procedures .
do not install a pipe if the individual breaks or total area of the breaks exceeds num square inches in area or if the total area of the breaks exceeds num percent of the total pipe surface area .
the polymer repair material must be one of the following num .
denflex coating dennis chemical company st. louis mo num .
scotchclad num protective coating numm company st. paul mn num .
ranbar trispec tpcnum black synthetic coating p.d .
george company manor pa clean and dry surfaces to be coated .
the repair coating must be at least num inches thick after hardening and must bond securely and permanently to the pipe .
apply num coats if the thickness of the repair coating is not measured .
allow num minutes drying time between the coats .
num payment not used num reserved num num structural plate culverts num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing structural plate culverts .
excavation backfill and shaped bedding must comply with section num .
section num does not apply .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num structural metal plate pipe num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing structural metal plate pipe arches and pipe arches .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit certificates of compliance for structural metal plate pipe arches and pipe arches .
submit a copy of the manufacturers assembly instructions before assembling structural plates .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general structural metal plate pipe arches and pipe arches must be fabricated from structural steel plates or structural aluminum plates .
the type of metal steel or aluminum is described .
structural plates nuts and bolts for structural steel plate pipe arches and pipe arches must comply with aashto m nummm num .
structural plates nuts and bolts for structural aluminum plate pipe arches and pipe arches must comply with aashto m num .
bolts must be zinccoated steel and comply with astm anum .
nuts must be zinc coated steel and comply with astm anum grade c. do not mix aluminum and steel materials in the same installation except steel bolts and nuts on structural aluminum plate pipe .
the thickness of galvanized coating for structural steel plate is determined under astm anumanumm and astm anumanumm .
if welding of steel is required it must comply with aws dnum structural welding code .
weld steel plates except fittings before galvanizing .
if welding of aluminum is required it must comply with aws dnumdnumm structural welding code .
the engineer may perform nondestructive testing of the welds .
corner plates must be at least num inch thick for structural steel plate pipe arches that are num inch thick .
section num structural plate culverts num numb protective coating structural steel plate pipe arches and pipe arches must be protected with bituminous coating where coating is shown .
coating must comply with section numc except polymeric sheet coatings are not allowed and asphalt mastic may be field applied .
if protective coating is applied to plates for structural steel plate pipe arches and pipe arches each plate must have the nominal metal thickness painted on the inner surface of each plate so that the plate thickness can be readily identified .
after installation coat the portion of nuts and bolts used for assembly of coated structural steel plate pipe arches and pipe arches projecting outside the pipe .
the portion of nuts and bolts projecting inside the pipe need not be coated .
if asphalt mastic is used for the protective coating the surface at pipe joints need not be coated before assembly .
joints must be sealed thoroughly after assembly with the asphalt mastic on the outside of the sealed joint .
repair damaged coatings under section numc .
numc identification if plates of two dissimilar thicknesses are involved in one cross section of an installation the installation is described by pipe size and by a symbol designating the number and thickness of plates required .
for example the symbol num designates an installation for one plate length composed of four numinchthick steel plates and one numinchthick steel plate the thicker plates to be centered on the invert .
this designation does not prevent you from using fewer plates if the minimum thickness requirements are complied with .
numd reserved num construction assemble structural plates under the manufacturers instructions .
repair damaged galvanized surfaces under section numb .
you may construct pipes and pipe arches with fewer plates than the number designated if the number of plates around the circumference of structural metal plate pipes and pipe arches are described .
before backfilling tighten plate section bolts within the ranges shown in the following table bolt diameter inch torque ftlb num num num num place struts as shown during construction of pipes arches and pipe arches .
maintain the struts in place until backfill has been placed to the grading plane elevation or num feet over the crown whichever is less .
remove the struts before construction of structures at the ends of pipes arches and pipe arches .
wherever pipes are connected to inlet and outlet structures place the ends of the pipes flush or cut them off flush with the structure face .
each side of an arch must rest on a galvanized metal angle or channel bearing that is securely anchored to the footing and capable of resisting the arch thrust without damage to the angle or channel .
num payment the payment quantity for structural metal plate pipe is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line .
the payment quantity includes the length of bends and elbows .
if the pipe is cut to fit a structure or slope the payment quantity is the length of pipe necessary to be placed before cutting measured in numfoot increments .
section num structural plate culverts num num metal liner plate pipe num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing metal liner plate pipe .
metal liner plate pipe must be constructed from numflange or numflange plates .
pipes must be circular and consist of a series of galvanized corrugated metal liner plates with a minimum width of num inches for numflange plates and num inches for numflange plates .
furnish plates with numinch diameter or larger grouting holes with pipe plugs .
when the plates are installed grouting holes must be spaced so that one line of holes is at the pipe crown and one line of holes is on each side at approximately the midpoint as shown .
the holes in each line must be not more than num feet apart and holes in adjacent lines must be staggered .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for metal liner plate pipe .
submit a copy of the manufacturers instructions before you assemble pipes .
for tension test specimens submit mill test reports as specified for plates for each heat and thickness upon notification .
numd quality assurance prepare and test specimens for tension under astm anumanumm for plates and astm anumanumm for sheets .
num materials numa general the base metal for liner plates must comply with astm anumanumm .
ungalvanized flat sheets and plates must comply with the quality requirements in the following table quality characteristics tensile strength min psi num yield point min psi num elongation in num inches min num galvanize plates under aashto m nummm num after the plates are formed punched and curved .
bolts and nuts for assembling numflange plates must not be less than num inch in nominal diameter .
bolts and nuts for circumferential flange seams must comply with astm anum for grade a chemical and mechanical requirements and grade b dimensions .
bolts and nuts for longitudinal seams must have square heads with a square shoulder to engage the plate .
bolts and nuts for longitudinal plate seams from num to num inch thick must comply with astm anum for grade a chemical and mechanical requirements .
bolts for longitudinal plate seams from num to num inch or thicker must comply with the chemical and mechanical requirements under astm anum .
nuts for use on bolts specified in astm anum must comply with astm anum for grade a chemical and mechanical requirements and grade b dimensions .
bolts and nuts for the assembly of numflange plates must not be less than num inch in nominal diameter for num to num inch thick plates and not less than num inch in nominal diameter for plates of greater thickness .
bolts and nuts must be quickacting coarse thread complying with astm anum .
galvanize bolts and nuts under astm anumanumm .
the moment of inertia based on the average of num ring of plates must not be less than the values shown in the following table section num structural plate culverts num uncoated plate thickness moment of inertia inchesnuminch inch numflange numflange num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num longitudinal seams must have enough bolts to develop the ultimate seam strength shown in the following table uncoated plate thickness strength lbft of length of pipe inch numflange numflange num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num plates must be num .
punched for bolting on both longitudinal and circumferential seams or joints num .
formed to produce squarely formed flanges num .
fabricated so that complete erection is from the inside of the pipe bolt holes in flanges must be spaced so that plates of the same curvature are interchangeable and to allow staggering of the longitudinal seams .
drilling punching or drifting to correct defects in manufacturing is not allowed .
plates with improperly punched holes will be rejected .
circumferential bolt spacing must be approximately num inches centertocenter for numflange plates and must be approximately num inches centertocenter for numflange plates .
numb pressure grouting grout for pressure grouting must consist of a suitable mixture of cementitious material sand and a chloridefree admixture designed to provide a pumpable mix .
the grout must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard and no more water than necessary to provide a pumpable grout .
materials for grout must be commercial quality .
grout must consist of cement and water and may contain an admixture if authorized .
admixtures must comply with the specifications for admixtures in section num except admixtures must not contain chloride ions in excess of num percent by weight and may be dispensed in solid form .
add water to the mixer followed by cement and admixture .
mix the grout with mechanical mixing equipment that produces a uniform and thoroughly mixed grout .
do not exceed num gal of water per num lb of cement .
retempering of grout is not allowed .
section num structural plate culverts num agitate the grout continuously until the grout is pumped .
numc reserved num construction install pipes in existing embankments and natural ground by the tunnel method except you may use open trench methods with shaped bedding near the entrance if authorized .
excavation must not precede plate installation by more than the width of a plate .
do not leave any excavation including the face unsupported except during excavation activities .
voids between the liner plate and the wall of the excavation must be forcegrouted within num hours of excavation .
assemble liner plates under the pipe manufacturers instructions .
handle plates in a way that prevents bruising scaling or breaking of spelter coating .
replace plates damaged during handling or placing and plates with damaged spelter coating except you may repair small areas of spelter coating with minor damage under section numb if authorized .
tighten bolts specified in num .
astm anum to a torque from num to num ftlb num .
astm anum to a torque from num to num ftlb metal liner plate pipe must not vary by more than num foot from the line established by the engineer and by more than num foot from the grade established by the engineer .
grouting equipment must be num .
capable of grouting at a pressure of at least num psi num .
equipped with a pressure gauge having a fullscale reading of not more than num psi force the grout through grouting holes in the plates in such a sequence and with enough pressure to completely fill the voids .
remove the plugs in grouting holes adjacent to the grouting hole being force grouted to allow inspection of the grout filling .
you may use freerunning aggregate forced pneumatically into the voids between the liner plate and the wall of the excavation as temporary support of the excavation .
pressure grouting of aggregate must comply with section numbnumd if the aggregate is pressure grouted within num hours of excavation .
num payment the payment quantity for metal liner plate pipe is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line .
num reserved num num subsurface drains num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for constructing subsurface drains .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for each type of subsurface drain involved .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general reserved numb protective coating if described as coated subsurface drains must be protected with a coating under section numc .
num construction numa general repair damaged coatings under section numc .
numb filter fabric remove loose or extraneous material and sharp objects immediately before placing filter fabric .
the subgrade and trench to receive the filter fabric must comply with the compaction and elevation tolerance specified for the material involved .
handle and place filter fabric under the manufacturers instructions .
align and place filter fabric without wrinkles .
overlap adjacent roll ends of filter fabric at least num inches .
the preceding roll must overlap the following roll in the direction that the permeable material is being spread .
completely replace torn or punctured sections damaged during placement or repair by placing a piece of filter fabric that is large enough to cover the damaged area and comply with the overlap specified .
cover filter fabric with the thickness of overlying material within num hours of placing the fabric .
num payment not used num underdrains num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing underdrains .
excavation and backfill must comply with section num .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for each type of pipe tubing and fitting .
section num subsurface drains num numc quality assurance reserved num materials numa general for alternative pipe underdrain do not mix types of pipe in the same installation .
numb perforated steel pipe perforated steel pipe and coupling bands must comply with aashto m num and aashto m num with the following modifications num .
pipe must comply with any one of the full circle types specified in aashto m num .
num .
pipe perforations must be drilled or punched .
num .
perforations must be located in the inside of crests or in the flat tangent portion of all corrugations but not in both locations in a given length of pipe .
the weight of galvanizing must comply with astm anumanumm and astm anumanumm .
you may substitute sleeve type couplings for the band couplers required under aashto m num .
the couplings must be plastic or galvanized steel suitable for holding the pipe firmly in alignment without the use of sealing compound or gaskets .
the couplings must have mechanical properties that will prevent distortion under normal conditions of use .
numc perforated aluminum pipe aluminum underdrain pipe and fittings must comply with aashto m num and the following modifications num .
pipe must comply with type iii specified in aashto m num .
num .
pipe perforations must be either drilled or punched .
num .
minimum thickness of sheet must be num inch .
you may substitute sleeve type couplings for band couplers required under aashto m num .
the couplings must be plastic or aluminum suitable for holding the pipe firmly in alignment without the use of sealing compound or gaskets .
the couplings must have mechanical properties that will prevent distortion under normal conditions of use .
numd perforated plastic pipe perforated plastic pipe must be smoothwall pvc plastic pipe corrugated pvc plastic pipe with a smooth interior surface or corrugated polyethylene plastic tubing .
smoothwall pvc plastic pipe must comply with aashto m num .
corrugated pvc plastic pipe with a smooth interior surface must comply with material and structural requirements in aashto m num .
pipe must have perforations located in the bottom half of the pipe the perforations must be slots complying with the size and opening area requirements in aashto m num .
inside diameter and diameter tolerances must comply with aashto m num or m num .
corrugated polyethylene plastic tubing must comply with aashto m num or m num .
pvc plastic pipe must be connected with belled ends or with sleevetype or stoptype couplings under aashto m num .
polyethylene tubing must be connected with snapon screwon or wraparound fittings and couplings under aashto m num or aashto m num .
nume underdrain outlets and risers underdrain outlets and risers must be fabricated from the same material as the underdrain pipe or from corrugated metal pipe .
do not mix aluminum and steel in the same installation except for covers and coupling band fastening hardware .
outlet and riser pipe and fittings must not be perforated .
welded steel covers must be galvanized under section numb after fabrication .
welding workmanship and technique must be equal to the best practice in modern commercial shops .
section num subsurface drains num covers must be fitted and bolted onto the riser pipe or elbow .
numf permeable material numfnum general permeable material for use in backfilling trenches under around and over underdrains must consist of hard durable clean sand gravel or crushed stone and must be free from organic material clay balls or other deleterious substances .
permeable material must have a durability index of not less than num .
use class num permeable material for underdrains unless the class or type of permeable material is specified in the special provisions .
at bridge abutments and wingwalls use either class num or class num permeable material .
place filter fabric between class num permeable material and backfill .
no filter fabric is required with class num permeable material .
numfnum class num permeable material alternative gradations within class num permeable material are identified by types .
place one of the types specified for class num permeable material .
the percentage composition by weight of class num permeable material in place must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table class num permeable material gradation requirements sieve size percentage passing type a type b num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num num num numfnum class num permeable material the percentage composition by weight of class num permeable material in place must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table class num permeable material gradation requirements sieve size percentage passing num num num num num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num class num permeable material must have a sand equivalent value of not less than num .
section num subsurface drains num numfnum class num permeable material the percentage composition by weight of class num permeable material in place must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table class num permeable material gradation requirements sieve size percentage passing num num num num num num num num no .
num num no .
num num at least num percent by weight of class num permeable material must be crushed particles as determined by california test num .
numg filter fabric filter fabric for use with underdrains must comply with section numb .
at bridge abutments and wingwalls filter fabric for underdrains must be class a .
numhnumn reserved num construction excavate trenches for underdrains place filter fabric install pipe and backfill trenches with permeable material as shown .
where underdrains are installed in trenches outside the subgrade area backfill the top num inches of the trench with structure backfill complying with section num .
join lengths of perforated steel pipe and perforated aluminum pipe with couplers .
lay perforated pipe with the perforations down .
solvent cementing of joints on perforated plastic pipe is not required .
repair damaged galvanized surfaces under section numb .
underdrain outlets and riser covers must seat uniformly and not be subject to rocking .
place perforated polyethylene tubing to line and grade in a closefitting semicircular bedding groove formed in the bottom of the trench .
at bridge abutments and wingwalls num .
install welded steel covers on underdrains terminating underground .
num .
place permeable material in horizontal layers .
thoroughly consolidate permeable material along with and by the same methods specified for structure backfill in section num .
ponding and jetting of permeable material or structure backfill adjacent to permeable material is not allowed .
num .
you may substitute permeable material for structure backfill material where the required width of backfill material adjacent to the neat lines of the permeable material as shown is approximately num foot or less .
num payment the payment quantity for pipe underdrain is the length measured parallel with the slope line .
the payment quantity includes the length measured along the centerline of elbows outlets and risers and the length of wyes tees and other branches to the point of intersection .
num horizontal drains num general section num includes specifications for constructing horizontal drains .
section num subsurface drains num section num does not apply .
num materials horizontal drains must consist of nominal numinch schedule num pvc plastic pipe complying with astm dnum .
at your option the type grade and design stress designation of the pipe must be num num num num num or num as specified in astm dnum .
the plastic pipe must comply with the national sanitation foundation standard no .
num if the plastic pipe is used to conduct water for human consumption .
slotted pipe must have num rows of slots .
the rows must be in the longitudinal direction of the pipe and the slots must be cut in the circumferential direction of the pipe .
the rows must be centered on num of the numrd points num degrees apart of the pipe circumference .
each row of slots must comply with one of the configurations shown in the following table .
the engineer determines the configuration to be used .
number of slots num per linear foot width of slot inch minimum opening per linear foot square inches num num num num num num num num num slots must be spaced uniformly along the pipe .
the minimum opening is measured on the inner surface of the pipe .
perforated pipe must have num rows of perforations with num row on each side of the pipe and the numrd row on the top .
the perforations must be num inch in diameter spaced at numinch centers with the top perforations staggered in relation to the holes on either side .
fittings for the pvc plastic pipe must be schedule num type ii pvc solvent weld type fittings and must comply with astm dnum .
you may use machined male and female ends instead of couplings .
unslotted or unperforated pvc plastic pipe approximately num to num feet in length must be provided at the outlet of the drain .
the engineer determines the exact length of pipe .
num construction the locations shown for horizontal drains are approximate .
the engineer determines the exact locations and placement sequence .
any ordered exploratory work is change order work .
complete the installation of horizontal drains at a bench in an excavation slope before excavating more than num feet below the bench .
furnish water required for drilling .
drill horizontal holes to the designated lines and grades with rotary equipment capable of drilling num to num inchdiameter holes num feet long through soil and rock formations .
install plastic pipe with pipe slots or perforations on top by pushing it into the hole or inserting it inside the drill rod then retracting the drill rod so that the drilled hole is cased for the full depth .
tightly plug the entrance end with a rounded or pointed extension that does not extend more than num foot beyond the end of the pipe .
during casing activity cement plastic pipe together to form a continuous tube .
prevent telescoping and damage to plastic pipe during installation .
identify each drain by securely attaching a permanent brass plate with a number assigned by the engineer to the outlet end of the nonperforated pipe drain or by other permanent marking designated by the engineer .
tightly plug the annular space between the hole and the pipe with earth for a length of at least num feet at the outlet end of the drilled hole .
section num subsurface drains num connect the outlet end of the drain to the collector system by installing a pipe tee pipe plug street ell and galvanized steel pipe or plastic pipe .
the engineer determines the length of the pipe .
furnishing and installing a collector system is change order work .
during drilling activities determine the drilled hole elevation at numfoot intervals and the elevation at the upper end of the completed drain hole .
you may take measurements by inserting tubes or pipes and measuring liquid levels or by other authorized methods .
dispose of water used for drilling and water developed during drilling activities under section num .
comply with the requirements of the rwqcb for nonstormwater discharges and the departments construction site best management practices bmp manual for dewatering .
num payment the payment quantity for furnish and install drain pipe horizontal drain is the length measured num along the centerline of the pipe and num from the outlet end to the collector system .
the payment quantity for drill hole is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe for the length of the hole drilled except the department does not measure or pay for any hole drilled where the drain pipe can not be installed for the full length of the drilled hole .
num edge drains num general section num includes specifications for constructing plastic pipe edge drains and edge drain outlets .
edge drain outlets include num .
outlet pipes vent pipes cleanouts and yfittings at cleanout pipes num .
intermediate outlet connections between the couplings at each end of the curved section of the y fitting edge drains include cross drain interceptors at structure approaches at end anchors or pressure relief joints and at pavement terminals joining existing pavements .
section num does not apply .
num materials numa general reserved numb pipe and pipe fittings pipe installed in trenches to be backfilled with asphalt treated permeable material must be pvc num degree c electric plastic conduit epcnum or epcnum and must comply with nema tc num .
all other edge drain pipe and edge drain outlets vents and cleanouts must be one of the following num .
pvc num degree c electric plastic conduit epcnum or epcnum and must comply with nema tc num .
num .
pvc plastic pipe schedule num or schedule num and must comply with astm dnum .
at your option the type grade and design stress designation of the pipe may be num num num num num or num as specified in astm dnum .
pipe must be straight end or bell end .
bell end sockets must comply with astm dnum except for marking .
pipe shown as slotted must have num rows of slots in the pipe .
the rows must be in the longitudinal direction of the pipe and the slots must be cut in the circumferential direction of the pipe .
the num rows must be spaced equally around the circumference of the pipe .
each row must have num num uniformly spaced slots per linear foot of pipe .
the slots must be num inch wide and of a length to provide at least num square inches of slot opening per linear foot of pipe .
other suitable configurations of slots that provide drainage equal to or better than the above slot requirements may be used if authorized .
section num subsurface drains num fittings for pvc num degree c electric plastic conduit must comply with nema tc num and fittings for pvc plastic pipe must be sockettype fittings under astm dnum for schedule num pipe and astm dnum for schedule num pipe .
yfittings must be shop fabricated from pipe as specified for the type of edge drain pipe installed .
the fitting must provide an unobstructed passageway through both legs of the yfitting .
numc treated permeable material at your option permeable material for edge drains must be asphalt treated permeable material or cement treated permeable material complying with section num for treated permeable bases .
numd filter fabric filter fabric must comply with section numb .
nume miscellaneous concrete for splash pads must be constructed of minor concrete except the concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
mortar placed where edge drain outlets and vents connect to drainage pipe and existing drainage inlets must comply with section num .
expansion type pressure plugs for cleanouts must seat firmly against the pipe lip and be one of the following num .
expandable plugs manufactured from neoprene under section numb with commercial quality stainless steel bolts and num hex nuts num .
commercial quality expandable duct plugs consisting of reinforced polypropylene rigid threaded plug with a commercial quality thermoplastic rubber sealing ring aggregate base for backfilling trenches in existing paved areas must comply with the materials specifications for class num aggregate base numinchmaximum gradation under section numb .
use minor hma to backfill trenches in existing asphalt shoulders .
the numinch screen or grate must be made of commercial quality galvanized metal with nominal numinch square openings .
numfnumh reserved num construction before excavating trenches for the installation of edge drains outlets vents and cleanouts in existing paved areas cut the outline of the paved areas to be removed to a neat line to a minimum depth of num inches with a powerdriven saw or a wheel type rock cutting excavator .
cuts along the joint between existing asphalt concrete and existing concrete pavement are not required .
remove concrete deposits that could occur along the lower edge of the concrete pavement in type num installations .
join pipe and fittings with commercial quality solvent cement and primer specifically manufactured for use with rigid pvc plastic pipe and fittings .
the solvent cement and primer must be made by the same manufacturer .
the color of the primer must contrast with the color of the pipe and fittings .
apply the solvent cement and primer under the manufacturers instructions .
spread treated permeable material when the atmospheric temperature is above num degrees f. you may spread the treated permeable material in num or more layers .
where edge drains are to be installed adjacent to asphalt treated permeable base you may spread the lower num inches of asphalt treated permeable material in a separate operation then spread the upper portion of the asphalt treated permeable material with the adjacent asphalt treated permeable base .
place asphalt treated permeable material at a temperature of not less than num degrees f or more than num degrees f except the temperature of asphalt treated permeable material spread with asphalt treated permeable base must comply with section num for spreading asphalt treated permeable base .
section num subsurface drains num compact asphalt treated permeable material spread with adjacent asphalt treated permeable base with the adjacent base and in the same way specified in section num for compacting the base .
compact all other layers of treated permeable material with a vibrating shoetype compactor connected to the spreading device .
the vibrating shoetype compactor must be in operation when the material is being spread in the trench and must be turned off when the material is not being spread .
cure cement treated permeable material that is not covered with hma within num hours after compacting the permeable material by sprinkling the material with a fine spray of water every num hours during daylight hours or by covering the material with a white polyethylene sheet not less than num mils thick .
start the curing requirements at num a.m. on the morning following compaction of the cement treated permeable material and continue for the next num hours or until the material is covered with hma whichever is less .
do not spray the cement treated permeable material with water during the first num hours after compacting .
you may cover the cement treated permeable material with the polyethylene sheet during the first num hours or before the start of the curing period .
backfill and compact trenches in existing embankment areas with native material .
aggregate base backfill must be spread and compacted by methods that produce a uniform base firmly compacted and free from pockets of coarse or fine material .
place type a pavement markers under section num on paved shoulders or dikes at outlet vent and cleanout locations where authorized .
the waiting period for placing pavement markers on new hma surfacing does not apply .
clean edge drain outlets vents and cleanout pipes during installation and remove obstructions after installation .
use a highpressure flexible hose with a nominal numinchdiameter nozzle containing flushing and propelling jets .
insert the hose into each edge drain outlet vent and cleanout pipe and push it through the pipe with a minimum num psig water pressure so that the entire edge drain system is penetrated by the flushing nozzle .
at your expense replace pipes found to be plugged including replacement of treated permeable material surfacing and backfill materials .
install outlet and vent covers at the end of each outlet pipe and vent pipe .
dispose of surplus excavated material .
num payment the payment quantity for edge drain is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe with no deductions for gaps in edge drain pipe at outlets and vents .
the payment quantity for edge drain outlet is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe .
num permeable material blanket reserved num reserved reserved num geocomposite drain systems num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing geocomposite drain systems .
geocomposite drain includes filter fabric and plastic pipe .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for the geocomposite drain certifying that the drain produces the specified flow rate .
the certificate must be accompanied by a flow capability graph for the geocomposite section num subsurface drains num drain showing flow rates and the externally applied pressures and hydraulic gradients .
include verification by an authorized laboratory for the flow capability graph .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general filter fabric must be class a .
numb geocomposite drain geocomposite drain must comply with the specifications for geocomposite wall drain .
numc plastic pipe plastic pipe must comply with the specifications for pipe for edge drains and edge drain outlets in section num .
numd drainage pads drainage pads must be constructed of minor concrete .
nume treated permeable base treated permeable base to be placed around slotted plastic pipe at the bottom of geocomposite drains must comply with section num .
if asphalt treated permeable base is used place the base material at a temperature of not less than num degrees f or more than num degrees f. num construction install the geocomposite drain with the drainage void and the filter fabric facing the embankment .
the fabric facing the embankment side must overlap at least num inches at all joints and wrap around the exterior edges at least num inches beyond the exterior edge .
if additional fabric is needed to provide overlap at joints and wraparound at edges the added fabric must overlap at least num inches and be attached to the fabric on the geocomposite drain .
place core material manufactured from impermeable plastic sheeting having nonconnecting corrugations with the corrugations approximately perpendicular to the drainage collection system .
if the fabric on the geocomposite drain is torn or punctured replace the damaged section completely or repair it by placing a piece of fabric that is large enough to cover the damaged area and provide at least a numinch overlap .
num payment not used num reserved num num overside drains num general num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing overside drains .
excavation and backfill must comply with section num .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for each of the following materials num .
steel num .
aluminum num .
plastic numd quality assurance joints for overside drains must comply with section numdnuma for watertightness .
num materials numa general for alternative pipe downdrain choose num of the types shown .
fabrication of overside drain materials must comply with the details and dimensions shown .
if authorized minor variations may be used to allow the use of the manufacturers standard jigs and templates during the fabrication .
the material thickness must be not less than the thickness described .
for pipe downdrains under concrete slope paving the end of the downdrain must consist of steel pipe or steel conduit .
do not mix steel and aluminum pipe in the same installation .
you may use the anchor assemblies shown with an aluminum installation if the anchor assemblies are electrically insulated .
plastic pipe and fittings used for overside drains must be from num manufacturer for each installation .
welding workmanship and techniques must be equal to the best practice in modern commercial shops .
numb steel pipe overside drains steel entrance tapers pipe downdrains reducers coupling bands and slip joints must be fabricated from galvanized steel sheets and must comply with aashto m num and section num .
the nominal thickness of the sheet must be at least num inch .
the pipe must be type i pipe under aashto m num .
steel tapered inlets and flume downdrains must be fabricated from steel sheets under section numb .
coupling bands for corrugated steel pipe must comply with either section numb or section num numdnumb for downdrain pipe .
the weight of galvanizing for overside drain materials must comply with astm anumanumm and anumanumm .
galvanized surfaces on overside drain materials that are damaged must be repaired under section num numb .
numc aluminum pipe overside drains aluminum entrance tapers pipe downdrains reducers coupling bands and slip joints must be fabricated of aluminum sheets and comply with aashto m num and section num .
the nominal thickness of the sheet must be at least num inch .
the pipe must be type i pipe under aashto m num .
section num overside drains num aluminum tapered inlets and flume downdrains must be fabricated of aluminum sheet complying with aashto m num with a thickness of at least num inch .
coupling bands for corrugated aluminum pipe must comply with either section numc or section num numdnumb for downdrain pipe .
numd plastic pipe overside drains plastic pipe for overside drains must be type s corrugated highdensity polyethylene pipe and comply with section num .
plastic pipe joints must comply with section numdnumb .
if pipe joint details are shown the tensile strength requirements do not apply .
the joint overlap requirements for integral joints must comply with the requirements for positive joints .
nume anchor assemblies a single anchor assembly includes num .
num pipe stakes with necessary hardware num .
bars or coupling bands num .
hardware for fastening downdrain pipe or flume downdrain .
pipe stakes plates bars clip brackets and hardware must be hotdip galvanized after fabrication under section numb .
numf cable anchorage system cable anchorage systems for pipe downdrains must comply with section nume .
cables welded steel eyes steel rods turnbuckles thimbles cable clamps and anchor plates must comply with specifications for similar materials in section numb .
steel pipe must comply with specifications for pipe posts in section numf .
concrete for concrete anchors must comply with the specifications for minor concrete except the concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
numg protective coatings if described as coated metal overside drains must be protected with coating under section numc .
if a protective coating is applied to a metal overside drain each section of the downdrain pipe and each accessory must have the nominal thickness of the metal clearly identified on the inner surface with paint or other authorized means .
repair damaged coatings under section numc .
num construction install entrance tapers and tapered inlets so that they function properly and efficiently keep material in the dike and prevent water from percolating under or around them .
the seal between the taper or inlet and the surrounding material must be watertight .
connect an entrance taper to a downdrain pipe by means of a band coupler or a slip joint .
weld or rivet bulkheads and outlet pipes or flume pieces to the taper or inlet to form watertight connections .
securely anchor a downdrain to the slope of the ground as shown if the downdrain is not in a trench .
cable must not contact soil in finished position .
either adjust position or replace affected portion of cable with galvanized steel rod of equivalent diameter .
if a plastic pipe joint restrainer assembly under alternative a is used install it immediately below the pipe bell .
the bell end of a plastic pipe overside drain must face uphill .
section num overside drains num num payment the payment quantity for pipe downdrain is measured along the centerline of the pipe and parallel with the slope line .
the payment quantity includes the length of elbows wyes tees and other branches to the point of intersection .
if the pipe is cut to fit a structure or slope the payment quantity is the length of pipe necessary to be placed before cutting measured in numfoot increments .
payment for the length of slip joints is not included in the payment for pipe downdrain .
the payment quantity for pipe downdrains under concrete slope paving is measured from the beginning of the corrugated steel pipe to the end of the downdrain .
the payment quantity for an entrance taper includes the length of the tapered section and the tail pipe .
the payment quantity for a tapered inlet includes the length of the tapered section and the flume stub .
num reserved num num miscellaneous drainage facilities num general num general section num includes general specifications for num installing miscellaneous drainage facilities for water drainage and transmission and num constructing casings for bridges .
miscellaneous drainage facilities include pipe components made of pipe or other materials .
pipe risers include pipe riser connections and bar reinforcement steel riser safety cage .
miscellaneous drainage facilities do not include steel covers frames and grates frames and covers manhole frames and grates manhole frames and covers or other miscellaneous metal parts .
iron and steel items used for miscellaneous drainage facilities must comply with section num .
for a miscellaneous drainage component with alternative in the bid item description choose from the types of the component shown .
do not mix different types of the same component in the same location .
num materials steps and ladders must be num steel if they are installed in steel or concrete drainage facilities or num aluminum if they are installed in aluminum drainage facilities .
hardware installed in aluminum drainage facilities must be aluminum .
epoxyresin adhesive for bonding a pipe slip joint to a cross drain must comply with the materials specifications for applying epoxyresin adhesive to concrete .
boards for redwood covers must be no .
num heart structural grade snums redwood .
minor concrete drainage appurtenances including concrete foundations bases and basin floors must comply with section num .
num construction excavation and backfill for miscellaneous drainage facilities must comply with section num .
attach steps and ladders to miscellaneous drainage facilities where described .
if new drain inlets or manholes are placed in paved or surfaced areas do not construct the drain to final grade until the paving or surfacing adjacent to the drain is completed .
install drainage pipe stubs pipe riser connections and bar reinforcement steel riser safety cages .
num payment the department does not pay for pipe or casing in excess of the length shown .
the payment quantity for any type of pipe is the length measured along the centerline of the pipe to the nearest num foot of pipe .
num corrugated metal pipe drainage facilities num general section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing drainage facilities with corrugated metal pipe .
corrugated metal pipe and coatings must comply with section num .
num materials not used num construction not used section num miscellaneous drainage facilities num num payment not used num welded steel pipe drainage facilities num general numa summary section num included specifications for fabricating and installing drainage facilities with welded steel pipe .
drainage facilities constructed with welded steel pipe include num .
energy dissipators num .
inlets num .
risers num .
reducers num .
manholes numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit color options for the finish paint .
the engineer selects the color of the finish paint .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control test the pipe under the operating head for num hours with no leaks .
correct any leaks or defects and retest if necessary .
num materials numa general welded steel pipe must comply with one of the following specifications num .
awwa cnum num .
astm anumanumm grade b num .
api specification numl grade b or grade xnum numb coatings numbnum general if a coating is described coat all portions of the welded steel pipe drainage facility .
repair of internal and external wall coatings must comply with the following num .
breaks or scuffs in the epoxy coating that are less than num square inches must be repaired by the application of epoxy material similar to and compatible with the durability adhesion and appearance of the original epoxy coating under section num of awwa cnum num .
repair coating must be a minimum thickness of num inch num mils after drying num .
department rejects a pipe section if individual breaks exceed num square inches or if the total area of breaks exceeds num percent of the total surface area of the pipe section numbnum coal tar coating a coal tar coating for welded steel pipe must be applied before shipping as follows num .
the interior and exterior surfaces must be cleaned primed and coated with coal tar enamel .
num .
the exterior surface must be wrapped with a bonded felt wrapper under awwa cnum and section anum of the appendix .
section num miscellaneous drainage facilities num numbnum factoryapplied fusionbonded epoxy coating factoryapplied fusionbonded epoxy coating must be applied to the interior and exterior surfaces of welded steel pipe under awwa cnum .
if a fusionbonded epoxy coating will be exposed to abovegrade sunlight the exterior coated wall surfaces must be primed and painted .
the primer and paint must comply with the type standard and coating thickness as shown in the following table coatings type standard coating thicknessa mil primer zinc rich aashto m num num finish paint exterior grade latex satin or flat complying with state voc requirements and as recommended by the manufacturer of inorganic zincrich primer num adry film thickness numbnum asphalt coating reserved num construction numa general after the pipe has been fabricated and welded into lengths it must be thoroughly cleaned of dirt oil grease loose scale and other foreign material .
perform field welding under awwa cnum .
install welded steel pipe such that it is not electrically connected to or in direct physical contact with other metal pipe .
if welded steel pipe is mechanically connected to public utility lines or other metal pipe provide electrically insulated connections .
place the connections within num feet of the pipes ingress or egress to any building or structure .
electrically insulated connections are not required for connections to nonmetallic pipe .
if backfill material contains rock or highly expansive clay soils install a sand shield under awwa cnum section anum of the appendix .
before backfilling at the welded joints pressure test the pipe .
numb coatings repair damage to coatings under section numc .
num payment not used num precast concrete pipe drainage facilities num general section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing drainage facilities with precast concrete pipes .
num materials pc concrete pipe for drainage facilities must comply with aashto m nummm num .
concrete must comply with section num except for the aggregate gradation requirements .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
num construction construct mortar joints under section num .
you may form inlets in place as an alternative to using pc concrete pipe and cutting the side openings .
section num miscellaneous drainage facilities num num payment not used num drainage appurtenances num general numa general section num includes general specifications for fabricating and installing appurtenances to drainage facilities .
drainage appurtenances include num .
miscellaneous metal appurtenances num .
drainage inlet markers num .
drainage gates miscellaneous metal appurtenances are not included in the payment for miscellaneous drainage facilities .
numb materials not used numc construction construct concrete appurtenances under section num .
numd payment not used num flared end sections numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing flared end sections .. numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals reserved numanum quality assurance the department accepts a pc concrete flared end section based on section num of aashto m num .
numb materials numbnum general minor fabrication variations in flared end sections may be authorized .
numbnum concrete flared end sections pc flared end sections must comply with the specifications for class iii reinforced concrete pipe in aashto m num and the following requirements num .
portland cement and aggregate must comply with section num except for the aggregate gradation requirements num .
area of steel reinforcement per linear foot of a flared end section must be at least equal to the minimum steel requirements for circular reinforcement in a circular pipe with the same diameter as the internal diameter of the circular portion of the flared end section reinforcement must comply with section num .
cutoff walls for pc concrete flared end sections must be minor concrete except the concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
section num miscellaneous drainage facilities num numbnum metal flared end sections metal flared end sections must be prefabricated steel or aluminum sections .
prefabricated steel flared end sections must comply with aashto m num and aashto m num .
prefabricated aluminum flared end sections must comply with aashto m num and aashto m num .
metal flared end sections may be used as an alternative to pc concrete flared end sections or plastic flared end sections .
metal flared end sections used on concrete pipe num inches in diameter or smaller must have toe plates .
mortar used to connect metal flared end sections to pc concrete pipe must comply with section num .
welded wire fabric must be commercial quality .
numbnum plastic flared end sections plastic flared end sections must comply with astm dnum .
numbnum alternative flared end sections an alternative flared end section must be the same material type as the drainage facility that it is attached .
comply with the material specifications in section num .
numc construction construct cutoff walls under section num .
numd payment not used num drainage gates numa general section num includes specifications for installing drainage gates .
numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum automatic drainage gates numbnuma general an automatic drainage gate must num .
provide free outflow num .
prevent backflow num .
be attached to the pipe or anchored to a concrete wall the gate must be assembled in the shop and its cast iron parts must be shop coated with commercial quality asphaltic paint .
numbnumb automatic drainage gates for low head pressure reserved numbnumc automatic drainage gates for high head pressure reserved numbnum slide headgates reserved numc construction not used section num miscellaneous drainage facilities num numd payment not used num inlet depressions numa general section num includes specifications for installing inlet depressions for drainage .
numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum hot mix asphalt inlet depressions hma drainage inlet depressions must comply with section num .
in shoulder areas of roadways use the hma type that is specified for roadway construction .
in locations outside the shoulder areas use the hma type that is specified for miscellaneous areas .
numbnum concrete inlet depressions concrete drainage inlet depressions must comply with specifications for minor concrete except the concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
numc construction if necessary to match the grade of the surrounding material place and finish hma by hand .
whenever concrete pavement is placed near an inlet depression place the pavement before constructing the inlet depression .
whenever concrete inlet depressions are constructed in shoulder areas place the concrete on the prepared base material compacted to at least num percent relative compaction .
after the placement to the lines and grades shown smooth the surface with a float and trowel .
if concrete is adjacent to isolation joints smooth the surface with an edger .
broom finish the smoothed concrete surface .
create a surface with a coefficient of friction of at least num when tested under california test num .
apply any necessary water immediately before brooming the surface .
cure the concrete under section numi .
numd payment not used num drainage inlet markers numa general section num includes specifications for installing drainage inlet markers .
numb materials if a specific type of drainage marker is not shown choose one of the following num .
thermoplastic num .
medal medallion num .
plastic medallion num .
stamped concrete the thermoplastic drainage inlet marker must be free of lead and chromium and must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num miscellaneous drainage facilities num thermoplastic inlet marker requirements quality characteristic test method requirement thickness in num legend color nonreflective blue or green background color nonreflective aashto m num white skid resistance min bpna astm enum num abpn means british pendulum number the metal medallion drainage inlet marker must be fabricated from commercialgrade stainless steel aluminum brass or bronze sheet metal or cast and must comply with the requirements shown in the following table metal medallion inlet marker requirements quality characteristic test method requirement thickness of metal in num height of marker in num legend color nonreflectiveb blue or green background color nonreflectiveb white or bare metal skid resistance min bpna astm enum num abpn means british pendulum number brequirement if metal marker is colored the plastic medallion drainage inlet marker must be fabricated from plastic that contains uv inhibitors and must comply with the requirements shown in the following table plastic medallion inlet marker requirements quality characteristic test method requirement thickness in num thickness with dome in num legend color nonreflective blue or green background color nonreflective white weathering resistance astm dnum num year without yellowing fogging or pitting numc construction install prefabricated drainage inlet markers by num .
mechanically cleaning and preparing the surface num .
attaching the prefabricated drainage inlet markers to the surface with adhesives fasteners or heat as recommended by the manufacturer install stamped concrete drainage inlet markers by num .
imprinting uncured concrete with an authorized concrete stamp for drainage inlet markers num .
producing stamped concrete surfaces that are free from blemishes numd payment not used section num miscellaneous drainage facilities num num reserved num grated line drains num general numa summary section num includes specifications for installing grated line drains .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for the grate line drains from the manufacturer .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general concrete backfill must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
pc polymer concrete drain sections must be either nonsloped uniform depth sections num to num inches or num percent presloped sections with graduated depths from num to num inches .
numb line drain channel drain channel sections must be manufactured using monolithic polymer concrete with no side extensions .
the interior surface of the line drain channel must be smooth below the level of the frame grate and associated connections .
monolithic polymer concrete must be consist of aggregate with either polyester resin or vinyl ester resin .
the polymer concrete must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement tensile strength min psi astm cnum num compressive strength min psi astm cnum num bending strength min psi astm cnum num moisture absorption max astm cnum num chemical resistance astm cnum pass freezethaw number of cycles without weight loss min astm cnum num numc line drain frames and grates line drain frames and grates must meet the following design and performance requirements num .
grated line drain frames and grates must be manufactured of ductile iron complying with section num num .
frames and grates include bolts nuts frame anchors and other connecting hardware .
galvanizing or asphalt paint coating is not required .
num .
frames and grates whether onepiece or separate must be classified heavy duty traffic rated with a transverse proofload strength of num pounds num .
grates and frames must be numpiece anchored into the body of the line drain unless shown as removable .
removable grates must be separate from the frame and must num .
be held in place by locking devices that are tamper resistant num .
provide a minimum repetitive pullout resistance of num lbft of length after completion of num hours of salt spray testing under astm bnum num .
be match marked in pairs before delivery to the job site and grates must fit into the frames without rocking num .
if a combination of numpiece frame and grate and removable grates are used the locations of the removable grates are shown num .
except for grates installed within designated pedestrian paths of travel grate design must accept inflow of runoff through openings consisting of a minimum of num percent of the total top surface area section num miscellaneous drainage facilities num of the grate .
individual openings or slots must have a dimension not greater than num inches measured in the direction of the grated line drain flow line .
num .
grates installed within designated pedestrian paths of travel must be certified as conforming to the provisions of the ada .
num construction excavation and backfill must comply with section num .
grated line drains must be installed in trenches excavated to the lines and grades established by the engineer .
grade and prepare the bottom of the trench to provide a firm and uniform bearing throughout the entire length of the grated line drain .
installation of grated line drains and joints must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
install grated line drains to the lines and grades with sections closely jointed and secured such that no separation of the line drains occur during backfilling .
the frame or grate must not extend above the level of the surrounding concrete backfill .
connect grated line drains to new or existing drainage facilities as shown .
place concrete backfill in the trench as shown .
place against undisturbed material at the sides and bottom of the trench in a manner that prevents num floating or shifting of the grated line drain and voids or num segregation in the concrete .
immediately remove foreign material that falls into the trench before or during concrete placement .
where necessary construct and compact earth plugs at the ends of the concrete backfill to contain the concrete within the trench .
secure frames or line drain wall to the surrounding concrete backfill with steel anchoring rods as shown .
alternative securing methods must provide a minimum pullout resistance of num lbft of length of grated line drain frame .
concrete backfill must be finished flush with the adjacent surfacing .
the surface of the concrete must be textured with a broom or burlap drag to produce a durable skid resistant surface .
num payment not used num casings for bridges num general numa summary section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing welded steel pipe casings through bridges and under approach slabs .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit shop drawings for the temporary support of casings at the abutments .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general reserved section num miscellaneous drainage facilities num numb casing casings for bridges must be welded steel pipe complying with section num .
before shipping the exterior surfaces of the casing must be cleaned primed and coated to comply with ansiawwa cnum or ansiawwa cnum .
wrapping tape for repairing damaged coating and wrapping field joints and fittings must be a pressure sensitive pvc or polyethylene tape with a minimum thickness of num mils num inches wide .
numc casing hanger assemblies casing hanger assemblies include a concrete clevis plate adjustable steel yoke cast iron pipe roller steel roller rod and hex nuts .
steel components must be galvanized .
you may use embedded steel welded linked eye rods instead of a clevis plate .
the casing hanger assembly must be rated for the water supply line and casing .
clevis plate yoke roller rod expansion anchors pipe clamps nuts and bolts and other fittings must be adequate for the type and size of the water supply line and casing being supported .
clevis plate expansion anchors yoke rod pipe clamps nuts and bolts and other fittings must be steel and comply with section num .
numd concrete casing supports concrete casing supports must consist of either a pc or cip minor concrete pipe cradle galvanized steel pipe clamp and num anchor bolts .
wire mesh and reinforcement must be commercial quality .
moist cure the pc concrete casing support for at least num days .
epoxy for anchoring the concrete casing supports must be one of the following types num .
epoxy binder num .
rapid set epoxy adhesive for pavement markers num .
standard set epoxy adhesive for pavement markers num construction install casings at each abutment and extend the casing to the greater of num .
num feet beyond the approach slab num .
num feet beyond the end of the adjacent wingwall num .
num feet beyond the abutment where the casing passes through an abutment wall the casing must be additionally wrapped with num layers of numlb asphaltfelt building paper securely taped or wired in place .
anchor pc concrete casing supports with epoxy .
if a blockout is shown in the bridge abutment wall for the casing the space between the casing and bridge abutment wall must be filled with mortar complying with section num .
openings for casings through the bridge superstructure concrete must either be formed or consist of pipe sleeves that are two pipe sizes larger than the casing .
repair damaged coating on the casing and wrap field joints and fittings with wrapping tape as follows num .
before wrapping thoroughly clean and prime the pipe casing joints and fittings under the tape manufacturers instructions .
num .
wrap the tape tightly with num uniform lap free from wrinkles and voids to provide not less than a num mil thickness .
num .
wrapping at joints must extend at least num inches over adjacent pipe casing coverings .
apply tension such that the tape will conform closely to contours of the joint .
section num miscellaneous drainage facilities num num payment the payment quantity for welded steel pipe casing is the length measured along the centerline of the casing .
num reserved num num existing drainage facilities num general num general section num includes general specifications for performing work on existing drainage facilities .
drainage facilities include culverts inlets headwalls endwalls aprons drains pipes gutters gutter depressions junction structures spillways and check dams .
num materials temporary pipe plug must be one of the following num .
wall of minor concrete not less than num inches thick num .
tight brick wall not less than num inches thick with cement mortar joints num .
commerciallymanufactured plug if its use is required for less than num months num construction trenches holes depressions and pits caused by removing salvaging reconstructing abandoning destroying modifying resetting relocating adjusting relaying remodeling and rehabilitating highway facilities must be backfilled with embankment material under section num .
if the trenches holes depressions and pits are in surfaced areas that remain undisturbed backfill with material that is equal or better in quality and to the thickness of the surrounding materials .
where partial removal of reinforced concrete is required remove a sufficient volume of concrete to expose the reinforcement for splicing .
splicing must comply with section num .
clean off material adhering to the reinforcement before placing new concrete .
num payment not used num remove drainage facilities num general section num includes work for removing drainage facilities .
num materials not used num construction box culverts inlets headwalls and endwalls must be completely removed if any portion of these structures is num within num feet of the grading plane in excavation areas num within num foot of original ground in embankment areas or num shown to be removed .
except for concrete pipe removing pcc components of drainage facilities must comply with section num numb .
reuse frames grates and covers at the locations shown .
num payment payment for removing and reusing frames grates and covers is included in the payment for the various items of work that include the reused frames grates and covers .
num rehabilitate drainage structures num general numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for cleaning and preparing inspecting and evaluating repairing rehabilitating and reinspecting culverts .
storm drains pipes conduit risers downdrains median drainage inlets and underdrains are included in the work under section num if they are attached to the culvert .
section num existing drainage facilities num repair as described .
repairing includes num .
filling voids below and around the exterior of the culverts num .
restoring culvert openings num .
smoothing protrusions inside culverts rehabilitate as described .
rehabilitating includes num .
filling voids below and around culverts num .
paving culvert inverts num .
installing pipeliners inside culverts for a miscellaneous drainage component with alternative in the bid item description choose from the types of the component shown .
do not mix different types of the same component in the same location .
numanum definitions alternative pipeliner bid items used where more than one type of pipeliner is shown for a given culvert .
annular space space or void between the outside wall of the pipeliner and the inside wall of a culvert .
lateral pipe opening opening in a culvert for a connecting pipe or drain of any kind .
service opening opening in a culvert for maintenance repair inspection or cleaning .
wastewater water and contaminants generated by culvert rehabilitation .
waterway existing drainage system including surface water tributaries and groundwater .
numanum submittals reserved numanum quality assurance numanuma general use an authorized laboratory with staff experienced and capable of conducting the specified testing .
your staff that performs inspections must be trained and experienced in locating defects breaks and obstacles .
numanumb preconstruction meetings numanumbi prerehabilitation meeting before starting cleaning and preparation work you must schedule and attend a prerehabilitation meeting with the engineer .
include any subcontractors manufacturers and other parties involved in the culvert work .
provide a meeting facility that is within num miles of the job site or at another location accepted by the engineer .
numanumbii pregrouting meeting before starting grouting work you must schedule and conduct a grouting meeting with the engineer and your personnel involved in the grouting work including your num .
project superintendent num .
supervisory personnel num .
grouting foreman num .
grouting subcontractors provide a meeting facility that is within num miles of the job site or at another location accepted by the engineer .
numanumc quality control numanumci annular space grouting the grout cast density at the point of placement must be from num to num lbcu ft and the minimum compressive strength must be num psi at num days .
section num existing drainage facilities num test the grout for compressive strength under astm cnum except that specimens must be moist cured before the numday compressive strength test and not be oven dried .
if the grouting plan shows multiple stages the grouting plan must include test results that verify that the grout stiffness is adequate for placement of multiple lifts .
for each batch of grout perform density and viscosity tests under astm cnum and astm cnum in the presence of the engineer .
grout density must be within num lbcu ft of the density in the authorized grout plan with mix design .
the time of efflux outflow must not exceed num seconds as specified in astm cnum unless otherwise authorized .
for pipeliners with a stiffness of less than num psi the grout pumps pressure measured at the point of injection must not exceed either of the following num .
num psi num .
manufacturers instruction for pipeliners with a stiffness of at least num psi the grout pumps pressure measured at the point of injection must not exceed num psi .
the pipeliner must be able to withstand a static head of grout that is num inches above the highest crown elevation .
the maximum grout pressure for a static grout head must not exceed the grout pumps maximum allowable pressure .
install a grout pressure gauge and recorder immediately adjacent to each injection port .
continuously record on paper with ink the actual grouting pressure versus time .
record grout pressure to an accuracy of num psi .
attach a gauge to a saddletype diaphragm seal to prevent clogging with grout .
numanumcii cctv recording cctv recordings must be made and submitted in high quality electronic media such as cd or dvd .
the cctv equipment must include num .
cctv camera with articulating head num .
transporter adapted for conditions of the culvert num .
television monitor num .
lighting num .
cables and power sources cctv equipment must num .
be specifically designed and constructed for pipe inspection num .
have camera lighting for minimizing reflective glare num .
have an adjustable focaldistance range from num inches to infinity num .
produce a minimum resolution of num lines per inch for both the camera and monitor num .
have a remotereading meter counter accurate to num percent over the length of the particular section being inspected verify accuracy of the distance meter in the cctv with a walking meter rollatape or other authorized device .
where human entry is possible for the entire length of the culvert you may use a handheld video camera with lighting as an alternative to cctv .
video and audio content must comply with the requirements for cctv .
inspect at a rate that is not more than num feet per minute .
numanumciii photographs use a digital camera and lighting .
lighting and photo quality must be suitable to provide clear and focused photographs of the entire culvert surface under all conditions .
numanumciv monitoring of annular space grouting wherever a pipeliner with annular space grouting is described monitor the grouting and record pressures throughout the grouting process .
verify compliance with the manufacturers instructions for each phase of section num existing drainage facilities num the grouting process .
gauges must comply with ansi bnum grade numa .
the pressure gauges recorder and field equipment must be calibrated by an independent testing agency .
numanumcv pipeliners pipeliners must be continuous over the entire length of the culvert and must have no visual defect such as foreign inclusions concentrated ridges discoloration pitting pin holes cracking or other deformities .
the pipeliner must not be overdeflected .
there must not be segregation or voids in the grout .
numanumcvi deflection testing of pipeliners if a pipeliner with annular space grouting is described test the pipeliner for deflection .
test after grouting and in the presence of the engineer .
for pipeliners with a nominal inside diameter of num inches or less either pull a mandrel through the pipeliner by hand or use another authorized method .
the mandrel must be num .
rigid and nonadjustable num .
comprised of at least num legs and have an odd number of total legs num .
longer than it is wide num .
made of steel num .
fitted with pulling rings at each end num .
stamped or engraved on some segment other than a runner indicating pipeliner material specification nominal size and mandrel outside diameter e.g .
hdpe f numsdr num num num num .
furnished in a suitable carrying case labeled with the same data as stamped on the mandrel num .
authorized before use for pipeliners with a nominal inside diameter greater than num inches determine the deflection using a num inch diameter rigid nonadjustable metal bar a minimumradius rigid template or other authorized method .
the pipeliner must not be overdeflected .
for pipeliners num inches or less in nominal diameter the mandrel must pass through the entire pipeliner .
for pipeliners greater than num inches in nominal diameter the deflection must be the lesser of either of the following num .
num percent greater than the actual dimension of the pipeliner in place .
this actual dimension includes the pipe joint system .
num .
num percent of the nominal pipeliner dimension .
if more than num percent of the nominal pipeliner dimension is overdeflected the pipeliner is rejected .
if num percent or less of the nominal pipeliner dimension is overdeflected the pipeliner may remain in place and the department deducts num percent of the bid amount for that pipeliner .
numb materials numbnum general slurry cement backfill for culverts must comply with section nume .
numbnum contact grout grout for contact grouting must comply with section num and contain num .
not more than num percent bentonite by weight of cement and water num .
not less than num lb of cement per cubic yard if sand is used in the grout mix the sand must comply with section numcnum and the gradation requirements in the following table section num existing drainage facilities num sieve size percent passing no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num numbnum annular space grout grout for annular space grouting must be lowdensity foam concrete that consists of water cementitious materials foaming agent and optional chemical admixtures .
cementitious materials must comply with section num except num .
use of scm is not mandatory num .
you may only use scm if you submit a statement from the foaming agents manufacturer verifying that the foaming agent is compatible with the scm foaming agent must comply with astm cnum .
numc construction numcnum general comply with the following work sequence and notify the engineer before you start each of the following steps num .
clean and prepare num .
inspect and evaluate num .
repair culvert num .
rehabilitate culvert num .
restore openings num .
perform postrehabilitation inspection before starting the inspection the culvert must be clean and free of water and debris .
during all culvert work keep the culvert clean and free of water and debris .
wherever culvert struts are described in the grouting plan install struts before starting any grouting .
wherever structural concrete repairs to the culvert are shown or ordered the structural concrete repair must be complete and the concrete must have a compressive strength of at least num psi before starting any grouting .
wherever concrete invert paving is shown or ordered the invert paving must be complete and the concrete paving must have a compressive strength of at least num psi before starting any grouting .
numcnum cleaning and preparation remove all debris sediment and other accumulated material from the culvert invert and restore the flow area to the original flow area or to the diameter shown .
where shown disconnect down drains towards the downstream end of the culvert .
clean the culvert with highvelocity cleaning equipment and air mover or mechanically powered equipment .
if human entry is possible you may use nonmechanically powered cleaning equipment .
numcnum inspection and evaluation after cleaning and preparation is complete inspect the entire length of the culvert and submit the inspection and evaluation report .
inspect by either cctv or human entry .
if sediment debris or other accumulated material is found during inspection stop the inspection and reclean the culvert .
cleaning must comply with the manufacturers instructions for the type of pipeliners section num existing drainage facilities num shown .
cleaning must be complete to allow accurate cctv and photography of the entire culvert .
no payment is made for recleaning .
make a numdegree inspection video and photographic record of each joint and lateral joint .
if the cctv camera does not pass from one end of the culvert through the entire length of the culvert reset the equipment and inspect from both ends until the entire length is documented .
if the inspection video is low quality and does not adequately depict the condition of the culvert correct the deficiencies and reinspect the culvert .
low quality may result from num .
poor camera head position num .
poor focus num .
low lighting num .
rapid rate of progression num .
missing documentation of time and location num .
inadequate cleaning of the culvert no payment is made for reinspection due to low quality and recleaning .
numcnum repairing after obtaining authorization of the inspection and evaluation report repair the existing culvert as described or ordered .
complete repairs before starting rehabilitation work .
numcnum rehabilitation numcnuma general place slurry cement backfill around the culvert and below the culvert invert as shown .
numcnumb annular space grouting before starting grouting activities install the bulkheads and place grout injection tubes and breather tubes with removable plugs around the pipeliner and through bulkheads as shown in the authorized grouting plan .
grout the entire annular space between the pipeliner and culvert without voids or grout segregation .
if you determine before starting grouting that the entire annular space is not accessible for grouting submit a work plan for correcting the annular space to allow for grouting .
no payment is made for correction of the annular space to allow for grouting .
mix the water cementitious materials and chemical admixtures before adding the foaming agent to the grout .
add the foaming agent at the job site .
grout must be placed in a continuous manner and injected in lifts .
the height of the lifts must num not exceed the height in the authorized grout plan or num be less if needed to avoid floating shifting or deforming the pipeliner .
monitor the injection pressure including the pressure for the last lift at the crown .
if the pipeliner can not withstand grouting pressures or static head either reduce the maximum pressure at the point of grout injection or employ staged grouting .
numcnumc restoring openings within num hours of installing a pipeliner restore the lateral pipe and service openings risers downdrains median drainage inlets and underdrains .
restore these openings before starting pipeliner installation at another culvert location .
the openings must conform and match the invert of connecting pipes .
do not excavate unless authorized .
restore openings from the interior of the pipe .
use either a cctv and remotecontrol cutting device or human entry .
the area of the restored opening must be at least num percent of the original area .
openings must have an edge that is crackfree smooth and free of burrs and projections .
section num existing drainage facilities num where human entry is possible grout the restored opening so that the seal is watertight .
grout must be one of the following num .
quickset epoxy mortar num .
highviscosity epoxy num .
hydrophilic vulcanized expansive rubber strip num .
manufacturers recommended mix numcnumd postrehabilitation inspection postrehabilitation inspection must comply with section numcnum .
numd payment payment for the following work is included in the payment for cleaning inspecting and preparing the culvert num .
cleaning and preparation num .
quality control and assurance num .
keeping the culvert free of water and debris num .
inspection and evaluation num .
repairing num .
performing postrehabilitation inspection unless a separate pay item is described for diverting the culvert flow payment for diverting the flow of water away from the culvert is included in the payment for cleaning inspecting and preparing the culvert .
repairs additional cleaning disconnecting downdrains and reconnecting down drains are paid as change order work unless such work is described in the contract .
record the quantity of slurry cement backfill that is installed in the culvert and submit this quantity .
the department does not pay for slurry cement backfill material that is wasted disposed of or remaining on hand after the completion of the work .
pipeliners are measured along the flow line of the existing culvert .
no payment is made for pipeliner length in excess of the measured length .
num fill culvert voids reserved num contact grouting reserved num invert paving reserved num edpm rubber pipe joint seal reserved num welded steel pipeliners reserved num plastic pipeliners reserved num curedinplace pipeliners reserved section num existing drainage facilities num num machine spiral wound pvc pipeliners numa general numanum general numanuma summary section num includes specifications for installing machine spiral wound pvc pipeliners directly into the culvert .. numanumb definitions reserved numanumc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for each reel of pvc strip and include num .
name of the manufacturer num .
plant location num .
date of manufacture and shift num .
cell classification num .
unit mass num .
average pipeliner stiffness and profile type numanumd quality assurance reserved numanum materials each reel and continuous pvc strip must be distinctively marked on the inside surface at intervals not exceeding num feet and with a coded number .
the coded number must include num .
name of the manufacturer num .
plant location num .
date of manufacture and shift num .
minimum strip thickness num .
cell classification and profile type num .
size the marking must be visible from inside the completed pipeliner .
numanum construction restore openings .
numanum payment not used numb machine spiral wound pvc pipeliners grouted numbnum general numbnuma summary section numb includes specifications for installing a continuous spiral wound pvc pipeliner into the interior of an existing culvert and filling the annular space with grout .
the pipeliner must be wound directly into the culvert using equipment that is either self running or static .
where human entry is feasible the pipeliner may be wound by hand inside the culvert .
numbnumb definitions reserved numbnumc submittals if you use pressure for installing the pipeliner the annular space grouting plan must include num .
manufacturers instructions for the maximum internal pressure num .
maximum differential pipeliner pressures section num existing drainage facilities num numbnumd quality assurance the nominal dimensions for the pipeliner must comply with dimensions shown .
numbnum materials pvc profile strips must comply with astm fnum or astm fnum .
you may use alternative profile types and corresponding minimum properties if authorized .
numbnum construction pipeliner installation must comply with astm fnum or astm fnum .
the profile strip may be nonreinforced or reinforced with a continuousprofiled steel strip with interlocking edges .
sealants and gaskets necessary for effectively interlocking the edges of the profile strip must be preapplied at the time of manufacture .
lock edges together as the strip is wound into the culvert .
if the profile strip is reinforced mechanically lock the profiled steel band onto the outside of the pvc pipeliner .
for circular culverts wind the profile strip at a fixed diameter .
for noncircular culverts wind the profile strip at a fixed dimension .
leave an annular space between the pipeliner and culvert wall .
the ends of the pipeliner must be flush with the culvert unless a beveled end is shown .
after grouting and beveling where shown seal the ends of the culvert between the pipeliner and culvert with cement mortar under section numf .
numbnum payment not used numc machine spiral wound pvc pipeliners expandable diameter numcnum general section numcnum includes specifications for installing a continuous spiral wound pipeliner into the interior of an existing culvert and expanding the pipeliner radially against the culvert .
numcnum materials pvc profile strips must comply with astm fnum .
numcnum construction pipeliner installation must comply with astm fnum .
the pipeliner must be continuous over the entire length of the insertion .
install pvc strips directly into the culvert from an insertion point and expand the strips radially against the culvert after insertion .
sealants and gaskets necessary for effectively interlocking the edges of the profile strip must be pre applied at the time of manufacture .
lock edges together as the strip is wound into the culvert .
seal the ends of the culvert between the pipeliner and culvert with cement mortar under section numf .
numcnum payment not used num cementitious pipeliners reserved num reserved num modify drainage structures num general numa general section num includes specifications for partially removing adjusting and adding to drainage facilities .
numb materials not used section num existing drainage facilities num numc construction not used numd payment not used num pipes numa general modifying pipes includes extending pipes .
extending pipes must comply with the specifications for new pipe installation .
numb materials not used numc construction existing headwalls or end walls must be removed or moved to a new location .
if headwalls or end walls are to be moved cut the pipe so that it has smooth edges at a point approximately num foot behind the headwall or end walls and perpendicular to the centerline of the pipe .
move the headwall or end wall to the reconstructed location and connect the pipes .
numd payment not used num inlets manholes and risers numa general not used numb materials not used numc construction modify inlet manhole and riser structures by capping .
excavate and remove structures to a depth of at least num foot below the grading plane .
cap inlet structures with minor concrete .
where shown round the bottom of structures with minor concrete .
minor concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
backfill to match the grading plane numd payment not used num slotted pipe grate reserved num adjust drainage structures num general section num includes specifications for partially removing and either lowering or raising facilities .
adjust to grade with new materials that are similar in character to the existing materials .
num materials not used num construction numa general not used section num existing drainage facilities num numb frames covers grates and manholes adjust frames covers grates and manholes by lowering before cold planing and raising after paving or surfacing .
before opening the lane to traffic either num complete permanent paving or surfacing or num temporarily fill any depressions with hma .
where paving or surfacing work is shown do not adjust to final grade until the adjacent pavement or surfacing is complete .
for a structure that is to be raised remove the cover or frame and trim the top of the structure to provide a suitable foundation for the new material .
instead of using new materials similar in character to those in the existing structure you may use raising devices to adjust a manhole to grade .
before starting paving work measure and fabricate raising devices .
raising devices must num .
comply with the specifications for section num except that galvanizing is not required num have a shape and size that matches the existing frame num .
be match marked by painting identification numbers on the device and corresponding structure num .
result in an installation that is equal to or better than the existing one in stability support and nonrocking characteristics num .
be fastened securely to the existing frame without projections above the surface of the road or into the clear opening where manholes are to be lowered remove the facility to num feet below finished grade or to an authorized depth .
adjust the manhole using the taper needed to match the finished grade .
if a manhole cover is unstable or noisy under traffic place a coil of asphaltsaturated rope a plastic washer or asphaltic compound on the cover seat .
before placement obtain authorization for use of the material .
numc inlet adjust inlets as shown .
use minor concrete with at least num pounds of cementitous material per cubic yard .
where inlets are adjusted before placing the uppermost layer of pavement or surfacing limit the work area so that adjusting the inlet and final paving or surfacing is completed within the same work day .
the top of the inlet grate or cover must be protected during paving operations by heavy plywood covers steel plate covers or other authorized methods .
excess paving material must be removed before rolling .
where inlets are adjusted after placing the uppermost layer of pavement or surfacing do not adjust the inlet to final grade until the paving or surfacing has been completed immediately adjacent to the inlet .
num payment if adjust inlet is paid by the linear foot adjusting the inlet is measured as the difference in the length between the top of the existing inlet and the top of the adjusted inlet .
if no item is shown for adjust inlet payment for adjusting the inlet is included in the payment for the type of pavement or surfacing shown in the bid item list .
if num no item is shown for adjust inlet and num pavement or surfacing is not involved payment for adjusting the inlet is included in the payment for the type of excavation shown in the bid item list .
if no item is described for adjust num frames num covers num grates or num manholes payment for adjusting these materials is included in the payment for the type of pavement or type of surfacing in the bid item list .
if no item is shown for adjust num frames num covers num grates or num manholes and if pavement or surfacing is not involved payment for adjusting these materials is included in the payment for the type of excavation shown in the bid item list .
section num existing drainage facilities num num abandon drainage structures num general numa general section num includes specifications for partially removing and rendering facilities unserviceable in place .
wherever manholes or drainage facilities are abandoned pipes entering the manhole or drainage facility must be securely closed by a tightfitting plug that is either of the following num .
wall of minor concrete not less than num inches thick num .
tight brick wall not less than num inches thick with cement mortar joints the bases of manholes or drainage facilities must be broken so that water is prevented from being entrapped .
demolish the manhole or drainage facility to an elevation that is num feet below finished grade .
backfill must comply with section nume .
numb materials not used numc construction not used numd payment not used num manholes reserved num culverts and pipelines reserved num inlets reserved num reserved num salvage drainage facilities numa general section num includes specifications for salvaging drainage facilities .
salvage drainage facilities as shown .
numb materials not used numc construction not used numd payment not used num reserved num division viii miscellaneous construction num slope protection num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing slope protection .
num materials construct slope protection or slope paving using minor concrete .
unless otherwise specified fabric must be class num rsp fabric .
num construction earthwork must comply with section num .
if placement of fabric is required place the fabric before placing slope protection slope paving and gabions .
before placing the fabric the surface of the slope must be free of loose or extraneous material and sharp objects that may damage the fabric .
handle and place the fabric under manufacturers instructions .
place the fabric loosely on the slope such that it conforms to the surface without damage to the fabric when the cover material is placed .
join the edges of the fabric with either overlapped joints or stitched seams .
if the fabric is joined with overlapped joints the adjacent borders of the fabric must be overlapped by at least num inches .
overlap in the same direction that the cover material is placed .
if the fabric is joined by stitched seams stitch with contrasting colored yarn .
use the size and composition of yarn that is recommended by the fabric manufacturer .
use num to num stitches per inch of seam .
the strength of a stitched seam must be the same as that specified for the fabric except if the stitched seams are oriented up and down a slope the strength may be reduced to a value that it is at least num percent of that specified for the fabric .
do not operate equipment or drive vehicles directly on the fabric .
if the fabric is damaged and the engineer determines that it can not be repaired replace the fabric .
if the engineer determines that the fabric can be repaired then repair it by covering the damaged area with new fabric .
if the repair is made using overlapped joints the overlap must be at least num feet .
num payment the department does not pay for additional fabric used for overlaps .
num rock slope protection num general section num includes specifications for constructing rsp .
use the class of rock and the method for placement described .
num materials numa general reserved numb rock for method a placement and the class of rsp described comply with the rock gradation shown in the following table section num slope protection num rock gradation for method a placement rock size percentage larger thana class numt numt numt numt num t num ton num num ton num num num ton num num num num ton num num num num ton num num num num ton num num num ton num afor any class the percentage of rock smaller than the smallest rock size must be determined on the basis of weight .
for all other rock sizes within a class the percentage must be determined on the basis of the ratio of the number of individual rocks larger than the smallest size shown for that class compared to the total number of rocks .
for method b placement and the class of rsp described comply with the rock gradation shown in the following table rock gradation for method b placement rock size percentage larger thana class num t num t num t light facing no .
num no .
num no .
num num ton num num ton num num num ton num num num ton num num num num lb num num num num num lb num num num num num lb num num num num num num lb num num num lb num afor any class the percentage of rock smaller than the smallest rock size must be determined on the basis of weight .
for all other rock sizes within a class the percentage must be determined on the basis of the ratio of the number of individual rocks larger than the smallest size shown for that class compared to the total number of rocks .
rock material must comply with the requirements shown in the following table rock material requirements quality characteristic test method requirement apparent specific gravity min california test num num absorption max california test num num durability index min california test num num notes durability absorption ratio dar course durability indexpercent absorption num if the dar is greater than num the absorption may exceed num percent .
if the dar is greater than num the durability index may be less than num .
section num slope protection num select rock such that the shapes provide a stable structure for the required section .
if the slope is steeper than num do not use rounded boulders and cobbles .
angular shaped rock may be used on any planned slope .
flat or needleshaped rock must not be used unless the individual rock thickness is greater than num times the length .
numc fabric fabric must be rsp fabric that complies with the class shown in the following table fabric class class largest rock grading class used in slope protection num num ton or smaller num larger than num ton num construction numa general excavate the footing trench along the toe of the slope .
local surface irregularities of the rsp must not vary from the planned slope by more than num foot as measured at right angles to the slope .
at the completion of slope protection work fill voids in the footing trench with excavated material .
compaction is not required .
numb placement method a do not place rocks by dumping .
place larger rocks in the footing trench .
place rocks on the slope such that their longitudinal axis is normal to the face of the embankment .
place foundation course rocks such that they are in contact with the ground surface .
for rocks above the foundation course place them such that each rock has a numpoint bearing on underlying rocks do not bear them on smaller rocks which may be used for chinking voids .
numc placement method b rocks may be placed by dumping and may be spread in layers by bulldozers or other suitable equipment .
place rocks such that num .
there is a minimum of voids num .
larger rocks are in the toe course and on the outside surface of the slope protection num payment if rsp is paid by the ton the payment quantity is the weight determined from scale weighings .
if rsp is paid by the cubic yard the payment quantity is the volume determined from the dimensions shown or ordered .
num concretedrock slope protection num general section num includes specifications for constructing concretedrock slope protection .
use the class of rock and the method for placement described .
num materials numa general reserved section num slope protection num numb concrete if colored slope protection is described color the concrete by mixing a fine ground synthetic mineral oxide into the concrete .
the synthetic mineral oxide must be specifically manufactured for coloring concrete .
the color of the completed concrete after curing and when air dry must match color no .
num of fed stdnum .
use the numinchmaximum combined aggregate gradation in the concrete .
the water content of the concrete must allow gravity flow into the interstices with limited spading and brooming .
numc rock rocks for concretedrock slope protection must comply with the gradation shown in the following table concretedrock gradation rock size percentage larger thana class num t num t light facing cobble num ton num num ton num num num ton num num num lb num num num num lb num num num num num lb num num afor any class the percentage of rock smaller than the smallest rock size must be determined on the basis of weight .
for all other rock sizes within a class the percentage must be determined on the basis of the ratio of the number of individual rocks larger than the smallest size shown for that class compared to the total number of rocks .
rock for concretedrock slope protection must comply with the requirements shown in the following table rock material requirements quality characteristic test method requirement apparent specific gravity min california test num num absorption max california test num num durability index min california test num num notes durability absorption ratio dar course durability indexpercent absorption num if the dar is greater than num the absorption may exceed num percent if the dar is greater than num the durability index may be less than num select rock such that the shapes provide a stable structure for the required section .
if the slope is steeper than num do not use rounded boulders and cobbles .
angular shaped rock may be used on any planned slope .
flat or needleshaped rock must not be used unless the individual rock thickness is greater than num times the length .
numd weep tubes weep tubes must num .
be schedule num perforated pvc pipe complying with section numd num .
have a numinch nominal diameter section num slope protection num num construction numa general excavate a footing trench along the toe of the slope .
mix the coloring agent uniformly and homogeneously with the concrete .
local surface irregularities of the concretedrock slope protection must not vary from the planned slope by more than num foot as measured at right angles to the slope .
at the completion of slope protection work fill voids in the footing trench with excavated material .
compaction is not required .
numb placement method a placement method a must comply with section numb .
numc placement method b placement method b must comply with section numc .
numd placing weep tubes wrap each weep tube in filter fabric .
place weep tubes and secure them such that they contact the face of the fabric on the slope and extend at least num inches beyond the outer surface of the rock .
if placement of fabric on the slope is not required the end of the tube near the slope must be covered with a cap made of the same material as the weep tube .
ensure that concrete will not plug the tube and perforations .
nume placing concrete the surface of the rock to be concreted must be cleaned of adhering soil and then moistened .
at any one location place the concrete in a continuous operation during a work day .
deposit concrete by use of chutes tubes buckets pneumatic equipment or other mechanical methods .
do not allow the concrete to flow more than num feet across the slope protection .
immediately after depositing spade and rod the concrete into place with suitable spades trowels or other suitable means .
the minimum concrete penetration must comply with the requirements shown in the following table minimum concrete penetration requirements rock class num t num t light facing cobble penetration in num num num num num after placing the concrete thoroughly brush the rocks to expose the top surfaces .
outer rocks must project above the concrete by a height of num times the rock diameter .
after completion of any num foot strip do not allow workmen or loads on the surface for at least num hours .
cure the concretedrock slope protection by one of the methods specified for curing concrete .
as an alternative you may cure the concretedrock slope protection by sprinkling a fine spray of water every num hours during the daytime for a period of num days .
if colored concrete is described and you use the curing compound method apply curing compound no .
num .
num payment if concretedrock slope protection is paid by the ton the payment quantity is the weight determined from scale weightings .
if concretedrock slope protection is paid by the cubic yard the payment quantity is the volume determined from the dimensions shown or ordered .
section num slope protection num num smallrock slope protection num general section num includes specifications for constructing smallrock slope protection .
num materials rock must be cobble gravel crushed gravel crushed rock or any combination of these .
if the rock layer is shown as num inches thick comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table rock gradation for numinchthick layer sieve size percentage passing num inch num num inch num num inch num num inch num if the rock layer is shown as num inches thick comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table rock gradation for numinchthick layer sieve size percentage passing num inch num num inch num num inch num num inch num if the rock layer is shown as numinches thick comply with gradation requirements shown in the following table rock gradation for numinch thick layer sieve size percentage passing num inch num num inch num num inch num num inch num granular material must contain at least num percent crushed particles when tested under california test num .
num construction local surface irregularities of the smallrock slope protection must not vary from the planned slope by more than num inches as measured at right angles to the slope .
small rocks may be placed by dumping and may be spread by bulldozers or other suitable equipment .
during spreading do not crack the rock .
num payment the payment quantity for smallrock slope protection is the volume determined from the dimensions shown or ordered .
num concrete slope protection gutter lining ditch lining and channel lining num general section num includes specifications for shaping slopes preparing the foundation and constructing any of the following section num slope protection num num .
concrete slope protection num .
lined gutters num .
ditch linings num .
channel linings num .
support walls num .
cutoff stubs num .
cutoff walls num .
footings num .
aprons construct slope protection gutter lining ditch lining and channel lining using minor concrete or shotcrete .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
num materials pervious backfill material must comply with section numd .
expansion joint filler must comply with section numbnum .
shotcrete must comply with section num .
if colored slope protection is described color the concrete by mixing a fine ground synthetic mineral oxide into the concrete .
the synthetic mineral oxide must be specifically manufactured for coloring concrete .
the color of the completed concrete after curing and when air dry must match color no .
num of fed stdnum .
weep tubes must num .
be schedule num perforated pvc pipe complying with section numd num .
have a numinch nominal diameter num construction evenly grade the foundation including all surfaces where concrete is to be placed such that no point on the graded surface is above the designated plane .
wrap each tube in fabric .
place weep tubes as shown or ordered .
placing concrete must comply with section num .
at each weep tube and drain hole place a securely tied sack that contains num cubic foot of pervious backfill .
the sack material must comply with the specifications for fabric in section numc .
mix the coloring agent uniformly and homogeneously with the concrete .
spread and tamp concrete until it is thoroughly compacted and mortar flushes to the surface .
if the slope is too steep to allow the use of concrete wet enough to flush with tamping tamp the concrete until it is consolidated and immediately trowel on a mortar surface that is num inch thick .
the mortar must consist of num part portland cement and num parts fine aggregate .
after strikingoff to grade handfloat the concrete with floats that are at least num inches wide and num inches long .
broom the entire surface with a stiffbristle broom to produce a uniform surface .
brooming must be done when the surface is set enough to prevent deep scarring and must be accomplished by drawing the broom down the slope leaving marks parallel to the edge of the slope .
the engineer may direct you to apply a fine spray of water to the surface immediately before brooming .
edges and joints must be edged with a numinchradius edger before the brooming .
install transverse expansion joints at numfoot intervals .
fill the expansion joints with numinchthick expansion joint filler .
after placing the concrete fill the footing trenches with excavated material .
compaction is not required .
section num slope protection num cure concrete slope protection gutter lining ditch lining and channel lining by with one of the methods specified for curing condrete .
if colored concrete is described and you use the curing compound method apply curing compound no .
num .
construct finish and cure shotcrete slope protection under section num .
num payment the payment quantity for concrete slope protection constructed with minor concrete or shotcrete is the product of num the area measured along the slope lines of the completed concrete slope protection and num the thickness shown for the concrete slope protection .
the department does not pay for additional concrete placed due to over excavation .
num brokenconcrete slope protection reserved num reserved num slope paving num general numa general numanum summary section num includes general specifications for constructing slope paving .
construct slope paving using minor concrete or shotcrete .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals reserved numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials shotcrete must comply with section num .
the aggregate size used in minor concrete must be from num to num inch .
if colored slope paving is described color the concrete by mixing a fine ground synthetic mineral oxide into the concrete .
the synthetic mineral oxide must be specifically manufactured for coloring concrete .
the color of the completed concrete after curing and when air dry must match color no .
num of fed stdnum .
expanded polystyrene and premolded expansion joint filler must comply with section num .
numc construction numcnum general construct concrete curbs before constructing sidewalks or slope paving .
concrete curbs must comply with section num .
mix the coloring agent uniformly and homogeneously with the concrete .
before applying concrete or shotcrete evenly grade foundations such that no point on the graded slope is above the slope plane shown .
thoroughly compact foundations .
foundations must contain enough moisture to provide a firm foundation and to prevent absorption of water from the concrete or shotcrete .
foundations must be free of surface water .
section num slope protection num schedule the construction of the slope paving such that the work including placing and finishing concrete or shotcrete and applying curing compound is completed on the same day that the work is started .
if the engineer determines that the size of the slope paving is too large to be constructed without an intermediate construction joint place a joint at an authorized location .
complete a section of concrete or shotcrete bounded by permissible construction joints within the same day .
cure slope paving by the curing compound method using curing compound no .
num .
numcnum minor concrete construct and finish minor concrete slope paving under section num .
spread and tamp the concrete until it is thoroughly compacted and mortar flushes to the surface .
if the slope is too steep to allow the use of concrete wet enough to flush with tamping then tamp the concrete until it is consolidated and immediately trowel on a mortar surface that is num inch thick .
the mortar must consist of num part portland cement and num parts fine aggregate .
after strikingoff to grade handfloat the concrete with floats that are at least num inches wide and num inches long .
broom the entire surface with a stiffbristled broom to produce a uniform surface .
brooming must be done when the surface is set enough to prevent deep scarring and must be accomplished by drawing the broom down the slope leaving marks parallel to the slope .
the engineer may order you to apply a fine spray of water to the surface immediately before brooming .
numcnum shotcrete construct and finish shotcrete slope paving under section num .
after the shotcrete has been placed to the depth shown check the surface with a straightedge .
place additional mortar to bring any low spots or depressions up to the proper grade .
the finish of the shotcrete slope paving must be uniform without humps or hollows of more than num inch in num feet .
numd payment the payment quantity for slope protection concrete constructed with minor concrete or shotcrete is the product of num the area computed from measurements along the slope of the actual areas constructed and num the thickness shown for the concrete slope paving the department does not pay for additional concrete or shotcrete placed due to overexcavation .
num exposed aggregate slope paving numa general section num includes specifications for constructing slope paving with an exposed aggregate finish .
numb materials construct exposed aggregate slope paving using minor concrete .
coarse aggregate must comply with the num inch by no .
num primary size coarse aggregate specified in section numcnumb .
concrete set retarders must be commercialquality and manufactured specifically for use on the top surface of concrete .
the retarder must effectively slow down the setting time of the cement and fine aggregate matrix long enough to permit exposing the aggregates .
numc construction mix the coloring agent uniformly and homogeneously with the concrete .
place and consolidate the concrete such that the coarse aggregate remains uniformly distributed throughout the concrete .
you may apply a concrete set retarder to the surface of the concrete after placing consolidating and finishing of the concrete is complete .
apply the set retarder under the manufacturers instructions .
section num slope protection num when the mass of the concrete is set enough to allow for removing the matrix of cement and fine aggregate expose the coarse aggregate num .
with a water spray coarse brooming abrasive blasting or a combination of these procedures .
removal methods must not dislodge or loosen the coarse aggregate from embedment in the mortar .
num .
to an approximate depth from num to num inch .
exposed aggregate surfaces must be uniform in appearance .
immediately after the cement mortar has hardened enough to resist further removal clean all cement film and other loose material from the exposed aggregate and all other surfaces with stiff brooms and water .
cure concrete under section numb except when operations for exposing the aggregate are underway .
you may use the water curing method .
if you remove an area of curing compound during the curing period keep the area continuously wet until the end of the curing period or until you reapply the curing compound .
numd payment not used num slope paving with concrete pavers numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for constructing slope paving using concrete pavers .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals if using premixed mortar submit the manufacturers instructions for the mixing proportions and procedures .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum concrete pavers concrete pavers for slope paving must comply with astm cnum for solid units .
the surface exposed to view must have a split face texture .
the nominal size of the concrete pavers must be num by num by num inches .
numbnum mortar hydrated lime must comply with astm cnum type s. mortar sand must be commercialquality and free of organic impurities and lumps of clay and shale .
mortar for laying concrete pavers must consist by volume of num part cement from num to num part hydrated lime and from num to num parts mortar sand .
add enough water to make a workable mortar .
accurately measure and thoroughly mix each batch of mortar .
do not retemper mortar more than num hour after mixing .
reduce the amount of lime as necessary to prevent leaching and efflorescence on the finished surface .
you may use a premixed packaged mortar blend of cement lime and sand without color that requires only water to prepare for use as brick mortar or grout .
packages of the premixed mortar must show the manufactures name brand weight and color identification .
numbnum bond coat the bond coat must be either dryset mortar or latexportland cement mortar .
organic adhesive must not be used for the bond coat .
mix the bond coat under the manufacturers instructions .
the consistency of section num slope protection num the mixture must be such that ridges formed with the recommended notched trowel do not flow or slump .
you may rework the bond coat provided no water or materials are added .
numbnum grout grout must be suitable for grouting quarry tile and must comply with ansi standard a num .
grout must consist by volume of num part cement up to num part lime num parts of sand and an amount of water to provide a grout with a consistency that can be forcibly compressed into joints .
you may use a premixed packaged grout blend of cement lime and sand that is suitable for grouting quarry tile and requires only water to prepare for use as brick grout .
packages of the premixed grout must show the manufacturers name brand weight and color identification .
numc construction numcnum general joints must be straight and of uniform and equal width .
protect surfaces of completed masonry concrete and other materials exposed to view from spillage splatters and other deposits of cementitious materials from masonry construction .
remove these deposits without damage to the materials or exposed surfaces .
stains efflorescence laitance splashes or spots on the faces of masonry exposed to view must be removed .
apply cleaning agents under the paver manufacturers instructions to a sample area determined by the engineer .
do not continue with cleaning beyond the sample area until the engineer authorizes the cleaning agent and the cleaning methods .
numcnum installation using a bond coat install concrete pavers on a bond coat over a mortar bedding .
do not use air blown mortar .
roughen and clean the concrete surfaces against which concrete pavers are to be placed exposing the stone aggregate .
immediately before placing the paver units flush the concrete surface with water and allow it to dry to a surface dry condition .
prepare the concrete surfaces to receive a mortar setting bed under the specifications for horizontal construction joints in section numdnum .
the mortar setting bed must be at least num inch thick and be finished parallel to the finished brick surface .
cure the setting bed for at least num hours before placing the bond coat .
roughen and clean the surfaces of the cured setting bed .
the surface must be free of laitance coatings oil sand dust and loose particles .
dampen the cured setting bed before placing the bond coat .
do not soak the setting bed .
float the bond coat onto the cured setting bed with enough pressure to cover the surface evenly with no bare spots .
the surface area to be covered with the bond coat must be no greater than the area that can be covered with concrete pavers while the bond coat is still plastic .
comb the bond coat mortar with a notched trowel within num minutes before installing concrete pavers .
do not install the concrete pavers on a skinnedover mortar bond coat .
backbutter the concrete pavers immediately before installing the units .
firmly press the concrete pavers into the freshly notched bond coat .
tap the concrete pavers to a true surface to attain num percent coverage of the bond coat with the back of each unit .
head and bed mortar joints must be num inch thick .
remove spacers strings ropes pegs glue paper and face mounting material before grouting the concrete pavers .
do not start grouting until at least num hours after installing concrete pavers .
force a maximum amount of grout into the joints between and surrounding the concrete paver units .
tool the grout to a slightly concave cross section to a depth not more than num inch below the finished surface .
section num slope protection num the finished grout must have a uniform color and must be smooth without voids pinholes or low spots .
keep the concrete pavers continuously damp for at least num hours after grouting .
numcnum installation on a mortar bedding the top surface of the airblown mortar or concrete base must be lightly and evenly scored horizontally and vertically with a metal scratcher having grooves not more than num inch apart .
cure the airblown mortar or concrete base by the water method for at least num days .
lay and embed the concrete pavers in approximately numinch thick mortar .
embedment must be shoved tight such that mortar is flushed into the joints to a depth of approximately num inch .
numd payment not used num reserved num gabions num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing gabion structures .
gabions consist of wire mesh baskets that are placed and then filled with rock .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment of gabion baskets to the job site .
submit a certificate of compliance for the pvc coating .
identify any uvresistance additive on the certificate of compliance .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control if ordered verify the unit weight of a rockfilled gabion .
verify the weight using the smallest standard gabion basket filling method and rock that will be used on the project .
use certified scales for weighing .
calculae the unit weight using the theoretical volume of the basket .
num materials numa general the standard sizes for gabion baskets must be either of the following num .
mattress style that are num by num by num inches num .
cubical style that are num by num by num inches the width height or length of a standard basket must not vary more than num percent from the standard size shown .
each gabion must be manufactured with the necessary panels that are properly spaced and secured such that the panels can be rotated into position without additional tying of the rotation joint .
numb mesh use the same mesh for each style and size of gabion basket .
the size of wire used to manufacture mesh must comply with the requirements shown in the following tables section num slope protection num wire size with pvc coating gabion basket style usa wire gauge mesh type cubical num twisted num welded mattress num twisted num welded wire size without pvc coating gabion basket style usa wire gauge mesh type cubical num twisted num welded mattress num twisted num welded wire must comply with the requirements shown in the following table wire material requirements quality characteristic test method requirement tensile strength min ksi astm anum num numgauge wire diameter min in zinc coating min ozsq.ft astm anumanumm astm anumanumm class num and anum num num numgauge wire diameter min in zinc coating min ozsq.ft astm anumanumm astm anumanumm class num and anum num num numgauge wire diameter min in zinc coating min ozsq .
ft astm anumanumm astm anumanumm class num and anum num num twistedmesh wire must be formed with a nonraveling twist and into a uniform hexagonal pattern .
for pvccoated wire use numgauge size for the selvage wires .
for wire without a pvc coating use numgauge size for the selvage wires .
weldedmesh wires must num .
be formed into the grid pattern shown num .
be welded by resistance welding num .
comply with astm anum except weld shears must be num .
num lb minimum for numgauge wire num .
num lb minimum for numgauge wire resistance welding after coating the wire with zinc is allowed if there are no large splashes flakes or flashes of zinc at the weld .
numc pvc coating if pvc coating is shown coat the mesh wire standard tie wires standard binders internal connecting wires preformed stiffeners and selvage wire .
section num slope protection num a pvc coating must be uv resistant .
a suitable uvresistance additive must be blended with the pvc .
if the gabions are exposed to natural sunlight the color of the pvc coating must be gray and resistant to fading .
apply the zinc coating before applying the pvc coating .
application of the pvc coating must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
evaluate the pvc coating by infrared spectral scan .
the scan must closely match those of tested and accepted materials already on file at the transportation laboratory .
the minimum thickness of the pvc coating must be num inch when measured radially at any cross section transverse to the wire length .
pvc coating will be visually inspected .
there must be no nicks cuts holidays or abraded areas .
minor cuts nicks and other minor imperfections due to manufacturing are allowed along the selvagewrapped edges of the twisted wire mesh .
you are not required to coat the ends of the wires where they have been trimmed along wire or panel edges during the normal manufacturing processes .
numd joints standard tie wire and standard spiral binder wire must comply with the requirements shown in the following table .
tie wire and spiral binder wire material requirements quality characteristic test method requirement tensile strength min ksi astm anum num tie wire numgauge wire diameter max in diameter min in zinc coating min ozsq ft astm anumanumm astm anumanumm anumanumm class num and astm anum num num num spiral binder wire numgauge wire diameter max in diameter min in zinc coating min ozsq ft astm anumanumm astm anumanumm astm anumanumm class num and astm anum num num num spiral binders must have a numinch separation between continuous successive loops .
if shown you may use alternative fasteners .
for pvccoated wire alternative fasteners must comply with astm anumanumm tensile type num class num .
for wire without pvc coating alternative fasteners must comply with astm anum and num .
interlocking fasteners must be class i finish num with a class num zinc finish coating num .
overlapping fasteners must comply with class ii finish num with a class num zinc finish coating nume internal connecting wire internal connecting wires must be a minimum size of numgauge .
the wire must comply with the specifications for tie wire in section numd .
you may use preformed stiffeners instead of internal connecting wires .
preformed stiffeners must comply with the specifications for tie wire in section numd and be installed under the manufacturers instructions .
section num slope protection num numf fabric if gabions are shown for downdrains use woven tape fabric .
woven tape fabric must comply with astm dnum have a mass of at least num ozsq yd and have a maximum permeability of num galminutesq ft. numg rock rock for filling gabions must comply with the testing and corresponding specifications in section num numb .
rocks for gabion baskets equal to or greater than num inches in height must vary in size and comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table rock gradation for numinch or larger baskets screen size in percentage passing num num num num rocks for gabion baskets that are num inches in height must vary in size and comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table .
rock gradation for numinch baskets screen size in percentage passing num num num num the unit weight of a rockfilled gabion must be at least num lb cu ft. num construction numa general areas where gabions are to be placed must be constructed to the lines and grades shown .
if fabric is shown place the fabric on the subgrade backslope and sides of the excavations .
if earth fill is to be placed over the gabions place the fabric on top of the gabions before placing the earth fill .
gabions must be divided by diaphragm panels such that baskets are numinch long cells .
numb assembly individually assemble empty gabion baskets and successively join the baskets .
assemble the individual mesh panels base front ends back diaphragms and lid and successive gabions such that the strength and flexibility along the joints is comparable to a single panel .
assemble the gabions as empty units .
rotate panels and diaphragms into position and join them along the vertical edges .
for twisted wire mesh construct joints using alternating double and single half hitches and locked loops made at numinch nominal spacing .
use numgauge standard tie wire .
do not construct joints with simple spiraling or looping without locking of the tie wire .
for welded wire mesh construct joints using either of the following num .
standard tie wire and alternating double and single half hitches and locked loops in every mesh opening along the joint num .
numgauge spiral binders with the spiral binder passing through every mesh opening along the joint .
crimp both ends of the spiral binder and secure it in place .
section num slope protection num you may use temporary fasteners to hold panels at gabiontogabion joints .
the temporary fasteners may remain in place .
use either interlocking fasteners or overlapping fasteners .
place a fastener at each mesh opening along the joint .
for pvc coated wire the spacing of fasteners must be at least num fasteners per num inches .
for wire without pvc coating the spacing of fasteners must be at least num fasteners per num inches .
set individual gabion baskets in place .
successively join the basket to the adjacent basket with num gauge tie wire or numgauge standard spiral binder before filling the basket with rock .
in num pass the tie wire or spiral binder must secure all selvage or end wires of the panels along the joint .
if forming successive gabiontogabion joints with alternative fasteners use num alternative fastener at each mesh opening .
the alternative fastener must contain and secure all wires along the joint .
join gabion baskets along the front back and ends including the top and bottom of adjacent gabions .
step and stagger multilayered gabion configurations .
join each layer of gabion to the underlying layer along the front back and ends .
join shear key and counterfort gabions to the underlying gabions along the front back and ends .
for transitional gabions fold cut and fasten the gabion baskets as shown or as authorized .
numc filling before filling each gabion basket straighten any kinks and folds in the wire and align the baskets .
place rock in the basket and preserve the alignment .
avoid bulges and minimize voids .
exposed rock surfaces must have a smooth and neat appearance .
sharp rocks must not project through the wire mesh .
use internal connecting wires or preformed stiffeners to produce a flat smooth external surface .
when filling numinchhigh gabions place the rock in numinchdeep layers .
when filling numinchhigh gabions place the rock in numinchdeep layers .
install internal connecting wires or preformed stiffeners before adding additional layers .
the last layer of rock must slightly overfill the gabion basket such that the lid will rest on rock when the lid is closed .
lids must be tied along the front end and diaphragms with numgauge tie wire or numgauge standard spiral binder .
in num pass the tie wire or spiral binder must secure all selvage or end wires of the panels along the lid .
if securing the lid with alternative fasteners use num alternative fastener at each mesh opening .
the alternative fastener must contain and secure all wires along the lid .
num payment the payment quantity for gabion is the volume determined from the dimensions shown or the actual volume of gabions placed .
num existing slope protection num general numa general section num includes specifications for performing work on existing slope protection .
work performed on existing slope protection must comply with section num .
numb material not used numc construction not used section num slope protection num numd payment not used num remove slope paving numa general section num includes specifications for removing slope protection .
numb materials not used numc construction not used numd payment the payment quantity for remove slope paving is the area of the slope paving measured before starting removal num reserved num num concrete curbs and sidewalks num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing concrete curbs sidewalks and their appurtenances such as gutter depressions and island paving and curb ramps and driveways .
steel dowels reinforcing steel and welded wire reinforcement must comply with section num .
num materials numa general concrete for curbs sidewalks and their appurtenances must be minor concrete containing at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
for extruded or slip form curb construction the maximum aggregate size must be from num to num inch .
the cementitious material content must be at least num pounds per cubic yard if a maximum of numinch aggregate is used .
preformed expansion joint filler must comply with astm dnum .
mortar must comply with section numf .
form oil must num .
be commercial quality or an equivalent coating num .
allow the ready release of forms num .
not discolor the concrete numb detectable warning surfaces a detectable warning surface must be on the authorized material list for detectable warning surfaces and must match yellow color no .
num of fedstdnum .
num construction numa general construct contraction joints by num scoring concrete with a grooving tool and rounding corners with an edger tool or num saw cutting hardened concrete to a depth of at least num inch .
immediately apply curing compound to the exposed surfaces of saw cut joints .
construct expansion joints at each side of structures and at the ends of curb returns .
fill expansion joints with numinchthick preformed joint filler .
finish the concrete adjacent to expansion joints with an edger tool .
do not construct expansion joints within num feet of an island nose .
shape the preformed joint filler to match the surface contour of the concrete .
numb subgrade preparation remove soft or spongy basement material to a depth of num inches below the subgrade elevation for curbs gutter depressions island paving and driveways and num inches below the subgrade elevation for sidewalks and curb ramps .
backfill the subgrade with earth sand or gravel to produce a stable foundation .
apply water to the subgrade and thoroughly compact it before placing concrete .
verify that the finished surface of the subgrade does not project into the concrete cross section at any point by num .
using a template supported on the side forms for the fixed form method num .
measuring from the offset guide line or survey marks for the extruded or slip form method numc fixed form method set forms to the required alignment grade and dimensions .
forms must section num concrete curbs and sidewalk num num .
be smooth on the side placed against concrete .
num .
have a straight upper edge .
num .
be rigid enough to withstand the pressure of fresh concrete without distortion .
use enough stakes clamps spreaders and braces to ensure rigidity .
num .
be clean of debris and old concrete .
num .
coated with form oil before placing concrete .
you may use either benders or thin plank forms on curves grade changes or curb returns .
wet the subgrade and forms immediately before placing the concrete .
place the preformed joint filler at expansion joints in the correct position before placing concrete against the filler .
place and compact the concrete without segregation .
numd extruded and slip form methods wet the subgrade immediately before placing the concrete .
feed concrete into the extrusion machine at a uniform rate .
restrain forward travel of the extrusion machine to produce a wellcompacted mass of concrete requiring no further finishing other than a light brushing .
the brush may be filled with water .
do not finish the concrete surface with a brush application of grout .
if you use a slip form machine automatically control the alignment grade and cross slope by one of the following methods num .
sensing from preset string lines num .
string line control of the alignment and grade and automatic control of the cross slope the slip form machine must have traveling forms rigid enough to produce the required cross section .
the machine must produce a dense homogeneous concrete true to grade and cross section and require minimum handwork .
consolidate the concrete with internal vibrators or other authorized method .
use a smaller maximum size of aggregate with an extruded or slip form machine if it is required to produce concrete num free from surface pits larger than num inch in diameter and num with welldefined web marks of water on the surface .
you may construct expansion joints by sawing through the concrete cross section to its full depth .
the width of the cut must provide a tight fit for the joint filler .
insert preformed joint filler into sawed joints and mortar it in place .
if a joint is cut before the concrete has hardened num .
protect the adjacent surfaces with close fitting firmly supported shields num .
complete the saw cut and insertion of the preformed joint filler before curing the concrete if a joint is cut after the concrete has hardened num .
mortar preformed joint filler in place using heavy trowel pressure num .
cover the exposed portions of the concrete in the vicinity of the saw cut with an additional application of curing compound after the concrete has cured check the joint filler for a tight fit .
if any loose joints are found mortar the joint in place and recheck after the mortar has cured .
repeat as necessary to achieve a tight fit .
nume curing cure concrete using the curing compound method with pigmented curing compound .
completely coat the exposed faces of the concrete with curing compound .
num payment not used section num concrete curbs and sidewalk num num curbs num general section num includes specifications for constructing curbs .
num materials not used num construction numa general if curbs are constructed over existing pavement use steel dowels and reinforcing steel or adhesive to anchor the curb to the existing pavement .
anchor steel dowels in drilled holes with mortar made from equal parts by volume of portland cement sand and water .
you may use anchor bolts instead of anchored steel dowels if authorized .
if adhesive is used remove all dust loose material or oil from the surface of the existing pavement by either wire brushing or blast cleaning .
construct contraction and expansion joints at right angles to the line of the curb .
space contraction joints at numfoot intervals .
for curbs adjacent to existing concrete align the curb joints with the existing concretes pavement joints .
the top and face of the finished curb must be true and straight .
the top surface of the curb must be uniform in width and free from humps sags or other irregularities .
clean any discolored concrete by abrasive blast cleaning or other authorized method .
except for curbs on structures you may place curbs with an extrusion machine or a slip form paver if num .
finished curb is true to line and grade num .
concrete contains the maximum quantity of water that maintains the curbs shape without support num .
required surface texture is attained check the flatness of the top and face of the curb and the surface of the gutter with a numfoot straightedge .
the surfaces must be flat to within num foot except at grade changes or curves .
numb fixed form method set fixed forms the full depth of the back and face of the curb .
the back forms may be constructed with numinchthick bender boards .
cleat the back forms together as required to attain the full depth of the curb .
use form clamps to prevent interference with finishing activities .
before removing the forms finish the surface true to grade with a straightedge float at least num feet in length .
operate the straightedge float longitudinally over the concrete surface .
remove the forms from the face of the curb from num to num hours after placing the concrete .
do not remove the forms if the concrete is plastic enough to slump .
after removing the forms immediately use a steel trowel to attain a smooth finish .
the smooth finish must extend num to within num foot of the flow line or num to the flow line of a curb with an integral gutter .
after smoothing the curbs face apply a finebrush finish parallel to the line of the curb .
numc extruded or slip form methods for an extrusion machine use the departments survey marks to determine the offset guide line for setting the grade for the top of the curb .
the extrusion machine must have a gradeline gauge or pointer that allows continual comparison between the curb placement and the offset guide line .
the machine must be capable of vertical adjustment during forward travel to construct curbs of varying height as determined by the offset guide line .
section num concrete curbs and sidewalk num you may operate the extrusion machine on rails or forms set at a uniform depth below the established grade of the top of curb .
num payment not used num sidewalks gutter depressions island paving curb ramps and driveways num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing sidewalks gutter depressionsisland paving curb ramps and driveways .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a numyear manufacturers replacement warranty against defects in a prefabricated detectable warning surface .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum warranties the numyear manufacturers replacement warranty for a prefabricated detectable warning surface must cover defects in dome shape color fastness soundoncane acoustic quality resilience and attachment .
the numyear warranty period starts at contract acceptance .
numdnum quality control reserved num materials not used num construction construct expansion joints at num .
all returns and opposite expansion joints in the adjacent curb num .
numfoot intervals where there is no adjacent curb construct contraction joints to create rectangular patterns from num to num square feet in the surface of sidewalks .
install a prefabricated detectable warning surface under the manufacturers instructions .
broom finish the surface of sidewalks gutter depressions curb ramps and driveways .
make the broom finish perpendicular to the path of travel on surfaces used by pedestrians .
you may apply water to the surface immediately before brooming .
the finished surface must not vary more than num foot from a numfoot straightedge except at grade changes .
if placing pavement around or adjacent to manholes pipe inlets or other miscellaneous structures in sidewalk gutter depression island paving curb ramps or driveway areas do not finish the miscellaneous structures to final grade until the pavement is finished beyond the miscellaneous structure .
if using fixed forms strike off and compact fresh concrete until a layer of mortar is brought to the surface .
finish the surface with a float to grade and cross section and trowel smooth .
leave forms in place for sidewalks gutter depressions island paving curb ramps and driveways for at least num hours after surface finishing .
section num concrete curbs and sidewalk num clean any discolored concrete by abrasive blast cleaning or other authorized method .
num payment not used num textured concrete and colored concrete surfaces num general numa summary section num includes specifications for texturing and coloring concrete surfaces .
texture concrete by imprinting with stamps tools brooms or other methods to attain the pattern or impressions shown .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit the manufacturers data for the color hardener and curing and finishing compounds for each color of a concrete surface colored by the dryshake method .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control construct test panels for textured or colored concrete under section numdnumc .
numdnum department acceptance the department accepts textured or colored concrete surfaces based on a visual comparison with the test panel .
num materials aggregate for textured or colored concrete surfaces must comply with the gradation requirements for fine aggregate .
aggregate used in grout for textured and colored concrete surfaces must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table aggregate gradation for grout sieve size percentage passing no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num color pigments for the dryshake method must comply with astm cnum .
num construction protect the surrounding exposed surfaces during the placement finishing and curing of colored concrete .
screed the concrete to the grade and cross section shown and strike off and compact the concrete until a layer of mortar is brought to the surface .
wood float the concrete to produce a uniform surface .
for the dryshake method apply the color hardener in num applications while the concrete surface is plastic .
use at least num lb of hardener per num sq ft of concrete surface .
wood float the surface after each application of hardener .
trowel the surface only after final floating .
section num concrete curbs and sidewalk num texture the concrete while it is in the plastic stage .
for a texture that requires a concrete stamp use the stamp under the manufacturers instructions .
do not texture or grout the grooved area and detectable warning surface on a curb ramp .
cure the concrete surfaces using the curing compound method with curing compound no .
num .
place any grout after the num initial curing of the textured concrete and num removal of curing seal and other deleterious substances .
the method of removal must not stain or discolor areas of textured concrete to remain exposed after grouting .
spread and consolidate the grout over the textured concrete under the manufacturers instructions .
remove excess grout with a squeegee and damp burlap rags or other authorized method .
apply curing seal .
num payment not used num reserved num existing curbs and sidewalks num general section num includes specifications for performing work on existing curbs sidewalks and their appurtenances such as gutter depressions and island paving .
work performed on existing curbs and sidewalks must comply with section num .
num materials not used num construction if you repair any part of a curb sidewalk curb ramp driveway or gutter depression remove and replace the entire section between contraction or expansion joints .
at contraction joints saw cut a true line at least num inches deep before concrete removal .
install a prefabricated detectable warning surface on an existing curb ramp under the manufacturers instructions .
num payment not used num reserved num num pumping equipment and controls num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for installing pumping equipment and the control systems .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general if you use the drainage pumps to maintain total pumping capacity before contract acceptance submit num .
shop drawings for the drainage inlet bulkhead and safeguards num .
maintenance work plan numcnum shop drawings plans and detail drawings may be num by num inches .
submit shop drawings for the pumping equipment including num .
system layout num .
piping connections num .
appurtenances num .
other materials required for the equipment installation num .
mounting details and anchorage details submit shop drawings for the electrical equipment including num .
electrical equipment schematics num .
control diagrams num .
wiring diagrams num .
conductor numbers for control and power conductors do not use project plan reproductions or the manufacturers standard printed data for electrical layout drawings .
submit shop drawings for the installation of drainage pump equipment and pumping plant electrical equipment after product data submittals are authorized .
if the drainage pump and pumping plant electrical equipment require changes to the pump plant metal work or other construction details submit revised shop drawings .
numcnum product data submit at least num copies of product data .
each copy must be bound together and include an index stating equipment names manufacturers and model numbers .
two copies will be returned .
product data must include num .
catalog cuts including num .
manufacturers name num .
catalog or part number num .
size num .
capacity num .
electrical ratings num .
finish num .
maintenance and adjustment requirements num .
identification symbols described num .
installation instructions num .
performance data section num pumping equipment and controls num num .
installation instructions numcnum samples the engineer may request material samples of submitted equipment .
numcnum work plans numcnuma general reserved numcnumb performance testing plan submit a work plan for performance testing of pumping plant equipment .
the work plan must include methods for num .
blocking pipes at their entrance point into the storage box num .
removing all debris from the pumping plant storage box debris sump and pump sump before testing num .
locating and installing bulkheads in the storage boxes if used num .
performing an operational test including pump controller operation num .
supplying water num .
disposing of water numcnumc maintenance plan submit a work plan for maintaining the existing pumping plants total pumping capacity and maintaining the pumping plant as specified in section nume .
the work plan must include num .
pumping plant maintenance procedures and schedule .
num .
alternatives for maintaining total pumping capacity as specified in section nume .
num .
description of the proposed pumping equipment .
if using alternative num or num specified in section num nume include auxiliary pump curves equipment ratings quantity and power supply .
num .
method for water disposal .
numcnum maintenance and operation manual submit a maintenance and operations manual before completion of the work .
submit num copy of pdf files on a cd or dvd and num copies in print format in numring binders with tabbed dividers .
the manual must include all authorized action submittals for drainage pump equipment and pumping plant electrical equipment .
organize each binder as follows num .
index num .
part lists num .
operating instructions num .
maintenance instructions num .
wiring schematics with control and power conductor numbers identified num .
certified pump curves incomplete or inadequate documents are returned for correction and resubmittal .
submit all paperwork delivered with the pumping plant equipment to the engineer .
numd quality assurance numdnum general notify the engineer at least num days before testing .
the pump plant must be complete before testing is performed .
furnish all water and electrical energy necessary for testing .
if authorized you may use the pumping plant discharge system .
numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved section num pumping equipment and controls num numdnumb operational tests perform the operational tests in the engineers presence .
the engineer verifies the pump nameplates before testing .
fill the pump sump and storage boxes with water .
fill boxes as required until the operational tests and performance tests are authorized .
if authorized you may add bulkheads in the storage boxes .
perform operational tests of the pumping plant to demonstrate num .
proper rotation of each pump num .
manual operation of the pumps separately and combined num .
automatic operation of the pumps separately and combined numdnumc performance tests after acceptance of the operational tests the engineer will run performance tests on the installed pumping plant equipment under section numcnumb .
performance tests include two numminute tests for each pump .
performance tests must show that each installed drainage pump complies with at least num num percent of the factory certified performance curve and num the design pump rates shown .
each pump must not load its motor more than the actual full load nameplate amperage regardless of head .
the motor service factor will not be applied .
remove bulkheads and blocking from pipes after performance testing is complete .
numdnumd drainage pump final inspection if you use the drainage pumps installed under the contract to maintain the total pumpling capacity for the pumping plant drainage area before contract acceptance remove and disassemble the pumps after your final use of the pumps .
remove and disassemble the pumps before contract acceptance .
the engineer performs a final inspection of the pumps .
worn damaged or otherwise unsatisfactory parts must be replaced .
assemble and reinstall the pumps .
test the drainage pumps used before contract acceptance under section numcnumb after the engineers final inspection and before contract acceptance .
num materials numa general anchorages must comply with the specifications for concrete anchorage devices in section numc .
numb delivery storage and handling deliver products to the job site in an undamaged condition in the manufacturers original sealed container or other packaging system .
packaging must be complete with labels and instructions for handling storing unpacking protecting and installing .
store and handle products num under the manufacturers written instructions and num such that you prevent damage deterioration or loss and maintain warrantee requirements .
num construction numa general reserved numb painting painting metal work must comply with section num .
paint uncoated drainage pump equipment including metal work as machinery under section num numcnum .
paint all wood surfaces under section num before installation .
section num pumping equipment and controls num paint the pump number on each drainage pump motor and on each discharge pipe num feet above every landing .
the numbers must be stenciled and at least num inches tall .
paint an arrow showing the direction of the drainage pump rotation on each discharge pipe num feet above every landing .
the arrows must be stenciled and at least num inches long .
use num applications of commercialquality white gloss enamel .
paint surfaces before they become unreachable because of assembly operations .
painting must not impair legibility life expectancy or function of the following items num .
brass surfaces num .
nameplates num .
warning plates num .
push buttons num .
operating handles num .
electrical cover plates num .
plastic parts num .
locks repair exposed nongalvanized threads or damaged galvanizing under section numb .
clean prime and touch up damaged areas of painted surfaces .
use the same type of primer paint and color as the damaged finish .
do not use cold galvanizing aerosol cans for repair or touchup work .
numc care and cleaning do not install pumping plant equipment until the structural portion of the pump sump is substantially complete .
you may install anchors and embedded equipment whenever required by the structural work .
protect the installed equipment from damage .
clean equipment enclosures galvanized and noncorrodible metal surfaces and wood surfaces in the pumping plant after installation under section numd .
remove debris from the pump house pump sump storage boxes and premises at contract acceptance .
numd maintenance instructions supply an numbynum inch fusedlaminate copy of num .
maintenance instructions in a galvanized sheetmetal frame .
install the frame on an interior pump house wall .
num .
control system schematic diagram .
install the diagram on the inside of a motor control center door .
nume total pumping capacity and maintenance requirements the department will not issue relief from maintenance and protection until contract acceptance .
for existing pumping plants num .
stage removal activities such that the total pumping capacity is maintained num .
provide pumping plant maintenance upon completion of pumping plants num .
maintain total pumping capacity num .
provide pumping plant maintenance furnish electrical energy necessary for maintaining the total pumping capacity and maintenance requirements .
pumping plant maintenance must include num .
removing dirt and debris from the storage boxes entrance bay pump sump and drainage inlets section num pumping equipment and controls num num .
performing adjustments and repairs for proper operation of drainage pump equipment and pumping plant electrical equipment keep a pump house logbook of pumping plant maintenance activities .
include the maintenance dates work performed and the name of the employee doing the work .
maintain the total pumping capacity at the corresponding dynamic head shown .
use one of the following alternatives to maintain the total pumping capacity num .
stage activities such that the entire pumping plant is complete and able to maintain total pumping capacity .
num .
furnish an auxiliary pumping system with a capacity equal to the total pumping capacity .
this system must include a power supply controls temporary drainage system sump pumps and discharge piping .
num .
combination of the above num alternatives .
dispose of water .
if authorized you may use the pumping plant discharge system .
numf use of pumps before contract acceptance section numf applies if you use the drainage pumps installed under the contract to maintain total pumping capacity before contract acceptance .
the pumping plant must be complete .
storage boxes screens pump sumps and pumping plant equipment must be authorized before use .
drainage water must be settled before entering the pumping plant .
drainage water must flow through safeguards and drainage inlet bulkheads to remove nonsuspended solids .
nonsuspended solids include debris soil sand and gravel .
safeguards include stilling ponds basins check dams and weirs .
safeguards must num .
intercept the drainage water and effectively stop nonsuspended solids by settling num .
deliver settled water to paved surfaces pipes or other nonerodible channels leading to the drainage inlets num .
be maintained such that the safeguards function as intended construct bulkheads around drainage inlets discharging to the pump sump and storage boxes .
drainage inlet bulkheads must consist of burlap sacks filled with pervious material .
num payment not used num drainage pumping equipment num general numa summary section num includes specifications for installing drainage pumping equipment .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general reserved numcnum product data submit product data for the following items num .
drainage pumps num .
flexible expansion couplings num .
wall louvers num .
flap valves section num pumping equipment and controls num num .
pressure gauges num .
pump house doors the drainage pump data must include num .
pump components num .
representative pump curve showing the motor does not develop more than num percent of its nameplate horsepower anywhere on the curve num .
hp kva kw power factor and voltage num .
starting and running currents num .
thermal and magnetic trip settings num .
starter overloads current setting num .
motor nameplate data including num .
full load speed num .
full load current num .
voltage num .
locked rotor kva per rated horsepower or code letter numcnum certificates of compliance submit certificates of compliance for factory certified impeller balancing and factory certified drainage pump tests .
certification documents must be in us customary units .
submit the factory original hard copy and num copies as pdf files on num cds or dvds .
send to osd documents unit .
the department will not accept a facsimile copy .
notify the engineer of the submittal .
include in the notification the date and contents of the submittal .
factorycertified test documents for each drainage pump must include num .
generated pump curve from the cutoff head to the minimum dynamic head shown .
show on the pump curve num .
identified test points used to generate the pump curve .
num .
plot of the design pump rates and dynamic heads shown on the pump curve .
num .
identified and plotted test point horsepower and efficiencies on the pump curve .
num .
data that confirms the pump develops from num to num percent of the motor nameplate power at the point the pump requires maximum power .
num .
motor rpm .
num .
impeller final diameter .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum regulatory requirements drainage pumps must be factory certified under ansihi num .
each pump certification must be for the actual motor pump and trimmed impeller combination delivered to the job site .
the impeller balancing must be factory certified under iso num iso balance quality grade gnum at the supplied motor rpm .
num materials numa general reserved numb drainage pumps and pumping apparatus numbnum general reserved section num pumping equipment and controls num numbnum drainage pump drainage pumps must be submersible endsuction singlestage closecoupled overhungimpeller centrifugal wastewater pumps complying with ansihi num and ansihi num .
pumps must be assembled and tested at the factory .
do not use a base elbow mounted pump .
drainage pumps must be coated with the manufacturers standard finish for the intended use .
drainage pumps must be the rpm and voltage shown and comply with the design pump rates and dynamic heads shown .
drainage pumps must have cast iron num .
casings num .
brackets num .
volutes with open inlet num .
horizontal pump discharges drainage pumps must have a base support engineered to allow design flow into the volute and support the assembled weight of the drainage pump .
base support legs must be bolted to the floor .
drainage pumps must have num replaceable bronze wear rings on the impeller and casing and num non magnetic stainless steel external nuts and bolts .
drainage pump impellers must be num .
dynamically balanced .
num .
made from ductile iron or bronze .
num .
nonclog type open or semiopen design for sludge and able to handle solids up to num inches .
num .
trimmed to develop from num to num percent of the motor nameplate power at the point of maximum load and still deliver at least the design pump rates and dynamic heads shown .
num .
keyed and secured to the shaft .
the impeller balancing must not weaken or deform the impeller .
drainage pumps must have a stainless steel shaft with factorysealed lubricated roller bearings tandem doublemechanical seals of tungsten carbide or silicon carbide with an oil reservoir and have internal moisture sensors in the oil reservoir .
motors must be a standard efficiency nema code letter a through g numphase nema design b motor with cable assembly .
the cable assembly must include a numconductor power cable and a numconductor control cable .
the motor with cable assembly must be rated for class num division num locations .
motors must have nema class f insulation builtin thermal protection with lifting eyes or lugs .
the cables must be listed for extra hard service for class num division num locations .
each cable must include an equipment grounding conductor with green or green with yellow stripe insulation .
the cables must be long enough to be installed from the motor to the enclosure shown without splicing .
install cable connectors for termination in the junction box .
each drainage pump must have a motor nameplate and pump identification nameplate .
attach identical nameplates to the inside of the corresponding starter compartment door on the motor control cabinet .
numbnum pumping apparatus flap valves must have an iron body with pipe flange frame and bronze mating surfaces .
fasteners expansion anchors nuts bolts and washers must be type num stainless steel .
pressure gauges must be a compound gauge complying with asme bnum grade a and must have num .
numinch liquid filled dial with stainless steel case and cover .
num .
reset screw .
num .
numinch mpt bottom inlet .
num .
range from num inches hg vacuum to num psi .
num .
gauge guard and gauge cock .
the gauge guard must be a num by num inch pvc or cpvc body ptfe or viton diaphragm and rated for num to num psi .
the gauge cock must be a numinch npt brass ball valve .
section num pumping equipment and controls num numc pump house doors louvers and fans numcnum general fabricate pump house doors and frames under ansisdi anum or ansinaammhmma num .
hinges must comply with ansibhma anum .
locksets must comply with ansibhma anum .
door gasketing must comply with ansibhma anum .
thresholds must comply with ansibhma anum .
galvannealed steel sheet must be commercial steel type b complying with astm anumanumm with at least an anum metallic coating complying with astm anumanumm .
numcnum pump house doors the pump house door consists of the door frame and door hardware .
furnish the factory applied finish coating system for the exterior locations .
the pump house doors must be at least num inches thick full flush seamless hollow metal construction .
the doors must comply with ansisdi anum physical endurance level a and the following num .
fabricate face sheets vertical stiffeners and top and bottom channels from numinchthick galvannealed steel sheet .
num .
fabricate the steelstiffened core using vertical stiffeners that extend the fulldoor height .
install stiffeners not more than num inches apart and spot weld to both face sheets no more than num inches on center .
fill the spaces between the stiffeners with glassfiber insulation or mineralfiber insulation .
num .
top and bottom channels must be continuous and spot welded to both face sheets .
the top channel must be flush and the bottom channel must be inverted .
num .
include moisture vents in the bottom channel .
the door frames must num .
be fabricated from numinchthick galvannealed steel sheet num by num inches in section num .
include galvannealed steel sheet grout guards at least num inches thick num .
have continuously welded num face joints and num miter corners that are flush and made smooth num .
include an integral stop num .
include a steel channel or angle stiffener head reinforcement at least num inch thick for openings wider than num inches floor anchors must be welded to the bottom of jambs and mullions with at least num spot welds for each anchor .
there must be at least num jamb anchors on each side .
hinges must be type anum or anum heavy weight stainless steel pin num knuckle ball bearing and nonremovable pin with set screw .
hinge fasteners must be supplied by the hinge manufacturer .
locksets must be series num bored operational grade num security grade num with a nonhanded steel lock chassis and selfaligning trim with concealed through bolts .
locksets must be function fnum with knobs chromium roses and a numinch steel square corner latchbolt .
weatherstripping must have a polyurethane seal .
the overhead door drips must have a num inch projection and be full width .
the door shoe with rain drips must be mill finished aluminum with a neoprene insert end covers and formed rain drip .
thresholds must be nominal num inches wide mill aluminum with factory non slip finish and span the full width of the opening shown .
numcnum wall louvers wall louvers must be continuous channel frame with nonvision inverted y blades .
wall louvers must num .
have a frame fabricated from num gauge electrogalvanized steel num .
have dual num gauge security grilles with through bolted screws on the inside num .
have a bronze insect and bird screen in a removable frame fastened on the inside num .
be factory primed and finished with enamel or powder coated epoxy numcnum fans reserved section num pumping equipment and controls num numd pipe joints and fittings numdnum general reserved numdnum steel pipe galvanized steel pipe must be standard weight complying with astm anumanumm .
threaded fittings must be galvanized steel or galvanized malleable iron .
welded steel pipe must comply with section num except that electrically insulated connections must not be used .
coat pipe under section numbnum .
steel pipe must be flanged .
flanges may be a factory threaded or welded type .
flange dimensions must comply with asme bnum class num .
threaded flanges must be ductile iron complying with ansiawwa cnumanum .
welded flanges must be steel hub slipon type complying with ansiawwa cnum class d. galvanize welded flange pipe sections under section numb .
gaskets must be a full face sbr rubber flange type complying with asme bnum class num .
steel flange bolts washers and nuts must be nonmagnetic stainless steel .
numdnum ductile iron pipe ductile iron pipe must comply with ansiawwa cnumanum .
pipe and fitting joints must be a gasketed mechanical joint type complying with ansiawwa cnumanum .
pipe fittings must comply with ansiawwa cnuma num and asme bnum class num .
pipe and fittings must have an asphaltic coating complying with ansiawwa cnumanum and an epoxy lining complying with ansiawwa cnumanum .
numdnum flexible expansion couplings flexible expansion couplings must be gasketed shortsleeve type having num .
mild steel middle ring with pipe stop num .
num rubbercompounded wedgesection ring gaskets num .
num mild steel follower rings num .
mild steel bolts to compress the gaskets galvanize all ferrous parts after fabrication .
assemble couplings such that a permanent watertight joint is obtained .
nume bracing and hardware brace drainage pumps and other equipment to prevent movement during operation .
the bracing method must comply with california seismic hazard zone requirements in the cbc .
slots for bolt and ubolt holes in bracing and clips must be num bolt diameters wide .
the slot holes must be parallel to the axis of the member .
install cut washers under bolt heads and nuts for slotted hole locations .
galvanize braces frames and other metal hardware under section numb .
pumping plant metal work must comply with section num .
numf storage cabinets storage cabinets must num .
be wall mounted steel and bolted or welded construction num .
have double doors with a single locking handle or magnet catch and padlock staples num .
have num adjustable shelves num .
be from num to num inches wide num to num inches deep and num to num inches tall section num pumping equipment and controls num num .
be factory primed and finish painted num construction numa general install pressure gauges with gauge guards and gauge cocks .
mount the gauges vertically .
furnish specialty tools required for the assembly or adjustment of equipment .
mount the tools in the storage cabinet .
install tools too large for the cabinet on adjacent brackets .
numb pump house doors install pump house doors under ansibhma anum .
check door frames for squareness alignment twist and plumbness before and after installation and adjust if necessary .
the tolerances are num inch .
check the door frame as follows num .
squareness at the door rabbet on a line num degrees from the jamb perpendicular to frame head num .
alignment at jambs on a horizontal line parallel to the plane of the wall num .
twist at opposite face corners of jambs on parallel lines and perpendicular to the plane of the wall num .
plumbness at jambs on a perpendicular line from head to floor fill the space between the door frame and wall with grout .
the grout slump must not exceed num inches .
do not deform or damage frames during grouting .
remove grout and other bonding materials from exposed surfaces of doors and frames immediately after grout work .
if grout contains an antifreezing agent field apply a bituminous coating to the backside of frames .
fit the door in the frame and shim as necessary .
install weatherstripping on the top and sides of the frame .
install a door shoe on the door .
install an overhead door drip over the door .
use weatherproof silicone sealant and adhesive as the threshold bedding sealant .
furnish a padlock for the pump house door until contract acceptance .
the department furnishes padlocks after contract acceptance .
num payment not used num pumping plant electrical equipment num general numa summary section num includes specifications for installing pumping plant electrical equipment .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general submit the tollfree telephone number of the designated service organization for manufacturers field services as an informational submittal .
numcnum product data submit product data for num .
power and metering equipment num .
pump control num .
conduit num .
conductors and cables num .
nameplates and warning plates num .
miscellaneous materials section num pumping equipment and controls num numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum regulatory requirements electrical equipment must comply with section num and be nrtl certified .
materials and workmanship must comply with section num and the following num .
num ca code of regs num et seq .
num .
num ca code of regs num et seq .
num .
nfpa num standard for fire protection in wastewater treatment and collection facilities numdnum manufacturers field services at contract acceptance provide num months of full maintenance for the pump controller by qualified employees of the pump controller manufacturers designated service organization .
maintenance must include the manufacturers routine preventive maintenance adjustments for proper operation and all required parts and supplies .
numdnum field quality control a factoryauthorized service representative must inspect test and adjust the pump controller for proper installation operation components and connections .
numdnum training train num department personnel in the programming connection operation troubleshooting and maintenance of the pump controller .
the training must be for at least num hours at the job site .
the training instructor must be a factoryauthorized representative of the pump controller manufacturer .
the training must include num .
books manuals and other training material for department personnel num .
equipment required for the pump controller training num .
handson experience in programming techniques and operation num materials numa general all magnetic coils of relays starters and other electrical equipment must be wound for an operating range having a mean equal to the voltage applied .
numb power and metering equipment numbnum general reserved numbnum service pedestal equipment reserved numbnum motor control center equipment panelboards must be a factoryassembled panelboard interior with metal cover singlephase numwire num vac and must have num .
numpole num a main circuit breaker and molded case branch circuit breakers num .
phase neutral and ground buses that are harddrawn copper num percent conductivity num .
separate isolated neutral bus num .
ground bus bonded to the cabinet num .
directory frame mounted on the inside of the door section num pumping equipment and controls num current switches must be selfpowered solid state alternating current sensing switches having the following num .
singlepole normally open contact rated numampere at num vac num .
numinchdiameter throughhole num .
low range current sensing level from num to num a num .
highrange current sensing level from num to num a time meters must be num vac and nonresettable from num to num hours .
selector switches must num .
be singlepole numpositionmaintained num a num vac rotary types num .
have contacts rated at num vac and num percent power factor num .
have an inductive pilot duty rating of num .
num a make num .
num a break num .
num a continuous pilot lights must be panel mounted num vac highvisibility leds with a colored plastic lens and screw cap .
control relays must be num vac numpole doublethrow general purpose relays with a clear plastic case and numpin plug base with num a contacts .
control relays must include a matching barrier type numcontact relay socket with num a contacts and screw terminals .
time delay relays must num .
be num vac electronic ondelay types num .
have doublepole doublethrow doublebreak num a contacts having a range from num to num seconds num .
have time delays set for num .
tdrnum num seconds num .
tdrnum num seconds intrinsically safe relays must be num .
solidstate completely selfcontained latching types num .
nrtl approved for use with class i division num location sensors num .
num vac with singlepole doublethrow num a contact with num .
maximum turnon time of num milliseconds num .
maximum output current of num ma at num vdc push buttons must num .
be heavy duty general purpose types num .
have num normally open momentary contact rated at num vac and num percent power factor num .
have an inductive pilot duty rating of num .
num a make num .
num a break num .
num a continuous terminal blocks must comply with nema ics num and be num .
din rail mounted or attached to the enclosure num .
rated for num a at num vac num .
made from molded plastic num .
equipped with num .
highpressure clamp connectors num .
nameplates screwed to each block or a computer printed plastic label attached with adhesive num .
identified conductor numbers section num pumping equipment and controls num numc pump control numcnum general the automatic operation of the drainage pump must be controlled by the water level monitoring system and pump controller .
numcnum water level monitoring system the water level monitoring system must be a trapped air level monitoring type that calculates the water depth using air pressure that is converted to an electrical signal .
the system must include an air compressor numway solenoid valve pressure transducer polyethylene air tube and a compression bell .
the system must num .
operate from num to num feet of water head num .
be accurate to num feet for ambient conditions ranging from num to num degrees f num .
isolate the pressure transducer during the purge cycle of the air column the air compressor must num .
have a num vac num hp shaded pole motor with integral overload protection num .
include an aluminum piston with polytetrafluoroethylenesleeved cylinder num .
have a capacity of at least num cu ftmin at num psi num .
be capable of initializing against a num psi head the solenoid valve must be a num vac direct acting threeway type having a nema type num plastic body and compression connections .
the pressure transducer must output a num to numma signal .
the polyethylene air tube must be a numinchthick wall type complying with astm dnum class a .
numcnum pump controller the pump controller must num control the pumps based on the output signal of the water level monitoring system num interface with the monitoring system and num generate alarms .
the controller must be num vac solid state industrial grade with software stored in nonvolatile memory .
the controller must process the num ma signal from the water level monitoring system and operate the pumps as follows num .
alternate pumps for each lead pump operation num .
energize the lead pump at the water level shown num .
energize the lag pump at the water level shown num .
deenergize the lead pump at the water level shown num .
deenergize the lag pump at the water level shown num .
if the pump controller energizes both pumps simultaneously energize the lead pump first and then energize the lag pump num seconds later the controller must output a num vac signal when the high or low alarms are energized .
the controller must energize the trapped air level monitoring system air compressor to purge the air system .
the purge interval must be adjustable from num to num hours .
the compressor run time must be adjustable from num to num seconds .
the controller must have num an led display with numinchhigh letters that computes to num decimal place and num use faceplatemounted gold contact switches for programming .
do not use software for programming control levels .
the controller must have num .
at least num output relays with num vac num a rated contacts num .
led indicators mounted on plugin bases num .
test push button and potentiometer for system testing system testing must bypass the pressure transducer input to allow manual adjustment of the signal .
section num pumping equipment and controls num the controller must have at least num programmable levels each programmable from num to num feet .
the controller must be capable of programming the following levels for the elevations shown num .
high alarm num .
low alarm num .
lead pump on num .
lead pump off num .
lag pump on num .
lag pump off the pump controller must include an internal power supply with num .
num vac input with vdc and current outputs to suit the equipment num .
panel or channel mounting capability num .
convection cooling num .
wiring that is completely enclosed num .
adjustment range of at least num percent num .
operational temperature range from num to num degrees f numd conduit conduit and fittings must be type num complying with section num .
flexible conduit and fittings must be type num complying with section num .
nume conductors and cable numenum general do not rewire manufacturers stock items specified in section numcnum .
numenum conductors conductors must comply with section num except conductors must be stranded copper and comply with the following num .
in enclosures install type mtw num .
in wet underground or outdoor locations install type xhhwnum num .
for all other locations install type thhn numenum conductor and cable identification identify conductors by number .
use one of the following methods num .
clear heatshrinkable tubing sealed over adhesivebacked paper or cloth wraparound markers num .
preprinted white heatshrinkable tubing numf nameplates and warning plates numfnum general nameplate and warning plates must be predrilled multilayer multicolor plastic labels with mechanically engraved inscriptions .
secure plates to equipment using screws or rivets .
do not use adhesives except on the inside face of enclosure doors .
if authorized you may secure nameplates to an adjacent surface .
numfnum nameplate and warning plate identification nameplate and warning plate inscriptions must be as shown .
nameplate letters must be white upper case helvetica and num inch in height .
leave at least a numinch black background on all num sides .
section num pumping equipment and controls num equipment control switch nameplate letters must be white upper case helvetica and num inch in height .
leave at least a numinch black background on all num sides .
secure the nameplate to the equipment directly beneath the switch .
warning plate letters must be white upper case helvetica and num inch in height .
leave at least a num inch red background on all num sides .
numg miscellaneous materials enclosures must be minimum nema type num .
floor coverings must comply with astm dnum and be rated for at least num volts dielectric strength when tested under astm dnum .
floor covering must be at least num inch thick .
float switches must num .
be num vac num a single pole double throw mechanicallyactivated wideangle types num .
have an inert synthetic leakproof shockproof and corrosionresistant casing num .
have a numgauge numconductor sjow sealed cable room lights must num .
be nrtl listed for damp locations num .
be ceiling mounted heavy duty industrial type fixtures num .
have a fiberreinforced polymer housing with steel wireway num .
have a hinged acrylic lens with closedcell gasket and abs or stainless steel latches num .
include num tnum lamps with an electronic instantstart ballast num .
include the manufacturers emergency battery pack sump lights must num .
be nrtl listed and labeled for class num division num locations num .
be wall mounted nonmetallic type fixtures num .
have a fiberreinforced polymer housing num .
have a hinged polycarbonate or acrylic lens with nonmetallic latches num .
have nonmetallic lampholders num .
include num tnum lamps with an electronic instantstart ballast entry lights must be outdoor wallmounted metalhalide luminaire type having a diecast frame with hinged door and numpiece front and bottom prismaticglass lens .
indicator lights must num .
be ul listed for wet locations .
num .
have a vaportight castmetal base with pin socket .
num .
have an impact and heat resistant colored polycarbonate threaded globe with neoprene gasket. . num .
have a threaded diecastaluminum guard .
num .
include a twin tube num w num vac compact fluorescent lamp with integral ballast .
light switches must num .
be nrtl listed specification grade num .
have num a num vac silver alloy contacts num .
be suitable for stranded conductor wiring num .
be ivory color duplex plug receptacles must be nema type numr specification grade ivory color and suitable for stranded conductor wiring .
junction and outlet boxes must comply with nema fb num .
boxes must be cast iron with threaded hubs have cast iron covers with gaskets and be at least num by num by num inches .
for weatherproof device boxes use covers with gasketed hinged flaps .
section num pumping equipment and controls num sump light switches at remote pump station must num .
be singlepole numposition maintained num a num vac rotary switches num .
have contacts rated at num vac and num percent power factor num .
have an inductive pilot duty rating of num .
num a make num .
num a break num .
num a continuous remote pump stations must be deadfront nema type numx enclosures having the following num .
hinged interior door and mounting panel on the back num .
push buttons duplex plug receptacle nameplates and sump light switch on the hinged interior door num .
terminal blocks on the mounting panel num .
hasp for a padlock seal failure relays must be num compatible with the drainage pump and num be a factory assembled unit having num normally open and num normally closed contact each rated at num vac .
seal failure relays must have individual pump leakindicator lights .
pull boxes must comply with section num .
supporting devices must be corrosion resistant .
concrete anchorage devices must be type num stainless steel .
num construction numa general do not install electrical equipment on unpainted wood panels .
numb installation numbnum general reserved numbnum conduit conductors and cable do not install conduits behind ladders or within num inches of the ladderrung vertical centerline .
install flexible conduit with approximately num inches of slack between terminations .
flexible conduits and their fittings are considered a discontinuity and must be shunted by bonding jumpers .
install bonding jumpers inside the flexible conduit .
do not use the flexible conduit as the ground .
install conductors and cables under section numk and as follows num .
pull conductors to prevent damage to the sheath or insulation .
num .
install conductors and cables entering equipment and boxes with drip loops to prevent water reaching the currentcarrying parts or other conduits .
num .
remove insulation without damaging the conductor .
num .
identify conductors by number at each termination .
feeder and branch circuit conductors that are ungrounded must have continuously colorcoded insulation .
conductors no .
num awg or larger may use colored tape .
if used apply tape at each connection and where accessible .
ungrounded conductor colorcoding must be as shown in the following table ungrounded conductor colorcoding system color code numvacsingle phase black blue numvacthree phase black orange blue numvacthree phase black red blue numvacthree phase brown purple yellow section num pumping equipment and controls num numbnum motor control center use concrete anchorage devices to anchor the motor control center sections to the concrete slab .
shim each section to make the motor control center level .
the motor control center sections must fit through the pump house doorway or roof access opening .
any modifications required for installation must be preapproved by the manufacturer and must not change performance .
install current switches in the starter compartments .
loop power conductors around the sensing coil multiple times .
numbnum panel lp the panelboard directory must list the equipment controlled and the area designation .
the directory must be printed using times new roman font and at least numpoint font size .
place the directory in the panelboard door frame with a transparent protective cover .
numbnum miscellaneous materials secure hangers brackets supports and electrical equipment to surfaces using num .
concrete anchorage devices into concrete or solid masonry surfaces num .
machine screws or bolts into metal surfaces num .
wood screws into wood construction surfaces numc conductor splices do not splice the drainage pump cables between the pumps and the enclosure shown .
conductor splices must be made only in num fixtures num junction boxes and num gutters .
splices must be made using either pressure connectors listed by a nrtl or soldered joints made by soldering irons .
do not use open flame soldering .
insulate splices using the following sequence num .
apply num halflapped layers of selffusing oil and flameresistant synthetic rubber tape covered by num halflapped layers of pressuresensitive adhesive pvc electrical tape at least num mils thick .
num .
after taping the splice apply an electrical insulating coating .
the coating must be num fast drying num resistant to oil acids alkalis and corrosive atmospheric conditions and num compatible with the tape .
num payment not used num booster pumps num general numa summary section num includes specifications for installing booster pumps .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general reserved numcnum shop drawings submit shop drawings for each booster pump .
numcnum product data submit product data for the booster pump including the following components num .
pump including pump curve and motor information section num pumping equipment and controls num num .
valves num .
pump controller num .
booster pump enclosure num .
pressure gauge num .
appurtenances numcnum closeout submittals submit closeout submittals as a maintenance and operations manual before completion of the work .
submit num copies as pdf files on cds or dvds .
submit num copy as fusedlaminate prints in a num ring binder with tabbed dividers .
organize each manual as follows num .
index num .
parts list num .
operating instructions num .
maintenance instructions num .
pump curve numd quality assurance the requirements of section numd do not apply to the booster pump .
notify the engineer num business days before testing the booster pump .
test the booster pump in the engineers presence after connecting the booster pump to the irrigation system .
the discharge water from testing must not cause erosion damage to equipment or plantings or interfere with ongoing work .
the pump must not load the motor to more than the product of the nameplate num amperage and num service factor .
the flow rate must not vary from the pump curve by more than num percent at num percent motor speed .
test each booster pump at the following test points num .
zero flow rate cutoff head num .
maximum flow rate num .
design heads shown num .
steadystate flow for each irrigation controller station record the following for each test point num .
motor rpm num .
motor voltage num .
motor amperage num .
suction pressure of the pump num .
discharge pressure of the pump after testing run the booster pump through num successful complete irrigation controller cycles .
if the booster pump fails testing adjust system components as necessary and retest .
num materials numa general the concrete for the foundation and pad of the booster pump must be minor concrete .
numb manufactured units numbnum general the booster pump must consist of a factory assembled and tested skidmounted system with the following components pump pump controller booster pump enclosure manifold inlet and outlet valves sensors fittings and appurtenances .
the system working pressure must be at least num psi .
section num pumping equipment and controls num the booster pump must be listed and labeled by a nrtl .
numbnum components numbnuma general reserved numbnumb pumps pumps must consist of a closecoupled pump and motor .
pumps must be num end suction centrifugal type with mechanical seals num coated with the manufacturers standard finish for exterior use and num single or multiple stage .
booster pumps must have a horizontal or vertical configuration .
for horizontal pumps num .
casing must be closegrained cast iron with a replaceable bronze wearing ring num .
impeller must be num dynamically balanced num made from bronze and num keyed and secured to the shaft by a stainless steel washer and cap screw num .
impeller shaft must be either steel with a bronze sleeve or stainless steel with no sleeve for vertical pumps num .
casing must be closegrained cast iron with replaceable stainless steel wearing ring num .
motor pedestal must be closegrained cast iron num .
impeller must be num dynamically balanced num made from stainless steel and num keyed and secured to the shaft by a stainless steel washer and cap screw num .
the impeller shaft must be stainless steel motors must be standard efficiency nema code letter g or smaller open drip proof and nema design b .
numbnumc ball valves ball valves must have a numpiece bronze body with full size port chromeplated or brass ball and be rated for at least num psi .
numbnumd butterfly valves butterfly valves must have a ductile iron body with molded seat liner made from epdm or ptfe bi directional stainless steel stem locking lever with extended neck and be rated for at least num psi .
numbnume pump controller the pump controller must consist of an enclosure vfd main disconnect circuit breakers motor starter motor protector and a pressure transducer .
the pump controller must keep the pump running when the flow of water fluctuates between the changing of the irrigation controller stations .
the pump controller must have a potentiometer or keypad for adjusting the motor speed .
the enclosure must be a nema type num enclosure and rated for the horsepower voltage and phase shown .
the ground bus must be bonded to the enclosure .
the circuit breaker must be rated as shown .
the following equipment must be on the front of the enclosure num .
numway switch for automatic mode or manual mode .
num .
main disconnect .
you may use the main breaker as the main disconnect if it is accessible on the front of the enclosure .
num .
highvisibility pilot lights rated for num vac with a colored plastic lens and screw caps .
include pilot lights for the following conditions num .
power on num .
run num .
no flow the vfd must section num pumping equipment and controls num num .
be listed and labeled by a nrtl num .
have num percent input impedance at the rated motor horsepower num .
be mounted in the enclosure num .
have a lcd screen with operator interface num .
process the analog input signal from the pressure transducer and num .
determine water pressure num .
set the pump motor speed num .
determine noflow conditions when the pressure transducer signal indicates a no flow condition in the manifold the vfd must stop the pump regardless of demand .
the vfd must have an adjustable time delay for the no flow condition .
upon resumption of flow in the manifold it must reset and resume automatic mode .
the vfd and the numway switch must operate the booster pump as follows num .
automatic mode must start and stop the pump based on digital input signals from multiple irrigation controllers num .
manual mode must start the pump regardless of the input signal pressure transducer must be stainless steel rated for at least num psi working pressure and send a num ma output signal to the vfd .
numbnumf booster pump enclosures the booster pump enclosure and lid must be fabricated from stainless steel or marine grade aluminum .
the lid must have a continuous hinge gas springs or equivalent lid supports and a hasp for padlocking .
gas springs must use their entire stroke without forcing the lid beyond its fully opened position .
side louvers must have internal bronze insect screens and be mounted on each end .
the enclosure must include at least num thermostatically controlled exhaust fan with bronze insect screens .
numbnumg pressure gauges pressure gauges must num .
comply with asme bnum grade b num .
include a numinch glycerin filled dial stainless steel case and cover reset screw and numinch npt bottom inlet num .
read from num to num psi numbnumh appurtenances manifolds must be steel pipe or copper pipe .
steel pipe must comply with astm anum grade b .
copper pipe must comply with astm bnum type k. the skid must be num either steel or aluminum channel with risers as necessary and num all welded construction .
welding must comply with aws dnum for steel construction or aws dnum for aluminum construction .
fasteners expansion anchors nuts bolts and washers must be type num stainless steel .
nameplates must comply with section numf .
numbnum fabrication fabricate the booster pump as follows num .
install the inlet and outlet valves inside the booster pump enclosure .
num .
use threaded or flanged fittings on the pump inlet and outlet connections .
num .
fabricate the pump so that it is removable without disassembling the manifolds .
num .
install pressure gauges in the manifolds on the suction and discharge sides of the pump .
num .
install the pressure transducer in the manifold .
num .
mount the pump controller inside the enclosure .
num .
attach the enclosure to the skid .
section num pumping equipment and controls num num construction numa general support the connected water piping outside the enclosure .
do not use the booster pump to support the connected piping .
install a padlock after installing the booster pump .
the department furnishes a padlock at contract acceptance .
place the maintenance and operations manual binder inside the enclosure .
numb foundation and pad pour a concrete foundation and pad where the booster pump is shown .
the foundation must be at least num inches wider than the skid on all num sides .
place the pad against the foundation on the door side of the enclosure .
the pad must be the same width as the foundation and at least num inches long .
conduit risers must be located inside the skid footprint .
numc skid installation use concrete anchorage devices to mount the booster pump skid on the foundation .
use at least num sets of tapered steel leveling wedges to level the skid .
use num wedges placed tapertotaper at each point of support .
the steel wedges must remain in place in the completed work .
after suction and discharge piping has been installed and tightened in place level the skid and tighten the concrete anchor hex nuts against the base .
fill the voids under the base with mortar complying with section numf .
retighten the mounting bolts after the voids have been filled .
numd nameplates install nameplates under section numf .
install nameplates on num .
pump num .
pump controller num .
switches num .
main disconnect num .
circuit breakers num .
panel lights num payment not used num reserved num num miscellaneous metal num general num general numa summary section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing miscellaneous metals .
welding must comply with aws dnum .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum qualifications welders and welding operators must be qualified under aws dnum .
numdnum department acceptance the following miscellaneous metal materials are inspected at the fabrication site num .
miscellaneous iron and steel num .
miscellaneous metal bridge notify the engineer num .
when materials listed above have been delivered to the fabrication site num .
at least num days before starting fabrication num materials numa general materials must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num miscellaneous metal num miscellaneous metal materials material requirement steel bars plates and shapes astm anumanumm anum or anum aisi or m grades num steel fastener components for general applications bolts and studs astm anum anchor bolts astm fnum a hs bolts and studs astm anum type num a hs threaded rods astm anum type num a hs nonheaded anchor bolts astm fnum grade num class numa a nuts astm anum including appendix xnumb washers astm fnum hardened washers astm fnum type num including snum supplementary requirements components of hs steel fastener assemblies for use in hs joints bolts astm anum type num tension control bolts astm fnum type num nuts astm anum including appendix xnumb hardened washers astm fnum type num circular including snum supplementary requirements direct tension indicators astm fnum type num zinccoated stainless steel fasteners alloys num num for general applications bolts screws studs threaded rods and nonheaded anchor bolts astm fnum or fnumm nuts astm fnum or fnumm washers astm anumanumm and asme bnumm gray iron castings inside a roadbed aashto m num outside a roadbed aashto m num except only aashto m num class numb is allowed ductile iron castings astm anum grade num carbonsteel castings astm anumanumm grade num class num malleable iron castings astm anumanumm grade num cast iron pipe commercial quality steel pipe commercial quality welded or extruded other parts for general applications commercial quality ause hardened washers .
bzinccoated nuts tightened beyond snug or wrench tight must be furnished with a dry lubricant complying with supplementary requirement snum in astm anum .
remove burrs rough and sharp edges and other flaws .
straighten warped pieces after fabricating and galvanizing .
numb galvanizing galvanize miscellaneous metal materials under the schedules and specifications shown in the following table section num miscellaneous metal num galvanizing schedules and specifications material schedulea specification rolled pressed and forged steel shapes plates bars and strip num inch thick except for pregalvanized standard pipe galvanize material after fabrication into the largest practical sections astm anumanumm steel num inch thick galvanize before or after fabrication galvanized before fabrication astm anumanumm coating designation gnum galvanized after fabrication astm anumanumm except the weight of zinc coating must average at least num ozsq ft of surface area with no individual specimen having a coating weight of less than num ozsq ft standard pipe astm anumanumm except the zinc coating for fence pipes and structural shapes except for metal line posts for barbed and woven wire fences must average at least num ozsq ft of surface area with no individual specimen having a coating weight of less than num ozsq ft iron and steel hardware except threaded studs bolts nuts and washers specified to comply with astm anum anum anum anum fnum or fnumb galvanize after fabrication astm anumanumm rail elements backup plates terminal sections and end and return caps of guardrail aashto m num afabrication includes shearing cutting punching forming drilling milling bending welding and riveting .
bfor threaded studs bolts nuts and washers specified to comply with astm anum anum anum anum fnum or fnum galvanize under their astms .
galvanizing is not required for stainless steel monel metal and similar corrosionresistant parts galvanizing is not required for the following miscellaneous bridge metal num .
portions of plates shapes or other items embedded more than num inches in concrete num .
embedded steel pipe ending at or below the surface of encasing concrete num .
items described to receive other finishes clean welded areas before galvanizing to remove slag or other material that would interfere with the adherence of the zinc .
galvanize parts of fastener assemblies separately before assembly .
tapping of nuts or other internally threaded parts to be used with zinccoated bolts anchor bars or studs must num be performed after galvanizing and num comply with thread dimensions and overtapping allowances in astm anum .
repair damaged galvanized surfaces as follows num .
clean by thoroughly wire brushing damaged areas and removing loose and cracked coating .
num .
paint cleaned areas with num applications of organic zincrich primer from the authorized material list for organic zincrich primers .
do not use aerosol cans .
section num miscellaneous metal num numcnumh reserved num construction not used num payment except for finalpayitem miscellaneous metal materials the payment quantity for miscellaneous metal material is the weight determined from scale weighings .
num miscellaneous iron and steel num general section num includes specifications for fabricating miscellaneous iron and steel .
num materials numa general raised pattern plates must be commercial quality .
numb frames grates and covers grates must be produced from one of the following num .
structural steel complying with either of the following num .
astm anumanumm num .
astm anum grades num num num num or num num .
ductile iron castings num .
carbonsteel castings manhole frames and covers must comply with aashto m num .
galvanize cast iron manhole frames and covers for sidewalks after fabrication and before assembling component parts .
coat other cast iron items with commercialquality asphalt except machined surfaces of manhole frames and covers for decks .
drainage inlet frames and grates except those on bridges need not be galvanized or coated with asphalt .
matchmark frames and grates and frames and covers in pairs before delivery to the job site .
grates and covers must fit into their frames without rocking .
num construction not used num payment a frame and cover pair is num measurement unit .
a frame and grate pair is num measurement unit .
num miscellaneous bridge metal num general numa summary section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing miscellaneous bridge metal .
miscellaneous bridge metal consists of num .
structural steel and cast steel portions of bearing plates bars rockers assemblies and other expansion or fixed bearing devices in concrete structures num .
equalizing bolts and expansion joint armor in concrete structures num .
expansion joint armor in steel structures num .
manhole frames and covers frames and grates ladder rungs guard posts and access door assemblies num .
deck drains area drains retaining wall drains and drainage piping not included in bridge deck drainage system section num miscellaneous metal num numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general submit a certificate of compliance for anchorage devices .
submit a work plan for placing the nonskid surface showing num .
application method num .
spread rate of epoxy and grit num .
number of coats numcnum bridge deck drainage system submit a certificate of compliance for fiberglass pipe and fittings include laboratory test results .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control numdnuma general test spring latches and other mechanical devices before delivery to the job site they must operate smoothly and properly .
numdnumb bridge deck drainage system after installing the drainage system and final cleanup of the deck and drainage areas test each drain pipe and facility except short free fall pipes in the engineers presence by discharging num gallons of water into the drain .
the test must demonstrate the proper operation of the drain pipe and facility .
if the test indicates obstructions in the pipe clear the pipe and repeat the test until the drain pipe and facility are unobstructed .
numdnumc nonskid surface before applying any nonskid material demonstrate the method of application to the engineer by preparing a num sq ft test sample applied on hardboard at least num inch thick .
the nonskid surface must have a total thickness of num inch .
numdnum department acceptance reserved num materials numa general fabricate the parts shown in the table below from the corresponding materials shown miscellaneous metal parts part material bearing assemblies astm anumanumm access opening covers commercialquality sheet steel access doors galvanized sheet steel complying with astm anumanumm coating designation gnum znum springs for deck drain grating latches commercialquality stainless steel spring wire containing a nominal composition of num chromium and num nickel pipe bends commercialquality tube bends or fabricated bends of equal smoothness .
do not use miterjoint bends .
metal parts of anchorage devices except iron castings for cip inserts steel or stainless steel iron castings for cip inserts malleable iron or ductile iron section num miscellaneous metal num fabricate expansion joint armor from steel plates angles or other structural shapes .
shape the armor to the section of the concrete deck and matchmark it in the shop .
cast steel and cast iron must comply with section num .
transition fittings between pipes of different diameters must be num .
smooth and uniform without sags projections or offsets num .
at least num inches in length for each numinch reduction in pipe diameter .
sealing compound for caulking and adhesive sealing must be polysulfide or polyurethane complying with astm cnum type s grade ns class num use o .
numb bolted and threaded bar connections hs bolted connections must comply with the specifications for hs steel fasteners and bolted connections in section num .
equalizing bolts must be bolts or threaded bars .
threaded bars shown as prestressing steel must comply with the specifications for plain bars in astm anumanumm including supplementary requirements .
nuts must comply with section numh and the numst paragraph of section numbnumc .
abrasives used for blast cleaning must comply with section numb .
thread locking systems must be on the authorized material list for anaerobic thread locking compounds and must comply with the requirements thereon .
numc anchorage devices numcnum general concrete anchorage devices must be on the authorized material list for stud mechanical expansion anchors shelltype mechanical expansion anchors resin caspsule anchors or castinplace inserts .
concrete anchorage devices must be num mechanical expansion anchors or resin capsule anchors installed in drilled holes or num cip concrete inserts .
an anchorage device must be a complete system including threaded studs hex nuts and cut washers .
thread dimensions for externally threaded anchorage devices before zinc coating must comply with asme bnum having class numa tolerances or asme bnumm having grade numg tolerances .
thread dimensions for internally threaded concrete anchorage devices must comply with astm anum .
except for mechanical expansion anchors and iron castings for cip inserts metal parts of anchorage devices must be hotdip or mechanically galvanized .
numcnum mechanical expansion anchors mechanical expansion anchors must be num hotdip or mechanically galvanized num made from stainless steel or num coated with electrodeposited zinc complying with astm bnum .
mechanical expansion anchors must be the integral stud type or the shell type with internal threads and an independent stud .
do not use selfdrilling mechanical expansion anchors .
when tested under california test num mechanical expansion anchors must withstand the application of a sustained tension test load of at least the values shown in the following table for at least num hours with a movement of at most num inch section num miscellaneous metal num mechanical expansion anchor sustained tension test load stud diameter inches sustained tension test load pounds numa num num num num num num num num num amaximum stud diameter allowed for mechanical expansion anchors numcnum resin capsule anchors when tested under california test num resin capsule anchors must withstand the application of a sustained tension test load of at least the values shown in the following table for at least num hours with a movement of at most num inch resin capsule anchor sustained tension test load stud diameter inches sustained tension test load pounds num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numcnum castinplace concrete inserts cip concrete inserts must be ferrule loop or cast iron .
iron castings for cip inserts must be mechanically galvanized .
when tested under california test num cip inserts must withstand the minimum ultimate test loads shown in the following table cip insert ultimate tension test load stud diameter inches ultimate tensile load pounds num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numd bridge deck drainage system numdnum general reserved numdnum pipe connections and joints selftapping screws for sleeve connections must num .
be stainless steel with hexheads num .
be installed in holes drilled to fit the screws num .
comply with astm anum type num for a project in a nonfreezethaw area section num miscellaneous metal num num .
comply with astm anum type num for a project in a freezethaw area drain pipe joints must be watertight smooth and free from projections or offsets over num inch on the inside .
mechanical couplings in piping must be gasketed shortsleeve type consisting of num .
mild steel middle ring with pipe stop num .
num rubber compound wedge section ring gaskets num .
num mild steel follower rings num .
mild steel bolts to compress the gaskets numdnum fiberglass pipes and fittings you may use fiberglass pipes and fittings with the same diameters and minimum bend radii as shown instead of welded pipe .
fiberglass pipe and fittings must num .
comply with astm dnum num .
have a minimum shortterm rupture strength of num psi for joining pipe and fittings use the adhesive type recommended by the manufacturer .
fiberglass pipe not enclosed in a box girder cell or encased in concrete must be made from uvresistant resin pigmented with concretegray color or be coated with a concretegray resinrich exterior coating .
do not use paint .
fiberglass pipe with uv protection must withstand at least num hours of accelerated weathering when tested under astm gnum with uvbnum lamps .
the resting cycle must be num hours of uv exposure at num degrees f and then num hours of condensate exposure at num degrees f. after testing the pipe surface must show no fiber exposure crazing or checking and only slight chalking or color change .
numdnum pvc pipes and fittings for drainage pipe nps num or smaller encased in concrete or enclosed in a box girder cell and exposed for at most num feet within the cell you may use pvc pipe and fittings with the same diameters and minimum bend radii shown instead of welded pipe .
pvc pipe and fittings must be schedule num complying with astm dnum .
nume bearing devices reserved numf nonskid surface epoxy must comply with section numc numd or numg .
grit must be num .
commercialquality aluminum oxide silicon carbide or almandite garnet grit particles num .
screen size no .
num or no .
num num .
applied uniformly at a rate of at least num pounds per square foot of surface area .
num construction numa general straighten warped sections of expansion joint armor before placing .
secure the expansion joint armor in the correct position during concrete placement .
numb bolted and threaded bar connections where cleaning is described clean nuts bolts threaded bars and plate washers under sspcsp num or sspcsp num before painting .
surfaces blast cleaned under sspcsp num must have a dense uniform angular anchor pattern of at least num mils when measured under astm dnum .
paint blastcleaned surfaces the same day blast cleaning is performed unless otherwise authorized .
section num miscellaneous metal num reclean surfaces that rust or become contaminated before paint is applied .
paint surfaces with num applications of organic zincrich primer from the authorized material list for organic zincrich primers .
do not use aerosol cans .
for threads engaged by nuts apply the numnd application to the nuts and threads after installation .
numc anchorage devices install mechanical expansion anchors resin capsule anchors and cip inserts under the manufacturers instructions .
if the manufacturers instructions do not include torque requirements tighten nuts used to attach equipment or fixtures to anchorage devices to the installation torque requirements shown in the following table torque requirements stud diameter inches installation torque requirements ftlb shelltype mechanical expansion anchors integralstudtype mechanical expansion anchors resin capsule anchors and cip inserts num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num install concrete anchorage devices such that the attached equipment or fixtures bear firmly against the concrete .
install shelltype mechanical expansion anchors such that the top surface of the anchor body remains num to num inch below the concrete surface after expansion .
after installation of shelltype mechanical expansion anchors and before mounting equipment or fixtures demonstrate to the engineer that the expansion anchors are firmly seated within these tolerances .
numd bridge deck drainage system securely cover deck drain grates and other grating openings to prevent intrusion of debris until after final cleanup of the deck and drainage areas .
provide a transition section where a pipe under a walkway or other improved area must be of a smaller diameter than the downdrain pipe .
couplings used to connect pvc or fiberglass pipe to steel must be threaded or flanged .
for pvc or fiberglass pipe do not use the sleeve connections shown .
if fiberglass pipe is used support spacing for fiberglass pipe must be the same as shown for welded steel pipe .
each pipe support must have a width of at least num inches .
if pvc pipe is used pipe support spacing for pvc pipe must be at most num feet .
nume bearing devices bearing assemblies or masonry plates placed on mortar pads must comply with section numcnum .
set bearing plates level .
set rockers and expansion devices to comply with the temperature at the time of erection or to the specified setting .
numf nonskid surface where a nonskid surface is shown on steel plates apply an epoxy mixed with grit .
the finish color of the nonskid surface must be light gray .
section num miscellaneous metal num before applying epoxy and grit to a galvanized surface prepare the surface under section num .
if authorized you may use a commercialquality nonskid surface made of a numcomponent uvresistant epoxy and grit if the quality is equal to the epoxygrit mixture specified .
num payment the payment quantity for miscellaneous metal does not include the weight of epoxy and grit for a nonskid surface .
num pumping plant metal work num general section num includes specifications for installing pumping plant metal work .
pumping plant metal work consists of fabricated and cast metal parts used for constructing pumping plants including num metal parts in the pumphouse outside stairway storage box and discharge box and num and the roadwaytype inlet frames and grates at the pumping plant site .
pipe handrailing must comply with section num .
num materials concrete anchorage devices must comply with section numc .
except in walkway areas cast iron manhole covers and frames and cast iron grates and frames must be dipped in commercialquality asphalt .
manhole covers and frames for pumping plant discharge boxes must be watertight and certified by the manufacturer to be rated to the pressure shown .
num construction provide num heavyduty galvanized steel safety padlock hasp and staple assembly .
the assembly must be securely attached to door and frame and have num .
vertical staple consisting of a rod with a diameter of at least num inch num .
slotted leaf at least num inches in length num payment the payment quantity for pumping plant metal work does not include num metal parts installed under section num and num roadtype inlet frames and grates paid for as a separate bid item .
num cattle guard num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing cattle guards .
earthwork for cattle guards must comply with section num .
concrete foundations and drain holes for cattle guards must comply with section num .
bar reinforcement must comply with section num .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit design details for the equivalent cattle guard design if used .
numd quality assurance reserved section num miscellaneous metal num num materials you may use an equivalent cattle guard design consisting of a prefabricated rail assembly and wings supported on a concrete foundation .
the engineer may authorize minor variations in dimensions to allow the use of the fabricators standard methods of fabrication .
the equivalent design cattle guard must support hsnum live loading .
weld using low hydrogen electrodes .
num construction if a cattle guard is installed at an existing fence attach the cattle guard to the fence .
the completed cattle guard must bear uniformly on the foundation .
the finished grade must not vary more than num inch from the adjacent roadway surface .
make any adjustment to the roadway surface needed to comply with this tolerance .
num payment not used num rigid fall protection reserved num isolation casings reserved num tie rod assemblies reserved num reserved num num wells num general reserved num water wells reserved num exploration holes reserved num monitor wells reserved num rehabilitate existing water wells reserved num destroy wells reserved num reserved num num local infrastructure num reserved num num incidental construction num general num general section num includes specifications for constructing incidental bid items that are not closely associated with other sections .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num survey monuments num general section num includes specifications for constructing survey monuments .
work performed on existing monuments must comply with section num .
num materials concrete must be minor concrete with a maximum numinch aggregate .
the department furnishes the survey marker disks .
the frames and covers must be fabricated from cast steel or gray cast iron .
the frames covers and hardware must comply with section num .
the covers must fit into the frames without rocking .
granular material must be gravel crushed gravel crushed rock or any combination of these and must not exceed num inches in greatest dimension .
num construction you may cast the monuments in place in neat holes without the use of forms unless forms are shown .
thoroughly consolidate the concrete and cure it by the water method .
locate the monument such that the point being referenced falls within num inch from the center of the disk when the disk is placed in the center of the monument .
place the survey marker disk before the concrete reaches its initial set .
firmly embed the disk in the concrete .
if base and surfacing are not shown around a monument fill any space around it with earth .
water and tamp the earth into place .
unless the surplus excavated material is hazardous uniformly spread it along the adjacent roadway where designated by the engineer .
num payment not used num reserved num miscellaneous coatings num general numa general section num includes general specifications for applying miscellaneous coatings to new and existing installations .
section num incidental construction num apply miscellaneous coatings under the specifications for coating structural steel in section num .
numb materials water for rinsing must comply with the specifications for water for pressure rinsing in section numa .
numc construction not used numd payment not used num painting timber numa general section num includes specifications for preparing and painting timber installations .
numb materials not used numc construction numcnum general reserved numcnum surface preparation remove cracked or peeled paint loose chalky paint dirt and other foreign material immediately before painting .
the moisture content of the timber must be not more than num percent at the time of initial paint application .
numcnum application paint new timber with num coat of wood primer followed by num coats of exterior paint .
you may apply the numst coat before erection if authorized .
paint previously painted timber with num coats of exterior paint .
prime bare wood with num coat of wood primer .
after the timber is in place putty the cracks checks nail holes and other depressions flush with the surface .
let dry before applying the numst coat of exterior paint .
numd payment not used num painting concrete numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for preparing and painting concrete surfaces .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit the coating manufacturers application instructions at least num days before use .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials coatings for concrete must be white .
numc construction numcnum general do not paint new concrete until it is at least num days old .
section num incidental construction num numcnum surface preparation prepare concrete surfaces under sspcsp numnace no .
num .
pressure rinse prepared surfaces before applying coating .
surfaces must be thoroughly dry at the time of painting .
you may use artificial drying methods if authorized .
numcnum application apply at least num coats under the manufacturers instructions and sspcpa num .
numd payment not used num staining concrete and shotcrete numa general numanum general numanuma summary section num includes specifications for preparing and staining concrete and shotcrete surfaces .
numanumb definitions reserved numanumc submittals submit the stain manufacturers product data and application instructions at least num days before starting staining activities .
numanumd quality assurance numanumdi general reserved numanumdii test panels stain the authorized test panel complying with section numdnumc or section numdnum .
the test panel must be num .
stained using the same personnel materials equipment and methods to be used in the work num .
accessible for viewing num .
displayed in an upright position near the work num .
authorized for staining before starting the staining work if ordered construct additional test panels until a satisfactory color is attained .
the preparing and staining of additional test panels is change order work .
the engineer uses the authorized stained test panel to determine the acceptability of the stained surface .
dispose of the test panels after the staining work is complete and authorized .
notify the engineer before disposing of the test panels .
numanum materials numanuma general reserved numanumb stain stain must num .
contain dilute acid that penetrates and etches the surfaces num .
be a waterbased solution of inorganic metallic salts num .
be a commercialquality product designed specifically for exterior applications num .
produce abrasionresistant color deposits section num incidental construction num numanumc sealer reserved numanumd sealing compound reserved numanum construction numanuma general seal the joints between surfaces to be stained and adjacent metal with sealing compound before applying the stain .
numanumb surface preparation test surfaces for acceptance of the stain before applying the stain .
clean surfaces that resist accepting the stain and retest until passing .
before staining the surfaces must be num .
at least num days old num .
prepared under sspcsp numnace no .
num num .
thoroughly dry numanumc application apply the stain under the manufacturers instructions .
apply the stain uniformly to avoid excessive rundown .
work the stain into the concrete using a nylon bristle brush in a circular motion .
after the last coat of stain has dried rinse the stained surfaces with water and wet scrub them with a stiff bristle nylon brush until the rinse water runs clear .
collect all rinse water .
protect adjacent surfaces during staining .
drips puddles or other irregularities must be worked into the surface .
numanum payment not used numb sculpted shotcrete and textured concrete numbnum general numbnuma summary section numb includes specifications for preparing and staining sculpted shotcrete and textured concrete surfaces .
numbnumb definitions reserved numbnumc submittals numbnumci general reserved numbnumcii contractor qualifications submit the following documentation of the staining subcontractors experience at least num days before the prestaining meeting num .
summary of the staining subcontractors experience that demonstrates compliance with section num numbnumdii .
num .
list of at least num projects completed in the last num years that demonstrate the staining subcontractors ability to stain textured concrete or sculpted shotcrete surfaces similar to the surfaces for this project .
for each project include num .
project description num .
name and phone number of the owner num .
staining completion date section num incidental construction num num .
color photos of the completed stained surface numbnumciii application plan submit an application plan at least num days before the prestaining meeting .
the application plan must include details for preparing and staining the surfaces to achieve the required color including num .
number of applications that will be used to apply the stain num .
for each application of the stain a description of num .
manufacturer color finish and percentage strength mixture of the stain that will be applied num .
methods and tools that will be used to apply the stain num .
methods for protecting adjacent surfaces during staining num .
rinse water collection plan for containing all liquid effluent and residue resulting from preparing and staining the surfaces numbnumd quality assurance numbnumdi general reserved numbnumdii contractor qualifications the staining subcontractor must num .
have experience staining textured concrete or sculpted shotcrete surfaces to simulate the appearance of natural rock formations or stone masonry num .
have successfully completed at least num projects in the past num years involving staining of concrete or sculpted shotcrete surfaces similar to the surfaces for this project numbnumdiii prestaining meeting before starting staining activities conduct a meeting to discuss the application plan .
meeting attendees must include the engineer and all staining subcontractors .
numbnum materials not used numbnum construction not used numbnum payment the payment quantity for prepare and stain concrete or prepare and stain shotcrete is the area measured along the stained vertical or sloped wall face .
num rock staining numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for preparing and staining rock .
preparing and staining rock includes preparing and staining the exterior surface of landscape boulders damaged or scarred native rock rock energy dissipaters rock slope protection and gabion surfaces .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit a work plan describing the methods to num control overspray and spillage and num protect adjacent surfaces .
submit the stain manufacturers product data including the product sheet and the application instructions .
section num incidental construction num numanum quality assurance numanuma general reserved numanumb test plot apply the stain to a rock test plot of at least num by num feet at a location designated by the engineer .
notify the engineer at least num days before staining the test plot .
prepare and stain the test plot with the same personnel materials tools equipment and methods to be used in staining the final surfaces .
separate test plots are required for staining rock slope protection and native rock .
if ordered prepare and stain additional test plots .
the preparing and staining of additional test plots is change order work .
obtain authorization of the test plot before starting the staining work .
the engineer uses the authorized test plot to determine the acceptability of the staining work .
if the test plot is not incorporated into the work dispose of it after the staining work is complete and authorized .
notify the engineer before disposing of the test plot .
numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum stain reserved numc construction numcnum general reserved numcnum preparation before applying the stain num .
identify and obtain authorization for the areas to be stained num .
remove oils dirt and other contaminants from the surfaces to be stained num .
dry all surfaces to be stained numcnum application stain the exposed surfaces under the manufacturers instructions to achieve a color consistent with the color of the authorized test plot .
control overspray and protect adjacent surfaces .
keep stained surfaces dry for at least num days after the application of the stain .
numd payment the payment quantity for rock stain is the area measured along the slope face .
num antigraffiti coating numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for applying a sacrificial antigraffiti coating to surfaces .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit the manufacturers application and removal instructions at least num days before starting work .
section num incidental construction num numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials antigraffiti coating must num .
be a nontoxic sacrificial nonflammable waterbased coating designed for protecting concrete from graffiti num .
be compatible with the concrete surface treatment num .
have a clear matte finish when dry num .
be removable with a hot pressure washer numc construction test surfaces for acceptance of the coating before applying .
clean surfaces that resist accepting the coating and retest until passing .
apply the antigraffiti coating under the manufacturers instructions in at least num even coats .
numd payment not used num staining galvanized surfaces reserved num painting electrical material numa general section num includes specifications for preparing and painting electrical material .
numb materials polymeric coating for steel service equipment enclosures must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement coating hardness min astm dnum hb salt spray resistance num hours astm bnum num adhesion method b min astm dnum num the steel service equipment enclosure finish coat color must match color no .
num of fedstdnum .
numc construction numcnum general clean and paint electrical material .
the coating must be free from flow lines streaks blisters and other defects that would impair serviceability or detract from the general appearance .
prepare and finish conduit and conduit fittings above ground as specified for the adjacent standard or post .
stencil the equipment number neatly on the standard or adjacent structure .
obtain the number from the engineer .
numcnum traffic signal faces and fittings finish the interiors of the metal signal visor louver and the front face of backplates with num applications of lusterless black exteriorgrade latex paint formulated for application to properly prepared metal surfaces .
painting is not required if the equipment has a good factory finish .
apply num coats of lusterless dark olive green exteriorgrade latex paint formulated for application to properly prepared metal surfaces to the following electrical equipment section num incidental construction num num .
signal section num .
signal head mounting brackets and fittings num .
outside of visor num .
pedestrian push button housing num .
pedestrian signal section and visor num .
back face of back plate the color must match color chip no .
num filed at mets .
numd payment not used num reserved num parking bumpers num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing parking bumpers .
section num does not apply to concrete for parking bumpers .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit product data for parking bumpers .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials parking bumpers must be steelreinforced pc units .
the concrete must be air entrained and have a minimum compressive strength of num psi .
each unit must be from num to num inches high from num to num inches wide and from num to num feet long .
all units for a project must be the same size .
each unit must have chamfered corners transverse drainage slots on the underside and at least num factoryformed or drilled vertical holes through the parking bumper for anchoring it to the substrate .
the units must be free of pockets sand streaks honeycombs and other obvious defects .
corners must be uniform straight and sharp .
the mounting hardware must be galvanized steel .
num construction verify that pavement is in suitable condition to start installation under the manufacturers instructions .
start installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected .
install parking bumpers under the manufacturers instructions .
num payment not used num reserved num resetting and relocating mailboxes num general section num includes specifications for resetting and relocating mailboxes .. reset and relocate newspaper boxes as specified for mailboxes .
section num incidental construction num num materials each new post must be redwood complying with the specifications for roadway sign posts in section num .
num construction during construction num .
move each mailbox to clear the way for your activities .
each mailbox must be accessible for delivery at all times .
num .
install each mailbox on a post set in the ground or on an authorized temporary support .
when construction is complete install each mailbox on a new post .
place each post in a hole .
backfill the space around the post with earth placed in layers about num inches thick .
moisten and thoroughly compact each layer .
num payment resetting or relocating num mailbox on num post is num measurement unit .
resetting or relocating num mailbox and num or more newspaper boxes on num post isnum measurement unit .
resetting or relocating num newspaper box on num post is num measurement unit .
the measurement units for resetting or relocating multiple mailboxes on num post are the number of mailboxes on the post .
the number of measurement units equals the number of units shown to be reset or relocated regardless of the number of moves required .
num obliterating roads and detours num general section num includes specifications for obliterating roads and detours .
num materials not used num construction if a part of the surfacing is to remain in place make a fulldepth saw cut to a true line along the edge of the surfacing before obliteration .
obliterate a road or detour by doing one of the following num .
placing an earth cover at least num inches thick num .
plowing pulverizing or scarifying to a minimum depth of num inches or to the bottom of the impermeable underlying base whichever is the greater depth if you obliterate by placing an earth cover scarify the existing base and surfacing for its full depth and break up the base and surfacing such that the material contains no lumps larger than num foot in greatest dimension before the earth cover is placed .
if you obliterate by plowing pulverizing or scarifying break the bituminous material into parts at most num inches in greatest dimension and mix with an equal quantity of underlying material .
after obliteration grade the area such that it blends with the surrounding terrain and is well drained .
num payment not used num reserved num reserved num num fences num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing fences .
num materials a temporary fence must comply with the plan details and specifications for a permanent fence of the same type except num .
used materials may be incorporated in the fence if the materials are good sound and suitable for the intended purpose num .
materials may be commercial quality if the dimensions and sizes of the materials are equal to or greater than the dimensions and sizes shown or specified in section num num .
post must be either metal or wood num .
the department does not require num .
galvanizing or painting of steel elements num .
treating wood with a wood preservative num .
concrete footings for metal posts for concrete for a metal post or brace footing or for a deadman use num .
commercialquality aggregates and cementitious material num .
at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard a reinforcing bar must comply with astm anumanumm .
num construction remove earth trees brush and other obstructions that interfere with fence construction .
connect new fences to existing fences .
measure post spacing parallel to the ground slope .
place each post in a vertical position except where the engineer orders you to set the post perpendicular to the ground surface .
place a corner post with a brace for each direction of strain at each junction with an existing fence .
fasten the wire in the new and existing fences to each post .
if ordered at a structure connect the new fence to the structure such that stock can pass freely through or under the structure otherwise install an end post and connect the fence to it .
crown each concrete footing to shed water .
after constructing a fence uniformly spread the surplus excavated material along the adjacent roadway where designated by the engineer .
num payment the payment quantity for fence is the length measured num .
parallel to the ground slope num .
along the fence the payment quantity does not include the width of openings .
num barbed wire and wire mesh fences num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing barbed wire and wire mesh fences .
numb definitions alignment angle change in a line where the angle of deflection is less than section num fences num num .
num degrees for a steel post barbed wire or wire mesh fence num .
num degrees for a wood post barbed wire or wire mesh fence corner change in a line where the angle of deflection exceeds num .
num degrees for a steel post barbed wire or wire mesh fence num .
num degrees for a wood post barbed wire or wire mesh fence fence type bw barbed wire fence consisting of num lines of barbed wire .
fence type wm wire mesh fence consisting of wire mesh fabric and num lines of barbed wire .
numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general reserved numb metal posts and braces line posts must comply with astm anum except packaging of posts is not required .
each post must be class b steel .
you may omit the anchor plate if the post is set in a concrete footing with a minimum cross sectional dimension of num inches and a depth equal to the full penetration of the post .
each end latch pull and corner post must have num .
minimum resisting section modulus of num cubic inch in any direction num .
length of at least num feet num .
weight of at least num lbft each brace and brace post must have num .
length of at least num feet num .
weight of at least num lbft numc wood posts and braces numcnum general each wood post and brace must be treated except where untreated wood is specified .
each wood line post to be driven must be machine pointed at the small end .
sweep must not exceed num foot in num feet .
numcnum untreated each untreated wood post and brace must be num .
redwood cedar douglas fir or southern yellow pine num .
straight and free from loose or unsound knots shakes over num the post thickness or other defects that would make it unfit structurally for the intended purpose post knots must be sound tight well spaced and not over num inches on any face .
each untreated wood line post and brace may be split material and must have num .
length of at least num feet num .
perimeter of at least num inches num .
each crosssectional dimension of at least num inches section num fences num each untreated wood end corner and brace post must be sawed or hewed and have num .
length of at least num feet num .
nominal size of at least num by num inches numcnum treated each treated wood post and brace must be num .
douglas fir hemfir southern yellow pine num .
round or sawed rectangular num .
free of heart center each douglas fir hemfir and southern yellow pine post and brace must be graded under section num .
each sawed post and brace must be of the minimum grade and species shown in the following table grades and species nominal size minimum grade species num by num inch construction light framing douglas fir no .
num structural light framing hemfir no .
num structural light framing southern yellow pine num by num inch select structural posts and timbers no .
num douglas fir select structural posts and timbers hemfir no .
num timbers southern yellow pine each round post and brace must be free from num .
decay num .
shakes over num the post diameter num .
splits longer than the thickness or diameter of the post num .
loose or unsound knots num .
multiple crooks num .
other defects that would weaken the post or brace or otherwise make it structurally unsuitable for the intended purpose pressure treat each post and brace under section num and awpa unum use category ucnuma commodity specification a or b .
treat posts after pointing .
instead of the imprint specified in section num the treating plant may hammer stamp either end of a treated post and brace with the symbol or name of the company performing the treatment .
for each round post and brace num .
peel to remove the outer bark and inner cambium bark except minimal strips of inner bark may remain if not over num inch wide or over num inches long num .
trim knots flush with sides num .
remove spurs and splinters num .
cut ends square each line post and brace must be num feet long .
any other post must be num feet long .
each length may be at most num inch shorter and num inches longer .
the small end of each round line post and brace must have a crosssectional dimension between num and num inches .
the small end of any other round post must have a crosssectional dimension between num num and num inches .
the taper from end to end of each round post and brace must not exceed num inches .
section num fences num each sawed rectangular line post must have a nominal size of at least num by num inches .
any other sawed rectangular post must have a nominal size of at least num by num inches .
numd barbed wire barbed wire must num .
comply with astm anum num .
have num point barbs num .
be one of the following num .
num gauge class num num .
num gauge class num num .
num gauge class num vertical stays must num .
comply with astm anum num .
be num gauge num .
have a class num zinc coating nume wire mesh wire mesh must num .
comply with astm anum type z grade num class num num .
be num inches wide num .
have num horizontal wires with vertical stays spaced num inches apart the top and bottom wires must be num gauge .
the intermediate wires and vertical stays must be num gauge .
numf tension wires hardware and grounding materials tension wire must be numgauge galvanized wire complying with astm anum .
galvanized bolts and nuts for attaching braces and straps to metal posts and galvanized devices for holding barbed wire and wire mesh in position must be commercial quality .
each staple used to fasten barbed wire and wire mesh fabric to wood posts must num .
comply with astm fnum num .
be at least num inches long num .
be manufactured from numgauge galvanized wire wire ties used to fasten barbed wire and wire mesh to metal posts must be at least numgauge galvanized wire complying with astm fnum .
clips and hog rings used for metal posts must be at least numgauge galvanized wire complying with astm fnum .
wire used to tie the lower line of barbed wire to the top wire of wire mesh must be numgauge galvanized wire .
each ground rod must num .
be galvanized or coppercoated steel num .
be num feet long num .
have a diameter of at least num inch conductor must be no .
num solid copper or equal .
numg gateways fence materials and end post bracing must comply with the specifications and plans for the fence type in which the gateway is constructed .
except for the length end bars must comply with the line post specifications and plans .
section num fences num vertical stays for gateways must be num .
pretwisted num .
numgauge galvanized wire num .
evenly spaced between end bars at numinch maximum intervals wire loops must be numgauge galvanized wire .
the chain for the latching device must be commercialquality shortlink steel coil chain .
the latching bar for the latching device must be commercialquality steel pipe .
bolts and nuts for attaching the chain to the end posts and latching bar must be commercial quality and galvanized .
num construction excavate high points that interfere with placing the fence fabric to the clearance shown .
brace adjacent line posts at alignment angles with diagonal tension wires unless impractical .
if impractical brace as specified for bracing corner posts .
set each metal diagonal brace and metal corner end latch gate and pull post in a concrete footing .
you may drive metal line posts .
set solid each wood line post one of the following ways num .
drive it into place .
num .
install it firmly in a drilled hole of the same dimension as the post .
num .
install it in a drilled or dug hole larger than the dimension of the post backfill around the post and compact the backfill .
install each wood post that is not a line post in a drilled or dug hole larger than the dimension of the post backfill around the post and compact the backfill .
install each round post in a drilled hole butt end down .
attach the wire mesh and barbed wire to each post .
securely fasten tension wires to wood posts .
make a single or double loop around each post at each attachment point and staple the wire to the post .
use wire ties hog rings or wire clips to fasten the wires to the metal posts .
connect each wood brace to its adjacent post with a numbynuminch steel dowel .
twist the tension wires until the installation is rigid .
stretch barbed wire and wire mesh fabric and fasten to each wood or steel end corner or gate post .
apply tension according to the manufacturers instructions using a mechanical stretcher or other device designed for such use .
if no tension is specified by the manufacturer use num lb for the required tension .
evenly distribute the pull over the longitudinal wires in the wire mesh such that no more than num percent of the original depth of the tension curves is removed .
do not use a motorized vehicle truck or tractor to stretch the wire .
attach barbed wire and wire mesh fabric to the privateproperty side of posts .
on curved alignments place the wire mesh and barbed wire on the face of the post against which the normal pull of the wire mesh and wire will be exerted .
terminate the wire mesh and barbed wire at each end corner pull and gate post in the new fence line .
attach wire mesh and barbed wire to each wood or steel end corner pull or gate post by wrapping each horizontal strand around the post and tying it back on itself with at least num tightlywound wraps .
at line posts fasten the wire mesh to the post at the top and bottom and at intermediate points not exceeding num inches apart .
fasten each line of barbed wire to each line post .
use wire ties or clips to fasten the wires to metal posts under the post manufacturers instructions .
drive staples crosswise with the grain of the wood and pointed slightly downward .
drive staples just short of actual contact with the wires to allow free longitudinal movement of those wires and to prevent damage to the wires protective coating .
secure all wires to posts to maintain horizontal alignment .
section num fences num two splices per num feet of fence in barbed wire and wire mesh are allowed .
use commerciallyavailable galvanized mechanical wire splices or a wire splice created by tying off wire .
install mechanical wire splices with a tool designed for that purpose under the manufacturers instructions .
tie off the wire as follows num .
carry the ends of each wire num inches past the tiedoff knot location and wrap them around the wire for at least num turns in opposite directions .
num .
remove the splice tool and close the space by pulling the end of the wires together .
num .
cut the unused ends of the wire close and neat .
fence fabric and fence wires of fences using wood line posts must be grounded .
ground by substituting a metal fence post for a wood post at intervals of at most num feet with at least num metal post in any length of fence over num feet between openings .
with wire tightly fasten each line of barbed wire and alternate longitudinal wires of the fence to the metal post .
where an electric transmission distribution or secondary line crosses a woodpost fence ground the fence with a ground rod installed directly below the crossing point .
drive the rod vertically until the top is num inches below the ground surface .
connect the ground rod to the fence with a conductor .
the connections must be either brazed or fastened with authorized noncorrosive clamps .
where a power line runs parallel or nearly parallel to and within num feet of the wood post fence ground the fence with a ground rod at each end post or at intervals of at most num feet .
if you can not reach the specified vertical ground rod penetration install an authorized equivalent grounding system .
after you attach fencing to untreated wood posts cut off any long post that makes the fence look nonuniform .
num payment not used num chain link fences num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing chain link fences .
numb definitions corner change in a line where the angle of deflection exceeds num degrees .
diamond count number of mesh openings in each height of chain link fence .
fence type cl chain link fence .
type cl is followed by a number representing the width in feet of the fence fabric .
the number is shown in the bid item description .
fence type cl slatted chain link fence with wood or plastic slats inserted vertically in the chain link fabric .
posts and braces framework that supports the metal fabric for chain link fence .
posts and braces include round and rollformed cross sections used as line end latch or corner posts and braces .
numc submittals if you use the protective coating system specified in section numb submit a certificate of compliance for the system .
submit a certificate of compliance for posts and braces that includes the information specified in astm fnum section num quality control provisions .
numd quality assurance reserved section num fences num num materials numa general galvanize or coat ferrous materials .
do not use materials imperfectly galvanized or coated or with serious abrasions .
for barbed wire on a chain link fence comply with section numd .
numb posts and braces the base metal for posts and braces must be commercialquality weldable steel complying with aashto m num type num except for the protective coating requirements .
posts and braces must comply with the strength requirements in astm fnum num .
group ia regular grade for round posts num .
group iil for rollformed posts and braces galvanize posts and braces under section numb except instead of galvanizing tubular posts and braces may have a protective coating system complying with the following num .
exterior surfaces of tubular posts and braces must have a combination coating consisting of hotdip galvanized primer followed by a chromate conversion coating and then a finish coat of clear cross linked organic coating .
for this combination coating num .
thickness of the zinc coating must be at least num mil as determined from the average results of at least num samples and at least num mil on an individual sample num .
chromate conversion coating must be at least num gsq in num .
total thickness of the combination coating must be at least num mils num .
exterior clearcoated surface of the pipe must have demonstrated the ability to resist num hours of exposure to salt fog with a maximum of num percent red rust when tested under astm bnum num .
clear finish coat must not have any film cracking after num hours of exposure in an artificial weathering device under one of the following num .
astm gnum cycles num or num carbon arc artificial weathering device num .
astm gnum cycles num or num xenon arc artificial weathering device num .
clear finish coat must not have blistering or cracking after num hours of exposure to num percent relative humidity under astm dnum num .
interior surfaces must have a zinc coating or a crosslinked organic coating containing a corrosion inhibitor .
for these coatings num .
coating thickness must be at least num mil num .
interior coated surface must have demonstrated the ability to resist num hours of exposure to salt fog with a maximum of num percent red rust when tested under astm bnum obtain authorization of the protective coating system before you use it .
any change to the protective coating system is a new system that requires authorization .
each post length must be at least the depth of the concrete footing plus the height of the fabric less num inches .
the length does not include any top fixture or other top tension wire support integral with the post .
each post must have provisions to securely hold the top tension wire in position and allow for post removal and replacement without damaging the wire .
fit each tubular post with a rainproof top .
post tops extension arms stretcher bars and other fittings and hardware must be num .
steel or malleable or wrought iron num .
galvanized after fabrication under section numb numc fabric chain link fabric must comply with aashto mnum for type i fabric with a class c coating or astm fnum class num unless vinylclad fabric is described in the fence bid item in which case the fabric must comply with aashto mnum for type iv fabric with a medium or dark green class a coating .
section num fences num the wire for the fabric must be num .
num gauge for a fence num inches or less in height num .
num gauge for a fence over num inches in height and for a slatted chain link fence chain link fabric for nonslatted fence must have the diamond count corresponding to the fabric height shown in the following table diamond counts fabric height inches num num num num num num num diamond count num num num num num num num chain link fabric for slatted fence must have numinchvertical and numinchhorizontal mesh .
knuckle finish fabric on the top and bottom edges .
numd tension wires hog rings turnbuckles truss tighteners truss rods and stretcher bars and bar bands tension wire must be commercialquality numgauge coil spring steel .
tie wires and hog rings must be at least numgauge steel .
post clips must be at least numgauge steel .
galvanize tension and tie wires hog rings and post clips under astm anum coating class num .
turnbuckles and truss tighteners must be num .
commercialquality steel malleable iron or wrought iron num .
galvanized under section numb num .
equal in tensile strength to the truss rod truss tighteners must have a strap thickness of at least num inch .
each truss rod must be steel and have a diameter of at least num inch .
each stretcher bar must be at least num by num inch .
each stretcher bar band must be at least num by num inch .
nume slats slats must be wood or plastic .
wood slats must be one of the following num .
clear redwood num .
mediumweight wood produced from the species shorea meranti each wood slat must have num .
thickness of at least num inch num .
width about num inch num .
length enough to fill the vertical openings of the fabric each plastic slat must num .
be a hdpe with uv inhibitors num .
have a flat tubular cross section with num .
wall thickness of about num inch num .
depth of about num inch num .
width of about num inches num .
length equal to the fence height section num fences num the plastic slat material must comply with the requirements shown in the following table plastic slat material requirements quality characteristic test method requirement melt index astm dnum num density astm dnum num low temperature brittleness f astm dnum num tensile strength psi astm dnum num num construction brace each end latch and corner post to the nearest line post with either of the following num .
diagonal brace used as a compression member num .
horizontal brace used as a compression member and truss rods used as tension members brace each gate post to the nearest line post with a horizontal brace used as a compression member and truss rods used as tension members .
equip each steel truss rod with a turnbuckle or truss tightener .
brace line posts horizontally and truss in both directions at intervals of at most num feet unless the fabric is installed by stretching with equipment .
fasten chain link fabric on the side of the posts designated by the engineer .
stretch and securely fasten the fabric to the posts .
fasten the top and bottom edges of the fabric to the tension wires .
stretch the tension wires tight .
install the bottom tension wire on a straight grade between posts by excavating high points of the ground .
do not fill in low points .
fasten the fabric to end latch corner and gate posts with stretcher bars and stretcher bar bands at num foot intervals except the fabric may be fastened to end and corner posts by threading through loops formed on the posts .
fasten the fabric to line posts with tie wires or post clips and to tension wires with tie wires or hog rings .
space the fasteners at about num inches on line posts and about num inches on tension wires .
give wire ties at least num complete turn .
close each hog ring with the ends overlapping .
wrap tension wires around terminal posts .
the top of the fabric to the top tension wire must be at most num inches .
if supporting arms for barbed wire are shown extend each arm upward from the top of the fence at an angle of about num degrees .
fit it with clips or other means for attaching num lines of barbed wire .
attach the top outside wire to the supporting arm at a point about num inches above the top of the chain link fabric and num inches out from the fence line .
attach the other wires to the arm spaced evenly between the top of the fence and the top outside wire .
for a chain link fence with slats install slats vertically in the mesh openings such that the slats fit snugly .
fasten them in a way that prevents easy removal or displacement .
num payment not used num reserved num gates num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing gates in fences .
constructing a gate in an existing fence includes removal of the fence .
section num fences num numb definitions gate unit for a barbed wire or wire mesh fence num gate with fittings hardware and gate posts with braces .
gate unit for a chain link fence num gate with fittings hardware and gate and latch posts with braces .
numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance reserved num materials each drive gate for a chain link fence must be the length shown in the bid item description .
each drive gate for a barbed wire or wire mesh fence must be at least num inches and at most num inches high .
each walk gate must be num feet wide .
a gate greater than num feet in length must have vertical stays such that no panel exceeds num feet in length .
a gate frame must be made with pipe at least num inch in diameter .
interior vertical stays must be made with pipe at least num inch in diameter .
pipe must comply with the specifications for posts and braces in section numb .
each gate frame panel must be cross trussed with adjustable truss rods at least num inch in diameter .
fasten and reinforce each corner of a gate frame with a malleable iron or pressed steel fitting or by welding .
each pressed steel fitting must num .
have a nominal thickness before galvanizing of at least num inch num .
be fastened to develop the strength of connected members welds must be smooth and develop the strength of the connected member .
galvanize fittings latches rods and other gate hardware under section numb .
fabric for gates in a barbed wire or wire mesh fence must comply with the specifications for nonslatted chain link fence in section num .
fabric for gates in chain link fences must comply with the specifications for the fabric for the fence in which the gate is installed .
attach chain link fence fabric to the gate frame using stretcher bars and tie wires as specified for fence construction .
space tension connectors at numfoot intervals .
for a chain link walk gate installed in an existing fence the gate mounting hardware must not contain openend slots for the fastening bolts .
each gate must have a combination steel or malleable iron catch and locking attachment that does not rotate around the latch post .
num construction hang each gate with at least num steel or malleable iron hinges at least num inches in width such that the gate is securely clamped to the gate post and permits the gate to be swung back against the fence .
the bottom hinge must have a socket to take the ball end of the gate frame .
construct a center rest with a catch and stops to hold gates open .
section num fences num for a walk gate constructed in an existing fence remove a line post and install the gate such that the gate is centered on the hole of the removed post .
when not working on the walk gate close the opening made in the existing fence with existing fence fabric or numfoot chain link fabric .
num payment the gate payment quantity is the quantity of gate units .
num reserved num existing fences num general numa general section num includes specifications for performing work on existing fences .
work performed on existing fences must comply with section num .
numb materials not used numc construction not used numd payment the bid items for work performed on existing fences and gates are measured as specified for the construction of new fences and gates .
num reconstruct fences numa general section num includes specifications for reconstructing fences .
numb materials not used numc construction prevent livestock from escaping during fence reconstruction .
at the junction of the reconstructed fence and cross fence place corner posts with braces and join the fences .
install gates to be reused at the locations designated by the engineer .
if the amount of fence to be disassembled exceeds the amount needed for reconstruction dispose of the excess fencing .
numd payment not used num salvage fences numa general section num includes specifications for salvaging fences .
numb materials not used numc construction package salvaged chain link fabric in numfeet segments per pallet .
group salvaged end and corner posts in num assembly per bundle .
numd payment not used section num fences num num reserved num reserved num division ix traffic control devices num miscellaneous traffic control devices num general num general section num includes general specifications for fabricating installing and placing miscellaneous traffic control devices .
traffic control devices must comply with the california mutcd .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num delineators num general numa summary section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing delineators .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for num .
metal target plates num .
enamel coating numd quality assurance when tested under california test num the enamel coating on a metal target plate must have satisfactory resistance to weathering humidity salt spray and chemicals .
the enamel coating must have num .
satisfactory adherence and impact resistance num .
pencil lead hardness of at least hb num .
numdegree specular gloss of at least num percent num .
excitation purity of no more than num percent num as received num after num hours in an artificial weathering device when tested under astm gnum table xnum cycle num num .
daylight luminous directional reflectance y value of at least num the department may sample metal target plates for testing as shown in the following table metal target plate sampling production stage lot size sample size finished target plates less than num num target plates num num target plates flat sheet stock num sq ft or lessa five numbynuminch specimens coil stock num lb or less two numbynuminch specimens or one numbynum inch specimen aflat sheet stock must be identifiable with parent coil stock .
section num miscellaneous traffic control devices num the department rejects the entire lot if any sample does not comply with section num or zinccoated steel sheets show any evidence of damage to or removal of the zinc coating .
if the department chooses to resample the sample quantity may be twice the number shown in the table titled metal target plate sampling .
num materials numa general a delineator must be on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials .
a delineator consists of a post and num target plates .
numb wood posts wood posts must comply with section numc .
numc metal posts the steel for a metal post must comply with astm anumanumm .
a metal post must be galvanized under section num .
numd flexible posts a flexible post must be num .
white except where shown as yellow num .
free from burns discoloration contamination and other objectionable marks or defects that affect appearance or serviceability nume target plates galvanize steel sheets under section num .
zinccoated steel sheets must comply with astm anuma numm commercial steel types a b and c. the nominal thickness of a zinccoated steel sheet must be at least num inch .
prepare zinccoated surfaces to produce optimum adherence of the enamel coating without damaging or removing the zinc coating .
an aluminum target plate must be aluminum alloy numhnum .
you may use other alloys having equivalent properties if authorized .
the nominal thickness of an aluminum sheet must be at least num inch .
prepare the aluminum sheets for the enamel coating by cleaning to remove contaminants and uniformly applying an acidchromatefluoride acidchromatefluoride phosphate or equivalent chemical anticorrosion conversion coating .
cut each target plate to size and shape and punch the mounting bolt holes .
the surfaces and edges of each target plate must be free from fabrication defects .
coat the pretreated metal target plate with an opaque white coating on both sides using a numcoat or num coat system .
when tested under california test num the dry film for the num .
numcoat system must be uniform and have an average thickness of at least num mil with no individual measurement less than num mil num .
numcoat system must consist of num to nummilthick primer and have an average thickness of at least num mil including primer and top coat with no individual measurement less than num mil for a numcoat painting system fabricate the zinccoated steel target plate including shearing cutting and punching before starting the enameling process .
the enamel coating on a metal target plate must be the product of a commercial manufacturer .
apply the enamel coating by spray dip roller continuous roller coating or other authorized method .
the coating must be smooth and substantially free from flow lines paint washout streaks blisters and other defects that might impair serviceability or detract from the general appearance .
section num miscellaneous traffic control devices num a finished metal target plate must be free from dents and defects .
the maximum edgetoedge surface deviation from a horizontal plane must not exceed num inch .
numf hardware attach a target plate with either num numinch galvanized steel or aluminum nuts and bolts or num numinch blind aluminum rivets and washers .
numgnuml reserved num construction drive the post in place where soil conditions allow if the driving method does not damage the post .
drill pilot holes if ground conditions are such that the post can not be driven without being damaged .
install the target plates after the post is set in place .
after setting the post fill any space around it with rockfree earth .
thoroughly tamp and water the fill material such that it holds the post securely in position .
unless the surplus material is hazardous uniformly spread it along the adjacent roadway where designated by the engineer .
before contract acceptance spot paint any exposed areas where the paint is damaged and clean any exposed areas that are soiled .
num payment not used num pavement markers num general numa summary section num includes specifications for placing pavement markers .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for each type of pavement marker used .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general a pavement marker must be on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials .
pavement markers must be packaged in a way that prevents damage .
each package must be marked with num .
manufacturers name num .
type num .
color num .
quantity num .
lot number num .
date of manufacture protect pavement markers from moisture during shipment to the job site and when stored at the job site .
numb nonreflective pavement markers numbnum general a nonreflective pavement marker must be a ceramic or plastic type .
section num miscellaneous traffic control devices num the marker must be free from defects that affect adhesion appearance performance or any combination thereof .
the top bottom and sides of the marker must be free from objectionable marks or discoloration .
the top surface of the marker must be convex with a gradual change in curvature .
the bottom surface must be flat within a numinch tolerance .
the bottom of the marker must have areas of integrallyformed protrusions or indentations .
the protrusions must project approximately num inch from the bottom surface .
the face of the protrusions must be parallel to the bottom of the marker .
numbnum plastic nonreflective pavement markers types a and ay plastic nonreflective pavement markers must be polypropylene or abs plastic and comply with the requirements shown in the following table plastic nonreflective pavement marker requirements quality characteristic test method requirement luminance factor type a white markers only top surface min california test num num yellowness index type a white markers only top surface max num type ay markers only .
the chromaticity coordinates must be within a color box defined under california test num .
pass compressive strength min lb num artificial weathering num hours exposure white markers only yellowness index max num a plastic nonreflective pavement marker must not be coated with any substance that interferes with the adhesive bond .
numbnum ceramic nonreflective pavement markers a ceramic nonreflective pavement marker must comply with the requirements shown in the following table ceramic nonreflective pavement marker requirements quality characteristic test method requirement bond strength min psi california test num num glaze thickness min in num hardness min moh num luminance factor type a markers only glazed surface min num yellowness index type a markers only glazed surface max num type ay markers only .
the chromaticity coordinates must be within a color box defined under california test num .
pass compressive strength min lb num water absorption max num numc retroreflective pavement markers the exterior surface of a retroreflective pavement marker must be smooth and contain num or num retroreflective faces of the specified color .
the base of the marker must be rough textured and free from gloss and substances that could reduce the adhesive bond .
the base must be flat within a numinch tolerance .
a retroreflective pavement marker must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num miscellaneous traffic control devices num retroreflective pavement marker requirements quality characteristic test method requirement bond strength min psia california test num num compressive strength min lbb num compressive strength recessed markers min lb num abrasion resistance specific intensity minimum requirements after abrasion pass water soak resistance no delamination of the body and lens system or loss of reflectance reflectance specific intensity clear yellow red num incidence angle min num num num num incidence angle min num num num num year after placement num num num athe marker body or filler material must not fail before reaching num psi under the bond strength test .
bthe marker must not deform more than num inch at a load of less than num lb and delamination of the shell and filler material must not exceed num inch regardless of the compressive load required to break the marker .
numd hot melt bituminous adhesive standard hot melt bituminous adhesive must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement penetration num g num seconds num f dmm astm dnum num softening point min f astm dnum num flash point coc min f astm dnum num filler content percent by weight insoluble in num trichloroethane astm dnum num brookfield thermosel viscosity no .
num spindle num rpm num f centipoise astm dnum num flexible hot melt bituminous adhesive must comply with the requirements shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement penetration num g num seconds num f max dmm astm dnum num softening point min f astm dnum num ductility num inmin num f min in astm dnum num ductility num inmin num f min in num flexibility california test num no breaks or cracks brookfield thermosel viscosity no .
num spindle num rpm num f centipoise astm dnum num bond strength to concrete min psi california test num num bond strength to retroreflective pavement marker min psi california test num num the filler material must be type pc grade iii calcium carbonate complying with astm dnum .
the fineness of the filler material must comply with the gradation requirements shown in the following table sieve size percentage passing no .
num num no .
num num no .
num num section num miscellaneous traffic control devices num nume epoxy adhesive the epoxy adhesive must be either rapid set or standard set .
num construction numa general establish the alignment for placing pavement markers .
do not place pavement markers over longitudinal or transverse joints in the pavement surface .
place pavement markers when the pavement surface is dry .
before placing pavement markers remove undesirable material from the pavement surface including dirt curing compound grease oil loose or unsound layers and paint .
regardless of the pavements age or type clean the surface by abrasive blast cleaning except where you apply hot melt bituminous adhesive on clean asphalt concrete or on a new clean seal coat .
apply pavement markers to the pavement with bituminous adhesive flexible bituminous adhesive standard set epoxy or rapid set epoxy adhesive except num .
apply pavement markers in pavement recesses with flexible bituminous adhesive num .
do not use epoxy adhesive to apply plastic nonreflective pavement markers comply with the manufacturers installation instructions for the type of adhesive used .
completely cover the pavement surface or bottom of the pavement marker with the adhesive without leaving any voids .
place the marker into position and firmly apply pressure until contact is made with the pavement .
apply enough adhesive such that it protrudes around the markers edges after pressing it into place .
place retroreflective pavement markers such that each retroreflective face is perpendicular to a line parallel to the roadway centerline .
the engineer determines when the adhesive has set long enough for newly installed pavement markers to bear traffic .
numb hot melt bituminous adhesive if using hot melt bituminous adhesive place pavement markers on asphalt concrete or a new seal coat num after the surface or seal coat has been open to traffic for at least num days and num when the pavement and ambient air temperatures are above num degrees f. indirectly heat hot melt bituminous adhesive in an applicator with continuous agitation or recirculation .
do not heat hot melt bituminous adhesive above the manufacturers maximum safe heating temperature .
place pavement markers immediately after applying hot melt bituminous adhesive .
remove any adhesive from the markers exposed lenses using a soft rag moistened with the manufacturers instructed solvent .
numc epoxy adhesive if using epoxy adhesive place pavement markers on asphalt concrete or a new seal coat num after the surface or seal coat has been open to public traffic for at least num days and num at the pavement and ambient air temperatures complying with the epoxy adhesive manufacturers instructions .
use automatic mixing equipment for the epoxy adhesive .
the equipment must num .
have positive displacement pumps num .
properly meter the num components of the epoxy adhesive in the specified ratio of num percent by volume of either component the voids in an undisturbed sample of cured mixed epoxy adhesive obtained from the extrusion nozzle of the mixing equipment must not exceed num percent .
at the start of each day check the ratio of the num components in the presence of the engineer by num disconnecting the mixing heads or num using suitable bypass valves and filling num suitable containers with section num miscellaneous traffic control devices num the unmixed components .
the mixing head must properly mix the num components until black or white streaks are not visible in the mixed material .
apply epoxy adhesive and place pavement markers before the epoxy starts to thicken .
apply enough epoxy such that it flows and protrudes around the markers edges when a slight pressure is applied to the marker .
numd pavement recesses locate pavement recesses along the line or lines of new or existing stripes .
do not construct recesses on existing structures .
the equipment used for recess construction must be power operated mechanical and capable of removing pavement to the dimensions shown .
remove residue with a vacuum before it is blown by traffic or wind .
do not allow the residue to flow across the pavement or into gutters or drainage facilities .
num payment not used num reserved num existing pavement markers and delineators num general section num includes specifications for performing work on existing pavement markers and delineators .
work performed on existing pavement markers and delineators must comply with section num .
num materials not used num construction numa general not used numb remove pavement markers remove pavement markers and the underlying adhesive by methods that cause the least possible damage to the pavement or surfacing .
when removing ceramictype pavement markers use screens or other protective devices to contain fragments .
remove fragments from the removal work before opening the lanes to traffic .
numc reserved num payment not used num reserved num num signs and markers num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for fabricating and installing sign panels and markers and constructing roadside signs .
signs and markers must comply with the california mutcd california sign specifications and the fhwa publication standard highway signs and markings .
for the california sign specifications go to the departments traffic operations website .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num sign panels num general numa summary section num includes specifications for furnishing sign panels .
furnishing sign panels includes fabricating and installing sign panels .
numb definitions background dominant sign color .
legend letters numerals tildes bars arrows route shields symbols logos borders artwork and miscellaneous characters that are intended to convey specific meanings on traffic signs .
numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for num .
aluminum sheeting num .
retroreflective sheeting num .
screenedprocess colors num .
nonreflective opaque black film num .
protectiveoverlay film upon request submit test samples of sign panels and materials at various stages of production .
the samples must be at least num by num inches and include the background material and legend .
at least num days before starting sign fabrication submit at least num copies of your qc plan for sign panels .
the qc plan must include num .
contact information for the person responsible for sign qc num .
acceptance criteria for incoming raw materials at the fabrication plant num .
type method and frequency of qc testing at the fabrication plant num .
types and brand names of retroreflective sheeting num .
list of the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers approved process colors protective overlay film and black nonreflective film including the manufacturers name and product name for each item num .
manufacturers installation and splicing instructions for the retroreflective sheeting num .
manufacturers instructions for cleaning each product num .
method of packaging transporting and storing signs section num signs and markers num numd quality assurance the department may inspect signs at the fabrication plant or the job site .
the department rejects formed panel signs with holes that are slanted or incorrectly spaced .
the engineer will reject damaged signs defective signs and signs with spelling errors before or after installation .
the department rejects a laminated panel if a numinchthick by numinchwide feeler gauge can be inserted to a depth of more than num inch between the extruded aluminum frame and the aluminum sheeting .
if instrumental testing under astm dnum is disputed the engineers visual inspection will determine the color of the retroreflective sheeting screened process colors and film .
num materials numa general a sign panel must be produced at a fabrication plant .
the sign must be imprinted with the following information num .
phrase property of the state of california num .
sign fabricators name num .
month and year of fabrication num .
type of retroreflective sheeting num .
sheeting manufacturers identification and lot number for the retroreflective sheeting the sign information must num .
be imprinted in numinch uppercase letters and numerals on the back lower right of each sign panel such that it will not be blocked by a sign post or mounting frame num .
be imprinted at the fabrication plant by diestamping on aluminum panels or by an equivalent method for fiberglassreinforced plastic signs such as affixing a diestamped aluminum tag num .
not be painted screened inked or engraved num .
be imprinted such that it does not damage the face of the sign for a sign composed of multiple panels the legend must be placed across joints such that it does not affect the size shape spacing and appearance of the legend on the assembled sign .
for a formed panel sign the retroreflective sheeting for the background and legend must be wrapped around the interior vertical edges of each panel .
a sign with a protectiveoverlay film must be marked at the fabrication plant with a numinchdiameter dot .
the dot must be placed on the lower border of the sign before applying the protectiveoverlay film .
the fabricator determines the application method and exact location of the dot except the dot must not be placed on the legend or near bolt holes .
the dot must be black if placed on a white border and white if placed on a black border .
the exposed portion of the mounting hardware on the sign face including rivets used to attach sheeting to framing members must have a factory or fieldapplied finish that closely matches the color of the background and legend of the sign face .
the face of a fabricated sign must be uniform flat smooth and free from defects scratches chips wrinkles gel hard spots streaks extrusion marks and air bubbles .
the front back and edges of sign panels must not have bends router chatter marks burns sharp edges loose rivets delaminated skins excessive adhesive overspray or aluminum marks .
protect transport and store sign panels fabricated with screenedprocess colors under the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers instructions .
transport sign panels such that the faces of the panels are protected from damage and weather .
ship panels on pallets in crates or in tier racks .
ship panels vertically on edge not stacked horizontally .
place padding and protective materials between the panels as necessary .
keep panels dry during transit .
do not store sign panels directly on the ground .
keep sign panels dry at all times and store the panels section num signs and markers num num .
in a dry environment num .
on edge vertically whether indoors or outdoors num .
in enclosed climatecontrolled trailers or containers in areas of high heat and humidity num .
indoors whenever the panels will be stored more than num days numb aluminum sheeting a sign panel must be fabricated from aluminum sheeting of an alloy and temper complying with astm bnum .
the aluminum sheeting must be pretreated for corrosion resistance as specified in astm bnum .
the surface of the sheeting must be cleaned deoxidized and coated with a light tightlyadherent chromate conversion coating free from powdery residue .
the conversion coating must be class num with a weight from num to num mgsq ft and an average weight of num mgsq ft. after the cleaning and coating process the aluminum sheeting must be protected from exposure to grease oils dust and contaminants .
the aluminum sheeting must be free from buckles warps dents cockles burrs and other defects resulting from fabrication .
the base plate for standard route markers must be die cut .
numc retroreflective sheeting retroreflective sheeting used for the background and legend must comply with astm dnum and must be on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials .
type iii iv viii ix and xi retroreflective sheeting must have class num num or num adhesive backing .
type ii retroreflective sheeting may have class num num num or num adhesive backing .
the adhesive backing must be pressure sensitive and fungus resistant .
retroreflective sheeting must be applied to sign panels at the fabrication plant under the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers instructions without appreciable stretching tearing or other damage .
the orientation of the legend must comply with the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers instructions .
the retroreflective sheeting on a sign panel with a minor dimension of num inches or less must be a single contiguous sheet without splices except for the splices produced during the manufacture of the retroreflective sheeting .
a sign panel with a minor dimension greater than num inches may have num horizontal splice in the retroreflective sheeting other than the splices produced during the manufacture of the retroreflective sheeting .
unless the retroreflective sheeting manufacturers instructions require a different method splices in the retroreflective sheeting must overlap by at least num inch .
the retroreflective sheeting on either side of a splice must not exhibit a color difference under incident and reflected light .
numd process colors and film the type of material recommended by the retroreflective sheeting manufacturer must be used for num .
screenedprocess colors num .
nonreflective opaque black film num .
protectiveoverlay film the fabricator must perform all patterns layouts and setups necessary for the screening process .
the fabricated surface of the applied screenedprocess color must be flat and smooth .
colored retroreflective sheeting must be used for the background except signs with green red blue or brown backgrounds may use reversescreenedprocess color on white retroreflective sheeting for the background color .
the coefficient of retroreflection for reversescreenedprocess colors used on white retroreflective sheeting must be at least num percent of the coefficient of retroreflection specified in astm dnum for the corresponding colored retroreflective sheeting .
the legend must be a black screenedprocess color or nonreflective opaque black film .
section num signs and markers num screenedprocess colors and nonreflective opaque black film must have outdoor weatherability characteristics equivalent to those specified for retroreflective sheeting in astm dnum .
nonreflective opaque black film must be a vinyl or acrylic material .
cured screenedprocess colors must not peel off if transparent cellophane tape with a tensile breaking strength of at least num lbin width measured under astm dnumdnumm is applied over the color and removed in a single quick motion at a num degree angle to the signs face .
nume singlesheet aluminum panels the aluminum sheeting for framed and unframed panels must be aluminum alloy numtnum or numhnum .
a singlesheet aluminum panel must not have a vertical splice in the aluminum sheeting .
a panel with a depth greater than num inches may have num horizontal splice in the sheeting .
for a framed panel the framing members must be aluminum channel or rectangular aluminum tubing .
the lengths of the framing members must be within num inch of the lengths shown .
aluminum channels or rectangular aluminum tubing must be welded together using the inert gasshielded arc welding process and enum aluminumelectrode filler wires .
the filler diameter must be equal to the wall thickness of the smallest welded channel or tubing .
the aluminum sheeting must be attached to the frame with numinchdiameter rivets .
the rivets must be placed at least num inch from the web channel edges .
the rivets must be made of aluminum alloy num and be anodized or treated with a conversion coating to prevent corrosion .
a fabricated singlesheet aluminum panel must be within num inch of the dimensions shown .
the panel must be flat to within num inft of the panel dimensions as measured by a straightedge placed in any direction across the plane of the panel .
numf fiberglassreinforced plastic panels a fiberglassreinforced plastic panel must num .
be on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials num .
comply with astm dnum num .
be weatherresistant grade ii thermoset polyester laminate the plastic must num .
be acrylic modified and uv stabilized for outdoor weatherability .
num .
contain additives designed to suppress fire ignition and flame propagation .
when tested under astm dnum the extent of burning must not exceed num inch .
num .
be stabilized to prevent the release of solvents and monomers .
the front and back surfaces of the laminate must be clean and free from contaminates and releasing agents that could interfere with the bonding of the retroreflective sheeting .
the color of the panel must be uniform gray munsell color notation nnum to nnum as specified in astm dnum .
the panel must be cut from a single piece of laminate .
mounting bolt holes must be predrilled .
predrilled bolt holes panel edges and the front and back surfaces of the panel must be true and smooth .
the panel surface must not have visible cracks pinholes foreign inclusions warping and wrinkles that might affect performance .
the panel must be num .
at least num inch thick num .
flat to within num inft of the panel dimensions as measured by a straightedge placed in any direction across the plane of the panel num .
within num inch of the dimensions shown section num signs and markers num numg laminated panels numgnum general a laminated panel must have a honeycomb core and extruded aluminum frame laminated between num sheets of aluminum to produce a flat rigid panel .
the face sheet must be a single contiguous sheet of numinchthick aluminum sheeting alloy numtnum or numhnum .
the back sheet must be a single contiguous sheet of numinchthick aluminum sheeting alloy numhnum .
the core material must be num lbsq ft phenolicimpregnated kraft paper that num .
is impregnated with num percent phenolic resin num .
has numinch honeycomb cell size num .
is fungus resistant under milstdnumb the adhesive used to laminate the face and back sheets to the honeycomb core and extruded aluminum frame must produce a bond that is strong permanent and resistant to oil and water .
the panel must withstand a wind load of num lbsq ft with a bending safety factor of num when tested for the simple span lengths shown in the following table panel type nominal panel thickness simple span length a num inch num b num inch num num inches num h num inches num the tensile strength of the panel must be at least num lbsq in when tested under astm cnum and cnum cycle b after aging .
instead of spraying with hot water the specimen must be immersed in water at num degrees f. an individual laminated panel must not exceed num feet in length and num feet in depth .
an individual panel must be fabricated as a single unit without horizontal and vertical joints splices or seams .
use num panels for signs exceeding num feet in depth .
you may use num panels to avoid placing the legend over a horizontal joint if authorized .
welds are not required on the side of the framing members where the face and back sheets will be placed .
after lamination numinchdiameter rivets must be placed at each corner of the perimeter frame through the face and back sheets .
the rivets must be made of aluminum alloy num and be anodized or treated with a conversion coating .
sealant must be placed at the corners of the perimeter frame to prevent water intrusion .
the face of a fabricated panel must be flat to within num inft of the panel dimensions as measured by a straightedge placed in any direction across the plane of the panel .
wherever the panels adjoin the gap between the adjoining edges must not deviate by more than num inch from a straightedge placed from corner to corner .
nonadjoining edges must not deviate by more than num inch from a straightedge placed from corner to corner .
the face and back sheets must be flush with the perimeter frame .
all panel edges must be smooth .
a panel must be from num to num inch of the dimensions shown .
the difference in the length between adjoining panels of multiplepanel signs must not be greater than num inch .
numgnum roadside laminated panels a laminated panel for a roadside sign must be type b or type h. for a type b panel section num signs and markers num num .
channel edges must be welded together to form the perimeter frame num .
vertical tube spacers must be welded to the frame for a type h panel num .
channel edges must be screwed to the tube channel edges with selftapping hex head stainless steel screws to form the perimeter frame .
num .
centerline panel tube must be welded to the perimeter frame along the horizontal centerline of the panel .
the centerline panel tube must be a single contiguous extrusion without joints .
num .
vertical tube spacers must be welded to the perimeter frame and to the centerline panel tube .
numgnum overhead laminated panels a laminated panel for an overhead sign must be type a .
an individual panel must not exceed num feet in length or num feet in depth .
if a panel length is not shown for a sign exceeding num feet in length the engineer determines the length .
the channel edges must be screwed to the modified h sections with selftapping hex head stainless steel screws to form the perimeter frame .
aluminum mounting clamps for anum hardware must be cast aluminum alloy with a tensile strength of at least num kipssq in .
the installed bolt torque must not exceed num inlb .
numh formed panels a formed panel must be fabricated from a single contiguous sheet of numinchthick aluminum sheeting alloy numhnum .
aluminum sheeting must be attached to struts with numinchdiameter anodized aluminum rivets .
the rivets must be placed through the sign face at the spacing shown after applying the background material and legend .
the formed edges must be square .
the drilled mounting holes must be straight and perpendicular to the front and back surfaces of the formed edges .
a fabricated formedpanel sign must be within num inch of the dimensions shown and flat to within num inft of the panel dimensions in any direction as measured by a straightedge placed in any direction across the plane of the panel .
num construction numa general deliver sign panels to the job site with the background and legend permanently affixed to the panels .
do not chip or bend sign panels .
immediately replace sign panels exhibiting damage or flaws including a significant color difference between daytime and nighttime .
obtain authorization before repairing sign panels at the job site .
use the following hardware to mount the type of sign panel shown num .
lag screws nuts bolts and washers for roadside signs num .
braces and wood block spacers for roadside signs num .
type anum and type anum mounting hardware for overhead laminatedpanel signs num .
type anum mounting hardware for overhead formedpanel signs numb laminated panels for laminated multiplepanel signs place an hsection closure extrusion in the top channel of the lower panel before mounting the upper panel .
when mounted the bottom channel of the adjoining upper panel must fit together to enclose the hsection closure extrusion for the full length of the panel without gaps .
section num signs and markers num num payment the payment quantity for furnishing any type of sign panel is the area determined from the dimensions shown .
num roadside signs num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing roadside signs .
roadside signs include type n ca type p ca and type r ca marker panels .
numb definitions roadside sign traffic sign with num or more sign panels attached to a supporting structure consisting of num or num posts a signal standard or a lighting standard .
numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance when delivered to the job site treated posts must comply with the specified grading requirements and have a moisture content of not more than num percent when tested under astm dnum with an authorized moisture meter .
num materials numa general a roadside sign includes sign panels fastening hardware back braces straps and saddle brackets and frame assemblies for multiple sign panels .
numb metal posts a mounting for a roadside sign to be installed on a barrier or railing must be fabricated from num welded or seamless steel pipe complying with astm anumanumm grade b and num structural steel complying with astm anumanumm .
bolted connections must comply with section numd .
concrete anchorage devices must comply with section num .
after fabrication all metal parts for mounting a roadside sign must be galvanized under section numb .
numc wood posts a wood post must be the allowable grade and species for the sizes shown in the following table section num signs and markers num nominal post sizea allowable grades and species num by num inches select heart redwood no .
num heart structural redwood numf no .
num heart structural redwood numf no .
num structural light framing douglas fir free of heart center no .
num structural light framing hemfir free of heart center no .
num structural light framing southern yellow pine free of heart center num by num inches select heart grade redwood select heart structural grade redwood numf no .
num heart structural redwood numf no .
num structural joists and planks douglas fir free of heart center no .
num structural joists and planks hemfir free of heart center no .
num structural joists and planks southern yellow pine greater than num by num inches select heart redwood no .
num heart structural redwood numf no .
num posts and timbers also known as no .
num structural douglas fir free of heart center select structural posts and timbers hemfir free of heart center and no .
num timbers southern yellow pine free of heart center asizes shown are minimum dressed dry sizes the posts must be graded under section numbnum .
the sweep must not exceed num foot in num feet .
when tested under astm dnum with an authorized moisture meter the moisture content of douglas fir hemfir and southern yellow pine posts must be not more than num percent in the outer num inch at the posts midpoint before preservative treatment .
douglas fir and hemfir posts must be treated under section numbnum and under awpa unum use category ucnuma commodity specification a .
posts must be incised and the minimum retention of preservative must comply with awpa requirements .
numd laminated wood box posts the department furnishes a laminated wood box post with an attached metal cap at the top of each post .
nume sign panel fastening and mounting hardware frame assemblies for multiple sign installations must be fabricated from an aluminum alloy or structural steel complying with astm anumanumm .
frames fabricated from structural steel must be hotdip galvanized after fabrication .
back braces for a sign must be made of commercialquality mild steel and hotdip galvanized after fabrication .
straps and saddle brackets for mounting sign panels on lighting standards sign structure posts and traffic signal standards must be stainless steel complying with astm anum type numb .
theftproof bolts must be stainless steel with a chromium content of at least num percent and a nickel content of at least num percent .
bolts except theftproof bolts lag screws metal washers and nuts must be made of commercialquality steel and hotdip galvanized after fabrication .
fiber washers must be commercial quality .
galvanizing must comply with section numb .
num construction numa general you may cut the ends of wood posts at the job site .
if cutting or boring is performed after treating posts with preservative manually apply preservative to the cuts and holes under section numbnum .
treat wood block spacers inserted between the post and sign panel on singlepost installations with wood preservative under section numbnum .
section num signs and markers num if you do not immediately use laminated wood box posts neatly stack them on dunnage .
do not paint wood posts and block spacers unless described otherwise .
drill num holes in each wood post to provide the breakaway feature shown .
make breakaway saw cuts and holes for the saw cuts in laminated wood box posts after installation of the posts .
do not splice the posts .
you may make num trim cut at the bottom of the post .
the line between the center of the top of a post and the center of the post at ground level must not deviate from a plumb line by more than num foot in num feet .
backfill the space around wood posts with earth or sand that is free of rocks or other deleterious material .
backfill around laminated wood box posts with granular material .
place the backfill material in layers approximately num foot thick .
moisten and thoroughly compact each layer .
backfill the space around metal posts with minor concrete that contains at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
unless surplus excavated material is hazardous uniformly spread it along the adjacent roadway where designated by the engineer .
numb sign panel installation install lag screws by turning the lag screw into pilot holes using a wrench .
bore the pilot holes with a bit diameter equal to the root diameter of the lag screw thread .
apply pvc tape polyethylene tape or other authorized corrosionresistant barrier to the areas on metal sign surfaces or hardware that will be in contact with treated wood .
before inserting bolts fill the bolt holes with the hardware manufacturers recommended corrosionprotection grease that will not melt or run at a temperature of num degrees f. the corrosionresistant barrier and grease is not required if wood posts and blocks are treated with pentachlorophenol in hydrocarbon solvent .
num payment an installed roadside sign consisting of one or more sign panels attached to num .
num post is num measurement unit of roadside sign one post num .
num posts is num measurement unit of roadside sign two post num .
num or num laminated wood box posts is num measurement unit of install roadside sign laminated wood box post the payment quantity for metal rail mounted sign and metal barrier mounted sign is determined by the scale weight of the pipe posts base plates anchorage assemblies and other metal parts used to mount a roadside sign on a barrier or railing .
the payment quantity for roadside signs installed by the strap and saddle bracket method on electroliers sign structure posts and traffic signal standards and by the mast arm hanger method on traffic signal mast arms is the quantity of the sign panels on these elements .
payment for furnishing sign panels is not included in the payment for roadside signs .
num sign overlays num general section num includes specifications for installing sign overlays .
num materials sign overlay materials must comply with section num .
a selfplugging blind rivet for installing a sign overlay must have a numbynuminch shank .
num construction drill the rivet holes with a no .
num drill bit .
if the overlay is not prepunched the maximum rivet spacing is num inches .
section num signs and markers num if the existing sign panel is porcelainenameled steel drill the rivet holes with a diamond bit .
cover the exposed metal around the hole with a thin coat of silicone adhesive .
num payment not used num markers num general numa summary section num includes specifications for fabricating and installing markers including highway post markers .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for num .
metal target plates num .
enamel coating num .
retroreflective sheeting numd quality assurance when tested under california test num the enamel coating on metal target plates must have satisfactory resistance to weathering humidity salt spray and chemicals .
the enamel coating must have num .
satisfactory adherence and impact resistance num .
pencil lead hardness of hb minimum num .
numdegree specular gloss of num percent minimum num .
excitation purity of num percent maximum num as received num after num hours in an artificial weathering device as specified in astm gnum table xnum cycle num num .
daylight luminous directional reflectance y value of num minimum the department may sample metal target plates for testing at the production stages for the lot and sample sizes shown in the following table metal target plate sampling production stage lot size sample size finished target plates less than num num target plates num num target plates flat sheet stock num sq ft or lessa five numbynuminch specimens coil stock num lb or less two numbynuminch specimens or one numbynum inch specimen aflat sheet stock must be identifiable with parent coil stock .
the department rejects the entire lot if either of the following occurs num .
any sample does not comply with section num num .
zinccoated steel sheets show any evidence of damage to or removal of the zinc coating if the department chooses to resample the sample size may be twice the number shown in the table titled metal target plate sampling .
num materials numa general a marker must be on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials .
section num signs and markers num numb wood posts a wood post must comply with section numc .
numc metal posts steel for a metal post must comply with astm anumanumm .
a metal post must be galvanized under section numb .
numd flexible posts a flexible post must be white except where shown as yellow .
the flexible post must be free from burns discoloration contamination and other objectionable marks or defects that affect appearance or serviceability .
nume target plates a target plate for a type knum ca or a type knum ca object marker must be the same color and material as the flexible post .
a target plate for highway post marker or type lnum ca or type lnum ca object marker installed on a metal post must be manufactured from an aluminum sheet or zinccoated steel sheet .
galvanize steel sheets under section numb .
zinccoated steel sheets must comply with astm anumanumm commercial steel types a b and c. the nominal thickness of a zinccoated steel sheet must be at least num inch .
prepare zinccoated surfaces to produce optimum adherence of the enamel coating without damaging or removing the zinc coating .
an aluminum target plate must be aluminum alloy numhnum .
you may use other alloys having equivalent properties if authorized .
the nominal thickness of an aluminum sheet must be at least num inch .
prepare the aluminum sheets for the enamel coating by a suitable cleaning method to remove contaminants and by uniformly applying an acidchromatefluoride acidchromatefluoride phosphate or equivalent chemical anticorrosion conversion coating .
cut the target plate to size and shape and punch the mounting bolt holes .
the surfaces and edges of the plate must be free from fabrication defects .
coat the pretreated metal target plate with an opaque white coating on both sides using a numcoat or num coat system .
when tested under california test num the dry film for the num .
numcoat system must be uniform and have an average thickness of at least num mil with no individual measurement less than num mil num .
numcoat system must consist of num to nummilthick primer and have an average thickness of at least num mil including primer and top coat with no individual measurement less than num mil if using a numcoat painting system fabricate a zinccoated steel target plate including shearing cutting and punching before starting the enameling process .
the enamel coating on a metal target plate must be the product of a commercial manufacturer .
apply the enamel coating by spray dip roller or continuous roller coating .
you may use other methods if authorized .
the coating must be smooth and substantially free from flow lines paint washout streaks blisters and other defects that might impair serviceability or detract from the general appearance .
a finished metal target plate must not have dents or defects .
the maximum edgetoedge surface deviation from a horizontal plane must not exceed num inch .
section num signs and markers num numf reflectors a reflector for a marker must be made of a type iii or higher grade retroreflective sign sheeting shown on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials .
numg hardware use num numinch galvanized steel or aluminum nuts and bolts or num numinch blind aluminum rivets and washers to attach a target plate to a post .
use numinch galvanized steel bolts nuts and washers to attach a marker panel to a post .
numh highway post markers a highway post marker is shown in the bid item list as a milepost marker .
letters and numerals on a highway post marker must be made with opaque black paint or film .
the paint and film must have an equivalent outdoor weatherability as the retroreflective sheeting specified in astm dnum .
nonreflective opaque black film must be vinyl or acrylic material .
film for letters and numerals must be computer cut and have pressuresensitive adhesive .
numinuml reserved num construction drive posts in place where soil conditions allow the driving without damage to the posts .
drill pilot holes if the ground conditions are such that the posts can not be driven without being damaged .
install target plates and marker panels after the posts are set in place .
after setting the posts fill the space around them with rockfree earth .
during placement thoroughly tamp and water the fill material such that the post is held securely in position .
unless surplus excavated material is hazardous uniformly spread it along the adjacent roadway where designated by the engineer .
use stencils to paint letters and numerals on highway post markers .
before contract acceptance spot paint all exposed areas where the paint is damaged and clean all exposed areas that are soiled .
num payment not used num reserved num existing roadside signs and markers num general section num includes specifications for performing work on existing roadside signs and markers .
work performed on existing roadside signs and markers must comply with section num .
num materials not used num construction numa general remove roadside signs only when replacement signs are installed or when the existing signs are no longer required for traffic .
reset or relocate each roadside sign the same day it is removed .
single sheet aluminum signs to be salvaged must be banded on a pallet with a total weight of not more than num lbpallet .
reset or relocate roadside signs using existing posts .
if an existing post is deteriorated or broken notify the engineer .
if ordered use a new post .
section num signs and markers num any new post and its installation ordered for reasons other than damage you cause is change order work .
numb installation of sign panels on existing frames install sign panels on existing frames with fastening hardware under section numa .
numc installation of removable sign panel frames install sign panels on removable sign panel frames with fastening hardware under section nume .
numd relocate markers reserved nume reset markers reserved num payment payment for furnishing sign panels of any type is not included in the payment for install sign panel on existing frame .
remove sign panel and remove sign panel frame consisting of a single removable sign panel frame with attached sign panels is num measurement unit .
payment for furnishing sign panels is not included in the payment for furnish removable sign panel frame with sign panels attached and install removable sign panel frame .
each sign installation is num measurement unit regardless of the number of posts or sign panels involved .
num num railings and barriers num general num general section num includes general specifications for constructing railings and barriers .
excavation and backfill must comply with section num .
num materials numa general reserved numb steel parts and hardware welding must comply with aws dnum .
grind welds on exposed surfaces flush with the adjacent surfaces .
galvanize completed steel parts and hardware for railings and thrie beam barrier under section numb .
after galvanizing the railing and barrier elements must be free of fins abrasions rough or sharp edges and other surface defects and must not be kinked twisted or bent .
if straightening is necessary use an authorized method .
elements with kinks twists or bends may be rejected .
clean and regalvanize num abraded or damaged galvanized surfaces of steel rail elements and posts and num ends of steel rail elements cut after galvanizing .
if authorized you may repair to the surfaces under section numb instead of regalvanizing .
numc mortar mortar must comply with the specifications for mortar in section num except the mortar must consist of num part by volume of cement and num parts by volume of clean sand .
numd markers markers must comply with section num .
num construction numa general at locations exposed to traffic schedule construction activities such that at the end of each day no post holes are open and no posts are installed without the blocks and rail elements assembled and mounted .
after constructing railings barriers terminal systems crash cushions and vegetation control uniformly spread the surplus excavated material along the adjacent roadway where designated by the engineer unless the material is hazardous .
numb mortar cure mortar by either the water method or the curing compound method using curing compound no .
num .
numc median barriers trim existing median plantings to clear the work area for median barrier construction .
dispose of the trimmings .
do not remove an existing median barrier more than num feet in advance of the barrier being constructed .
at the end of each days activities reset the existing median barrier without mesh or glare screen and anchor the barrier in an authorized way such that no gap is left between the reset barrier and the barrier being constructed .
you may place type k temporary railing instead of resetting the existing barrier .
num payment except for midwest guardrail system and double midwest guardrail system the payment quantity for railings is the length measured along the face of the railing including end and intermediate posts with no deductions for gaps in the railing for lighting and sign supports .
section num railings and barriers num num metal railings and barriers num general numa general numanum general section num includes specifications for constructing metal railings and barriers .
numanum materials plastic blocks for midwest guardrail systems and thrie beam barrier must be on the authorized material list for highway safety features .
grease used to coat the inside surfaces of foundation tubes to receive wood posts must not melt or run at a temperature of num degrees f. numanum construction for midwest guardrail systems and thrie beam barrier install posts foundation tubes and soil plates in soil .
numanum payment not used numb vegetation control reserved num midwest guardrail systems numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for constructing midwest guardrail systems .
the reinforcing steel in the concrete anchors for type ca end anchor assemblies must comply with section num .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit num certified copies of mill test reports as an informational submittal for each heat of steel from which the rail elements and steel posts are formed or fabricated .
for end anchor assemblies and rail tensioning assemblies submit num .
num certified copies of the mill test reports for each manufactured length of cable used .
num .
num sample of the cable for testing .
the cable must be num inches in total length and must be properly fitted with a swaged fitting and righthand thread stud at both ends as specified in section num numbnum including a clevis if shown .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials numbnum general numbnuma general railing parts must be interchangeable with similar parts regardless of the source .
numbnumb steel components and hardware workmanship for steel components and hardware must be equivalent to good commercial practice .
edges bolt holes and surfaces must be free of torn metal burrs sharp edges and protrusions .
fabricate the metal work in the shop .
do not punch cut or weld in the field .
section num railings and barriers num rail elements end caps and return caps must comply with aashto m num for class a type i wbeam guardrail except within num miles of the coast the components must comply with aashto m num for class a type ii wbeam guardrail .
bolts nuts and other fittings must comply with aashto m num .
instead of the rolled steel section shown you may substitute a welded section built up from structural steel plates if num .
depth width and average thicknesses of the welded section are at least equal to those of the rolled section num .
steel plates of the welded section comply with astm anumanumm num .
flanges of the welded section are welded to the web with continuous fillet welds on each side of the web the rail element metal must withstand a cold bend without cracking of num degrees around a mandrel of a diameter equal to num times the plate thickness .
if the radius of curvature of a rail element is num feet or less shape the rail element in the shop .
stencil the radius of curvature on the back of each rail element in numinchhigh numerals .
fabricate steel posts from steel complying with astm anumanumm .
bolts must have shoulders of a shape that will prevent the bolts from turning .
the holes in the rail elements must be of a shape similar to the bolt shoulder .
the bolted connection of the rail element to the post must withstand a num lb pull at num degrees to the line of the railing .
numbnumc wood posts and blocks the grade and species of wood posts and blocks must be no .
num timbers also known as no .
num structural douglas fir or no .
num timbers southern yellow pine .
wood posts and blocks must be graded under section numbnum except allowances for shrinkage after mill cutting must not exceed num percent of the american softwood lumber standard ps num minimum sizes when installed .
wood posts and blocks must be rough or snums .
the size tolerance of rough sawn blocks in the direction of the bolt holes must not exceed num inch .
after fabrication the wood posts and blocks must be pressure treated under section num and awpa unum use category ucnuma commodity specification a .
numbnumd bolt hole grease grease used to fill bolt holes in wood posts and blocks must be recommended for corrosion protection by the manufacturer .
the grease must not melt or run at a temperature of num degrees f. numbnume components for connection to a concrete surface components for connecting midwest guardrail systems to vertical concrete surfaces such as bridge railings barriers retaining walls and abutments must comply with the following requirements num .
metal box spacers and plate washers must be fabricated from steel complying with astm anumanumm .
num .
metal box spacers must be fabricated from separate plates and welded or pressformed and welded .
num .
hs bolts must comply with astm anum anumm or anum or be fabricated from steel rods complying with astm anum .
the bolts or rods must comply with the mechanical requirements in astm anum or anumm after galvanizing .
the nuts and washers must comply with astm anum or anumm .
num .
for connecting guardrail to existing bridge railings or barriers the epoxy adhesive used in the sand and the epoxy adhesive mixture for repairing spalled or damaged areas around the anchor bolt holes must be a numcomponent commercialquality epoxy adhesive manufactured especially for making epoxysand mortar .
numbnum end anchor assemblies and rail tensioning assemblies section numbnum applies to end anchor assemblies and rail tensioning assemblies .
section num railings and barriers num concrete used to construct the anchors for end anchor assemblies must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
fabricate the metal components of anchor assemblies in compliance with good shop practice .
fabricate the anchor plates metal plates foundation tubes and soil plates from steel complying with astm anumanumm .
fabricate the anchor rods from steel complying with astm anumanumm astm anum or astm anum grade num num num or num .
hot forge the eyes or form the eyes with cjp welds .
after fabricating and before galvanizing thermally stress relieve anchor rods with eyes that were formed with any part of the eye below num degrees f during forming or with eyes that were closed by welding .
the completed anchor rod after galvanizing must develop a strength of num lb .
instead of using builtup fabrication you may pressform the anchor plates from steel plate with or without welded seams .
bolts and nuts must comply with astm anum .
anchor cables must be numinch preformed num x num wire strand core or independent wire rope core galvanized under federal specification rrwnum right regular lay manufactured from improved plow steel with a minimum breaking strength of num tons .
the overall length of each cable anchor assembly must be at least num feet .
use cable clips and a cable thimble to attach the cable to the anchor rod where shown .
thimbles must be commercialquality galvanized steel .
cable clips must be commercialquality dropforged galvanized steel .
swaged fittings must be machined from hotrolled steel bars complying with aisi c num and annealed suitable for cold swaging .
galvanize the swaged fitting before swaging .
to keep the stud in the proper position drill a lock pin hole through the head of the swaged fitting and install a numinch plated steel spring pin .
stamp the manufacturers identifying mark on the body of the swaged fitting .
before galvanizing mill a numinch slot in the stud end for the locking pin .
studs must comply with astm anum after galvanizing .
the swaged fittings stud and nut assembly must develop the specified breaking strength of the cable .
ship cable assemblies as a complete unit including studs and nuts .
clevises must be dropforged galvanized steel and must develop the specified breaking strength of the cable .
for anchor rods to be buried in earth coat the portions to be buried with a nummil minimum thickness of one of the following num .
coal tar enamel complying with awwa c num num .
coal tar epoxy complying with either of the following num .
sspcpaint num coal tar epoxypolyamide black paint num .
u.s. army corps of engineers specifications formula cnuma coal tarepoxy black paint numbnum type wbnum transition railings section numbnum applies to type wbnum transition railings .
tengauge rail elements must comply with aashto m num for class b type i thrie beam element except within num miles of the coast the numgauge rail elements must comply with aashto m num for class b type ii thrie beam element .
other rail elements and end caps must comply with aashto m num for class a type i thrie beam element except within num miles of the coast the rail elements and end caps must comply with aashto m num for class a type ii thrie beam element .
section num railings and barriers num numc construction numcnum general numcnuma general at locations where traffic is adjacent to midwest guardrail system work all materials required to complete the guardrail work at a location must be available before you start work at the location .
construct midwest guardrail systems using num .
wood or steel line posts .
num .
wood blocks for line posts .
you may use plastic blocks for steel line posts where shown .
num .
only num type of post and block for any num continuous length of guardrail .
numcnumb posts place the posts at equal intervals except you may space the end posts closer to the adjacent posts if authorized .
drive wood posts with or without pilot holes or place the posts in drilled holes .
backfill any space around the wood posts with selected earth that is free of rock .
place the earth in numinchthick layers .
moisten and thoroughly compact each layer .
drive steel posts with or without pilot holes .
if pilot holes are used backfill any space around the steel posts with dry sand or pea gravel after driving .
drive steel foundation tubes with soil plates attached with or without pilot holes or place them in drilled holes .
backfill any space around the foundation tubes with selected earth that is free of rock .
place the earth in numinchthick layers .
moisten and thoroughly compact each layer .
coat the inside surfaces of the foundation tubes to receive wood terminal posts with grease .
insert the posts into the tubes by hand .
do not drive the posts .
you may slightly round the post edges to facilitate insertion .
numcnumc bolt holes and cuts in wood posts and blocks if copper naphthenate ammoniacal copper arsenate ammoniacal copper zinc arsenate ammoniacal copper quat or copper azole is used to treat wood posts and blocks before inserting the bolts fill the bolt holes with grease .
you may field bore the numinchdiameter holes shown for breakaway wood guardrail terminal posts .
if you perform field cutting or boring after treatment thoroughly swab spray or brush the cuts and holes with num applications of the same type of preservative as initially used or treat the cuts and holes with copper naphthenate under awpa standard mnum .
preservative application in the field must comply with the numst and numnd paragraphs of section numcnumb .
numcnumd rail elements the edges and center of the rail elements must contact each post block .
splice the rail elements at numfoot maximum intervals .
locate the splices at midspan between posts .
rail element splices must be lapped at least num inches and bolted .
lap the rail elements such that the exposed ends do not face approaching traffic .
the rail elements must have full bearing at joints .
install end caps and return caps under the manufacturers instructions .
numcnume connection to a concrete bridge railing or barrier if connecting a midwest guardrail system to a new concrete bridge railing or barrier drill anchor bolt holes in the concrete or form holes using metal or pvc sleeves .
if connecting a midwest guardrail system to an existing concrete bridge railing or barrier drill anchor bolt holes in the concrete .
section num railings and barriers num repair any areas around the holes that were spalled or otherwise damaged during drilling using an epoxy adhesive and sand mixture in proportions of num to num .
the epoxy adhesive must comply with section num numbnume .
mix the num components and the epoxysand mixture under the manufacturers instructions .
numcnumf anchor bolts set with epoxy for anchor bolts set with epoxy place the anchor bolts in holes filled with a numcomponent epoxy mixture complying with the specifications for load bearing applications .
numcnum end anchor assemblies place the concrete for end anchors for type ca end anchor assemblies against the undisturbed material of the excavated holes .
if ordered form the top num inches of the holes .
tighten the anchor cables for type ca end anchor assemblies after the concrete anchor has cured for at least num days .
backfill the holes excavated in the slope to construct buried post end anchors with selected earth .
place the earth in layers approximately num foot thick .
moisten and thoroughly compact each layer .
numcnum type wbnum transition railings reserved numd payment except for midwest guardrail systems located within the pay limits of num a terminal system num a transition railing num an end anchor assembly or num a railing tensioning assembly the payment quantity for midwest guardrail system is the length measured along the face of the rail element from end post to end post of the completed railing and includes buried post anchors .
the point of measurement at the end post is the center of the bolt attaching the rail element to the end post .
if midwest guardrail system is connected to a structure barrier wall or abutment the point of measurement is the midpoint between the num bolts attaching the rail element to the structure barrier wall or abutment .
the payment quantity for double midwest guardrail system is the length measured from end post to end post along the center line of the guardrail .
an end anchor assembly type ca with num cables attached to num concrete anchor is num measurement unit .
num thrie beam barriers numa general section num includes specifications for constructing thrie beam barrier .
thrie beam barrier must comply with the specifications for midwest guardrail systems in section num .
single thrie beam barrier work includes transition sections between w beam and thrie beam elements .
numb materials rail elements terminal connectors end caps and return caps must comply with aashto m num for class a type i thrie beam guardrail except within num miles of the coast the components must comply with aashto m num for class a type ii thrie beam guardrail .
tengauge rail elements for transition railings must comply with aashto m num for class b type i thrie beam element except within num miles of the coast the numgauge rail elements must comply with aashto m num for class b type ii thrie beam element .
other rail elements and end caps for transition railings must comply with aashto m num for class a type i thrie beam element except within num miles of the coast the rail elements and end caps must comply with aashto m num for class a type ii thrie beam element .
use steel posts for thrie beam barrier on bridges .
use wood posts for approach barrier transitions to connect to concrete structures and for posts set in steel foundation tubes at trailing end anchors .
at all other locations use either wood or steel posts .
use only num type of post in any num continuous length of barrier .
use wood blocks with wood and steel posts .
you may use plastic blocks with steel posts where shown .
section num railings and barriers num for thrie beam barrier on bridges num .
threaded rods must comply with astm anum num .
anchor bolts must comply with astm fnum grade num num .
plates must comply with section num numc construction toenailing wood blocks to wood posts is not required .
if the spacing between the posts must be varied from the standard spacing you may modify the rail elements at the job site if authorized .
repair damaged galvanizing under section numb .
for thrie beam barrier on bridges num .
if cored or drilled holes for anchor bolts must be offset to avoid existing main reinforcing steel the corresponding base plate anchor bolt holes may be slotted to adjust to the new anchor bolt locations .
slotting must not reduce the edge distance of the hole to less than num inch .
num .
drilling of anchor bolt holes and bonding of bolts must comply with the specifications for drilling and bonding dowels in section numenum .
if median barrier delineation is shown match the barrier marker spacing to the raised pavement marker spacing on the adjacent median edgeline pavement delineation .
numd payment the payment quantity for single thrie beam barrier is the length measured from end post to end post along the face of the rail element of the installed barrier .
the quantity does not include any portion of single thrie beam barrier within the pay limits of transition railing type stb .
the payment quantity for single thrie beam barrier constructed on each side of a bent underneath a structure or on each side of other obstructions is the length measured along each face of the installed barriers .
the payment quantity for double thrie beam barrier is the length measured from end post to end post along the center line of the installed barrier .
the quantity does not include any portion of double thrie beam barrier within the pay limits of transition railing type dtb .
the point of measurement at the end posts of single and double thrie beam barriers is the center of the bolt or rod attaching the rail element to the end post .
if a single thrie beam barrier is constructed on each side of a median obstruction and the single barriers merge into a double barrier the post with num blocks attached is the end post for measuring the length of the single and double thrie beam barriers .
the division point for determining the payment quantities of double thrie beam barrier bridge and double thrie beam barrier is the face of the paving notch of the bridge .
num terminal systems numa general numanum general section num includes specifications for constructing terminal systems .
numanum materials not used numanum construction not used numanum payment not used section num railings and barriers num numb alternative inline terminal systems reserved numc alternative flared terminal systems reserved numdnumh reserved num california bridge rails numa general numanum summary section num includes specifications for constructing california bridge rail .
concrete must comply with section num .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
california stnums bridge rail work includes the handrailing .
numanum definitions reserved numanum submittals submit shop drawings for the california bridge rail .
the shop drawings must include num .
details for venting and pickup holes in rails and sleeves num .
railing layout num .
complete details for the construction of the work including construction methods sequence of shop and field assembly and installation procedures submit num copies of the shop drawings .
allow num days for review .
upon authorization the engineer returns num copies to you for use during construction .
numanum quality assurance reserved numb materials numbnum general reserved numbnum reinforced concrete in freezethaw areas num .
concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard num .
bar reinforcing steel must comply with section num numbnum metal components structural shapes structural tubing plates bars bolts nuts and washers must comply with section num num .
other fittings must be commercial quality .
formed steel sections must be uniform in appearance .
stud bolts must comply with the specifications for studs in clause num of aws dnum .
ferrous metal parts must be galvanized under section numb .
railings must conform to the curvature by means of a series of short chords from centertocenter of rail posts except num tubing for railings described as conforming to the curvature must be shop bent to fit the curvature and num tubing with a horizontal curve radius less than num feet must be shop bent or fabricated to fit the curvature .
joints must be matchmarked .
section num railings and barriers num numbnum coatings organic zincrich primer used to paint the exposed bolt threads must be on the authorized material list for organic zincrich primers .
numc construction railings must present a smooth uniform appearance in their final position conforming closely to the horizontal and vertical lines shown or ordered .
erect railings carefully and true to line and grade .
posts must be normal to the profile grade .
transverse to the profile grade railings must be plumb within a tolerance not to exceed num foot in num feet .
adjacent rail elements must align with each other within num inch .
in freezethaw areas cure concrete by the water method .
after installing the rail paint the exposed bolt threads with num applications of organic zincrich primer .
numd payment the payment quantity for california bridge rail is the length measured from end to end along the face of the railing including reinforced concrete end blocks and intermediate posts .
num chain link railings numa general section num includes specifications for constructing chain link railings .
numb materials structural shapes plates bars and bolts must comply with section num .
structural tubing steel must comply with astm anumanumm or anum .
frame members carrying electrical conductors must be rigid metal conduit manufactured of mild steel complying with ul num electrical rigid metal conduit steel .
hot dip galvanize the interior and exterior surfaces of the rigid metal conduit .
truss rods post tops and other required fittings and hardware must be steel malleable iron or wrought iron .
post tops and other closures must be watertight .
fittings and hardware must fasten properly to the posts and other members .
cable used in the frame must num .
be wire rope num .
be num inch in diameter num .
have a minimum breaking strength of num lb num .
be galvanized under federal specification rrwnum crimped sleeve clamps and stud socket assemblies must num .
be metal num .
develop the strength of the cable num .
be the same color as the cable tension wires must be at least numgauge coil spring steel .
post clips must be at least numgauge steel .
wire ties or hog rings must be numgauge commercialquality steel wire .
galvanize the tension wires post clips wire ties and hog rings under astm anum coating type z class num .
you may substitute one of the following for the steel wire ties or hog rings num .
numgauge numinch minimum diameter aluminum wire ties complying with astm bnum or bnumm alloy numhnum section num railings and barriers num num .
numgauge numinch minimum diameter aluminum hog rings complying with astm bnum or bnumm alloy numtnum or alloy numhnum chain link fabric must be num gauge and must comply with one of the following num .
aashto m num type i class c num .
aashto m num type iv class a num .
astm fnum class num chain link fabric must be woven into approximately numinch mesh .
all of the railings for a single structure must be the same color .
numc construction give wire ties at least num complete turn .
bend the wire tie ends away from pedestrian traffic .
tighten truss rods and cables with turnbuckles or other fittings .
install a thimble at each cable loop .
stretch and fasten the chain link fabric securely to the posts other members and tension wires .
stretch the tension wires tightly .
wherever necessary to conform to horizontal or vertical curvature rework and fit the fabric to present a smooth neat and workmanlike appearance .
provide openings in the fabric as required by other facilities .
reinforce the openings with at least num turn of numgauge wire .
attach pipe handrailing to chain link railing where shown .
pipe handrailing must comply with section num num .
numd payment not used num cable railings numa general section num includes specifications for constructing cable railings .
numb materials concrete for the post footings must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
pipe for posts and braces must be standard steel pipe or pipe complying with section numb .
truss rods post tops cable clamps eye bolts thimbles and other required fittings must be commercial quality steel malleable iron or wrought iron .
post tops must be watertight .
the eye of the eye bolts must be either drop forged or formed with a complete penetration weld .
the eye must develop num percent of the bolt strength .
turnbuckles must num .
be commercial quality num .
have jaw or eye ends num .
have a minimum breaking strength of num lb num .
be steel pipe type or dropforged steel crimped sleeve clamps and stop sleeve clamps must num .
be nonferrous metal num .
develop the strength of the cable num .
be the same color as the cable cables must section num railings and barriers num num .
be wire strand or rope num .
have a minimum diameter of num inch num .
have a minimum breaking strength of num lb num .
be galvanized under federal specification rrwnum numc construction tension the cables to provide taut railings between posts .
install a thimble at each cable loop .
numd payment not used num tubular handrailings numa general section num includes specifications for constructing tubular handrailings .
numb materials the materials for tubular handrailing components must comply with the specifications shown in the following table material specification rail and post tubes astm anumanumm grade b rolled bars and plates astm anumanumm rail splice sleeves astm anumanumm bolts astm anum anumm or anum threaded rods astm anum nuts and washers for bolts and threaded rods astm anum or anumm bolts and threaded rods furnished under astm anum must comply with the mechanical requirements specified in astm anum after galvanizing .
rail tubes must be shop bent or fabricated to fit the horizontal curve if the radius is less than num feet .
if the vertical radius of the tubular handrailing is num feet or less that portion of the railing must be either shop bent or built up from numinchthick structural steel plates .
the builtup tubular rail elements must match the seamless tubing in appearance .
the difference between outtoout rail splice sleeve dimensions and the clear inside dimensions of the tubular steel rail elements must not exceed num inch after galvanizing .
numc construction tubular handrailings must present a smooth uniform appearance in their final position conforming closely to the horizontal and vertical lines shown or ordered .
before the tubular handrailing parts are assembled clean the bearing surfaces and surfaces to be in permanent contact .
if the railing is mounted on a concrete surface the post bases must be true and flat to provide uniform bearing .
carefully handle the materials such that no parts are bent broken abraded or otherwise damaged .
do not use manufacturing handling or installation methods that damage or distort the members or damage the galvanizing .
adjust the vertical position of the tubular handrailing to compensate for the camber and dead load deflection of the superstructure .
the engineer determines the adjustment amount before the railing is installed .
the metal railing posts to which the chain link railing attaches must fit the mounting brackets pipe sleeves and other connection fittings .
section num railings and barriers num where necessary install shims at posts and rail elements to provide uniform bearing and conformance with the horizontal lines and vertical grade lines .
shims at steel posts must be commercialquality galvanized sheet steel .
numd payment not used num pipe handrailings numa general section num includes specifications for constructing pipe handrailings .
numb materials rail elements must be commercialquality standard steel pipe .
brackets bolts nuts and other fittings must be commercialquality structural steel except standard steel pipe fittings may be used where shown .
numc construction erect pipe handrailings carefully and true to line and grade .
numd payment not used num reserved num concrete barriers num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing concrete barriers and wildlife passage ways in concrete barriers .
concrete must comply with section num .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
drill and bond dowels under section num .
concrete barrier work includes num .
bar reinforcing steel including the length that extends from the barrier into decks walls and footings num .
constructing type l wildlife passage ways num .
constructing steel plate barriers at overhead sign foundations electroliers drainage structures and other locations shown for type numsw concrete barriers num .
tubular handrailing and tubular lower rail must comply with the specifications for tubular handrailings in section num num .
threaded rods for the tubular handrailing and resin capsule anchors for the tubular lower rail must comply with section num type k concrete barrier must comply with the specifications for type k temporary railing in section num num and the plans for type k temporary railing except removable panels must not be used and the barriers must remain in place at the completion of the work .
thrie beam barrier elements end caps and hardware required to construct type m wildlife passage ways must comply with section num .
numb definitions reserved section num railings and barriers num numc submittals if the extrusion or slip form method is to be used and the reinforcement is not fixed in place before placing the concrete submit a qc plan for the extrusion or slip form construction method .
the qc plan must include num .
contingency plan for correcting problems in production transportation or placement num .
procedure for splicing concrete barrier reinforcement num .
procedure for positioning reinforcement during extrusion or slip form operations num .
test procedure for verifying the final positions of the longitudinal reinforcement num .
test report form to be used that shows the station of the test the position of the reinforcement relative to the top of the barrier and the clearance cover from the faces of the barrier to the reinforcement submit the test report forms within num hours after constructing the concrete barrier .
submit a certificate of compliance for a new or used type numk portable concrete barrier that is not cast on the job site .
for the tubular handrailing on a type numsw concrete barrier submit num copies of the threaded rod layouts before placing the barrier reinforcement .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb barrier smoothness test the smoothness of the top and exposed faces of barriers using a numfoot straightedge laid on the surfaces .
numdnumc barrier reinforcement positions for the extrusion or slip form construction method if the reinforcement is not fixed in place before placing the concrete verify the final positions of the horizontal reinforcement at numfoot intervals evaluated a minimum of num feet behind the trailing extrusion or slip form edge by testing the position of the reinforcement relative to the top of the barrier and the clearance cover from the faces of the barrier to the reinforcement .
numdnum department acceptance the department rejects concrete barriers with any reinforcement that does not comply with section num numanumciii .
num materials numa general reserved numb concrete numbnum general concrete for type num series concrete barriers must comply with the specifications for minor concrete except the concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
in nonfreezethaw areas concrete for concrete barriers other than type num series must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
in freezethaw areas concrete for concrete barriers must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
section num railings and barriers num for type numf numge and numsf concrete barriers the concrete paving between the tops of the num walls of the barrier and the optional concrete slab at the base between the num walls of the barrier must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
numbnum concrete for extrusion or slip form methods minor concrete for extruded or slip formed concrete barriers must comply with the following num .
maximum aggregate size must be no larger than num inches and no smaller than num inch .
num .
if the numinch maximum size aggregate is used the concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
num .
combined aggregate gradation must produce concrete of the shape and surface texture specified .
num .
consistency must be such that after extrusion or slip forming the concrete maintains the shape of the barrier without support .
you may make the concrete by continuously batching the materials by volume and mixing in a continuous mixer under the batching and mixing requirements in astm cnumcnumm .
numc bar reinforcing steel in freezethaw areas bar reinforcing steel for concrete barriers must be epoxy coated under section num num .
numd steel plates and hardware structural steel plates and hardware required to join the concrete barrier at gaps caused by overhead sign foundations electroliers drainage structures and at other locations shown must comply with section numa .
nume granular backfill for type numf numge and numsf concrete barriers the granular material for backfill between the num walls of concrete barrier must num .
be earthy material suitable for the purpose intended num .
have no rocks lumps or clods exceeding num inches in greatest dimension numf type k concrete barrier reflectors type k concrete barrier reflectors must be type k temporary railing reflectors on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials .
the adhesive used to mount reflectors on a type k concrete barrier must comply with the manufacturers instructions .
numg connection of a concrete barrier to a structure sheet metal neoprene strip and grease at the connection of a concrete barrier to a structure must comply with the following num .
sheet metal must be commercialquality galvanized sheet steel that is smooth and free of kinks bends or burrs .
joints in the sheet metal must be butt joints sealed with plastic ductsealing tape .
num .
neoprene strip must comply with the specifications for neoprene in section num .
num .
grease must comply with sae asnum .
expanded polystyrene at the connection of a concrete barrier to a structure and at a concrete barrier transition at a bridge column must comply with section numbnum .
numh type numk portable concrete barriers type numk portable concrete barrier must consist of interconnected new or undamaged used pc portable concrete barrier units .
for type numk portable concrete barrier num .
concrete must comply with the specifications for minor concrete except weighmaster certificates and certificates of compliance are not required .
section num railings and barriers num num .
steel plates must comply with astm anumanumm .
after fabrication galvanize the steel plates under section numb .
num .
connection pins must be round bars complying with astm anumanumm .
num construction numa general numanum general reserved numanum closing gaps in concrete barriers during construction on highways open to traffic if a gap is left in the concrete barrier such as for equipment or special drainage features close the gap by temporary or permanent means when work is not actively in progress at the location of the gap .
numanum adjusting barrier height if the concrete barrier height is adjusted the engineer determines the adjustment amount before the concrete is placed .
if a concrete barrier is constructed on ab adjust the barrier height to compensate for irregularities in the surface of the finished ab .
for a concrete barrier constructed on a recently completed bridge adjust the barrier height to compensate for the camber and dead load deflection of the superstructure .
construct the barrier after the falsework has been released and as long after the superstructure construction as the progress of the work will allow .
for a concrete barrier constructed on existing pavement or on an existing structure adjust the barrier height to compensate for irregularities in the existing grade .
numanum locating expansion joints locate concrete barrier expansion joints at deck pavement and principal wall joints .
the expansion joint filler material must be the same size as the joint or a minimum of num inch .
numanum placing barriers the concrete barrier must present a smooth uniform appearance in its final position conforming closely to the horizontal and vertical lines shown or ordered .
the barrier must be free of lumps sags or other irregularities .
you may place the portion of the barrier that is below finished grade to the neat lines of the excavation .
numanum barrier construction methods numanuma general construct type num series concrete barriers by one of the following methods num .
castinplacewithfixedforms method num .
extrusion or slip form method num .
combination of both methods construct concrete barriers other than type num series by the castinplacewithfixedforms method .
numanumb castinplacewithfixedforms method concrete barriers constructed by the castinplacewithfixedforms method must comply with section num .
do not use pc mortar blocks to support the reinforcing steel on the traffic side of barriers .
numanumc extrusion or slip form method numanumci general reserved section num railings and barriers num numanumcii placing concrete for concrete barriers constructed using an extrusion or slip form machine or other similar type of equipment the concrete must be well compacted and dense and the exposed surfaces must comply with section num .
you may be required to submit evidence of successful operation of the extrusion or slip form machine or other equipment .
feed the concrete to the extrusion or slip form machine at a uniform rate .
operate the machine under enough uniform restraint to the forward motion to produce a wellcompacted concrete mass free from surface pits larger than num inch in diameter and requiring no further finishing other than that specified in section numanum .
numanumciii placing reinforcing bars for concrete barriers constructed using extrusion or slip form methods place the horizontal reinforcing bars continuously .
if the reinforcement is not fixed in place before placing the concrete the reinforcement must not deviate more than num inch from the positions shown when tested under section numdnumc .
numanumciv maintaining barrier grades the grade for the top of concrete barriers constructed using extrusion or slip form methods must be indicated by an offset guide line set from survey marks established by the engineer .
the forming portion of the extrusion or slip form machine must be readily adjustable vertically during the forward motion of the machine to conform to the predetermined grade line .
a grade line gauge or pointer must be attached to the machine such that a continual comparison can be made between the barrier being placed and the established grade line as indicated by the offset guide line .
instead of the above method for maintaining the barrier grade the extrusion or slip form machine may be operated on rails or forms set at a uniform depth below the predetermined finished top of the barrier grade or on existing pavement or bridge decks .
numanumcv constructing expansion joints for concrete barriers constructed using extrusion or slip forming methods construct expansion joints using one of the following methods num .
comply with section num .
num .
saw through the barrier section to its full depth .
insertion of joint filler is not required .
if you saw or form the joints before the concrete has hardened firmly support the adjacent portions of the barrier with close fitting shields .
if you saw or form the joints after applying curing compound treat the exposed barrier faces in the vicinity of the joint with curing compound after sawing or forming the joints .
numanum finishing before applying the curing compound the surface finish of type num series concrete barriers must be free from surface pits larger than num inch in diameter and you must give the surface a final soft brush finish with strokes parallel to the line of the barriers .
do not finish the surface with a brush application of grout .
to facilitate finishing remove fixed forms for cip type num series concrete barriers as soon as possible after the concrete has set enough to maintain the barrier shape without support .
at least num days after placing type num series concrete barriers give the exposed surfaces a light abrasive blast finish to achieve a uniform appearance .
the final surface finish of concrete barriers other than type num series must be a class num surface finish complying with section numfnum .
any alternative method of final surface finishing must be authorized .
numanum curing cure the exposed surfaces of concrete barriers under section numb by the curing compound method using curing compound no .
num .
for concrete barriers on bridges and walls that do not support soundwalls section num railings and barriers num you may instead cure the formed surfaces of the barriers by the formsinplace method if you keep the forms in place for at least num hours after placing the concrete .
for type num series concrete barriers apply the curing compound using a mechanical sprayer capable of applying the curing compound to at least num entire side and the top of the concrete barrier in num application at a uniform rate of coverage .
protect the spray against wind .
in freezethaw areas cure concrete barriers on bridges and walls under section numb by the water method .
for type num series concrete barriers keep the forms in place for at least num hours after placing the concrete .
numanum smoothness the top and exposed faces of barriers must comply with the following smoothness requirements when tested under section numdnumb num .
for type num series concrete barriers the top must not vary more than num foot from the edge of the straightedge and the faces must not vary more than num foot from the edge of the straightedge .
num .
for concrete barriers other than type num series both the top and faces must not vary more than num foot from the edge of the straightedge .
numanum installing tubular handrailings for a tubular handrailing mounted on a type numsw concrete barrier drill and bond the threaded rods under the specifications for drilling and bonding dowels in section num .
numanum installing barrier markers where concrete barrier markers are shown cement the markers to the barrier under the manufacturers instructions .
match the barrier marker spacing to the raised pavement marker spacing on the adjacent median edgeline pavement delineation .
numanum installing reflectors where shown install reflectors on type k concrete barriers .
mount the reflectors using an adhesive complying with section numf .
numanum placing granular backfill for type numf numge and numsf concrete barriers place the granular material for backfill between the num walls of the concrete barrier must be placed without compaction .
numb concrete barriers at existing structures for a concrete barrier constructed on an existing structure bond the dowels in drilled holes in the existing concrete .
for a concrete barrier constructed to the face of an existing concrete structure match the existing weep holes .
numc connection of a concrete barrier to a structure at the connection of a concrete barrier to a structure apply a uniform film of grease to the upper surface of the neoprene strip before placing the sheet metal .
numd concrete barrier transitions for a concrete barrier transition num .
remove portions of the existing concrete barrier where shown num .
roughen the contact surfaces of the existing concrete barrier num .
drill and bond dowels into the existing concrete barrier nume type numk portable concrete barriers set type numk portable concrete barriers on a firm stable foundation .
grade the foundation to provide uniform bearing throughout the entire barrier length .
section num railings and barriers num place and maintain the abutting ends of the pc concrete units in alignment without substantial offset to each other .
position the pc concrete units straight on tangent alignments and on a true arc on curved alignments .
the minimum curve radius for horizontal alignments is num feet .
the final surface finish of type numk portable concrete barriers must comply with section numfnum .
place the fabrication date and your name or logo on each panel .
the fabrication date and name or logo must be num inches or less in height and must be located num inches or less above the bottom of the rail panel .
cure the exposed surfaces of concrete elements by the water method the formsinplace method or the curing compound method .
curing compound must be curing compound no .
num .
numf wildlife passage ways construct wildlife passage ways in concrete barriers where shown .
construct the passage way opening by forming the opening in the concrete barrier or after the concrete barrier is constructed by saw cutting the outline of the opening and removing the concrete and bar reinforcing steel within the limits of the opening .
the completed opening for the wildlife passage way must be clear and unobstructed for the dimensions shown .
for a type m wildlife passage way you may be required to remove concrete barrier .
before removing the concrete barrier make a saw cut of approximately num inch in depth on the face of the barrier along the removal limits .
num payment the payment quantity for concrete barriers other than types numf numge and numsf is the length measured along the top of the barrier .
the payment quantity for type numf numge and numsf concrete barriers is the length measured once along the centerline between the num walls of the barrier .
the payment quantity for concrete barriers includes the length of gaps in the concrete barrier where steel plate barrier is attached to the concrete barrier .
num crash cushions num general numa general section num includes specifications for constructing crash cushions .
numb materials not used numc construction not used numd payment not used num reserved num reserved num existing railings and barriers num general numa general section num includes specifications for performing work on existing railings barriers terminal systems and crash cushions .
section num railings and barriers num work performed on existing railings barriers terminal systems and crash cushions must comply with section num .
numb materials concrete must comply with the specifications for minor concrete .
reinforcement must comply with section num .
numc construction if a portion of a guardrail or thrie beam barrier is to remain in place removing salvaging reconstructing relocating or resetting work includes num .
resetting end caps return caps and buried post anchors num .
providing connections to existing and new facilities including connections to concrete numd payment the payment quantities for removing salvaging reconstructing relocating and resetting existing railings and barriers are measured as specified for measuring new railings and barriers .
num existing guardrails numa general numanum general section num includes specifications for performing work on existing guardrail .
numanum materials not used numanum construction not used numanum payment not used numb remove guardrails numbnum general section numb includes specifications for removing guardrail .
numbnum materials not used numbnum construction where removing guardrail remove any concrete anchors and steel foundation tubes .
numbnum payment not used numc salvage guardrails numcnum general section numc includes specifications for salvaging guardrail .
numcnum materials not used numcnum construction remove disassemble clean prepare mark bundle package tag haul and stockpile the guardrail to be salvaged .
comply with the requirements for number per bundle for the guardrail components shown in the following table section num railings and barriers num component number per bundle rail num wood posts num by num inches num wood posts num by num inches num steel posts num blocks num tag incomplete bundles and show the quantity contained .
numcnum payment not used numd reconstruct guardrails reserved nume adjust guardrails reserved numfnumj reserved num existing metal bridge railings numa general numanum general section num includes specifications for performing work on existing metal bridge railings .
numanum materials not used numanum construction not used numanum payment not used numb reconstruct metal bridge railings numbnum general numbnuma summary section numb includes specifications for reconstructing metal bridge railings .
numbnumb definitions reserved numbnumc submittals submit num copies of shop drawings showing the details of the refabrication of the removed materials and the fabrication of the new materials .
include a list of the new materials the type of metal and the metal specifications .
numbnumd quality assurance reserved numbnum materials not used numbnum construction remove refabricate and install the metal bridge railing of the type shown .
refabrication of removed material fabrication of new material and installation of the railing must comply with the specifications for a new metal bridge railing of the type being reconstructed .
section num railings and barriers num perform aluminum welding by the inertgasshielded arc welding process .
finish exposed aluminum welds to a neat surface .
repair abraded and damaged galvanized surfaces on the removed material under section numb .
numbnum payment the payment quantity for reconstruct metal railing bridge is the length measured along the face of the reconstructed railing and includes the length of gaps in the railing for lighting and sign supports .
numcnumg reserved num reserved num num markings num general num general section num includes general specifications for applying and constructing markings .
markings must comply with the ca mutcd .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num traffic stripes and pavement markings num general numa summary section num includes specifications for applying traffic stripes and pavement markings .
numb definitions pavement marking transverse marking such as num a limit line num a stop line or num a word symbol shoulder parking stall or railroadgradecrossing marking .
traffic stripe longitudinal centerline or lane line used for separating traffic lanes in the same direction of travel or in the opposing direction of travel or a longitudinal edge line marking the edge of the traveled way or the edge of a lane at a gore area separating traffic at an exit or entrance ramp .
a traffic stripe is shown as a traffic line .
numc submittals for each lot or batch of thermoplastic paint and glass beads submit num .
certificate of compliance including the product name lot or batch number and manufacture date num .
mets notification letter stating that the material is authorized for use num .
sds for glass beads used in dropon applications and in thermoplastic formulations submit a certificate of compliance and test results for each lot of beads specifying the epa test methods used and tracing the lot to the specific test sample .
the testing for lead and arsenic content must be performed by an independent testing laboratory .
submit retroreflectivity readings for traffic stripes and pavement markings at locations with deficient retroreflectivity determined by the engineer .
numd quality assurance before starting permanent application of twocomponent painted traffic stripes or markings apply a test stripe of the paint on roofing felt or other suitable material in the presence of the engineer .
the test section must be at least num feet in length .
test each lot of glass beads for arsenic and lead under epa test method num and numb or numc .
the engineer will perform a nighttime drivethrough visual inspection of the retroreflectivity of the traffic stripes and pavement markings and notify you of any locations with deficient retroreflectivity .
measure the retroreflectivity of the deficient areas using a retroreflectometer under astm enum and the sampling protocol specified in astm dnum .
section num markings num num materials numa general traffic stripes and pavement markings must be retroreflective .
within num days of applying traffic stripes and pavement markings the retroreflectivity of the stripes and markings must be a minimum of num mcdmnumlxnum for white and num mcdmnumlxnum for yellow when measured under astm enum .
numb thermoplastic thermoplastic must comply with state specification pthnumspray pthnumhydro or pthnumalkyd .
for recessed thermoplastic stripes and pavement markings mark packages of thermoplastic with the words for recessed application .
numc paint the paint for traffic stripes and pavement markings must comply with the specifications for the paint type and color shown in following table paint specifications paint type color specification waterborne traffic line white yellow and black state specification ptwbnumrnum acetonebased white yellow and black state specification ptnumvoca waterborne traffic line for the international symbol of accessibility and other curb markings blue red and green federal specification ttpnume the color of painted traffic stripes and pavement markings must comply with astm dnum .
numd glass beads glass beads applied to paint must comply with state specification num .
glass beads applied to molten thermoplastic material must be type num beads complying with aashto m num .
the glass beads must have a coating that promotes adhesion of the beads to thermoplastic .
at least num percent of the beads by count must be true spheres that are colorless and do not exhibit dark spots air inclusions or surface scratches when viewed under numx magnification .
each lot of glass beads used in pavement markings must contain less than num ppm each of arsenic and lead when tested under epa test methods num and numb or numc .
nume thermoplastic traffic stripes and pavement markings with enhanced wetnight visibility a thermoplastic traffic stripe or pavement marking with enhanced wetnight visibility consists of a single uniform layer of thermoplastic and num layers of glass beads .
the numst layer of glass beads must be on the authorized material list for highperformance glass beads .
the color of the glass beads must match the color of the stripe or marking to which they are being applied .
the numnd layer of glass beads must comply with aashto m num type num .
the glass beads used in both layers must be surface treated for use with thermoplastic under the bead manufacturers instructions .
within num days of applying a thermoplastic traffic stripe or pavement marking with enhanced wetnight visibility the retroreflectivity must be a minimum of num mcdmnumlxnum for white stripes and markings and num mcdmnumlxnum for yellow stripes and markings when measured under astm enum .
numf twocomponent painted traffic stripes and pavement markings a twocomponent painted traffic stripe or pavement marking consists of num coat of paint and num applications of retroreflective glass beads of num gradations .
section num markings num the largegradation glass beads must be on the authorized material list for twocomponent traffic striping paints and largegradation retroreflective glass beads .
the smallgradation glass beads must comply with aashto m num type num .
the glass beads must have an adhesionpromoting and waterrepellant coating complying with the paint manufacturers instructions .
you may use alternative types of glass beads recommended by the paint manufacturer if authorized .
the daytime and nighttime color of the painted traffic stripes and pavement markings must comply with astm dnum .
numg recessed twocomponent painted traffic stripes and pavement markings reserved numh traffic stripe and pavement marking tape reserved numinumm reserved num construction numa general establish the alignment for traffic stripes and the layouts for pavement markings with a device or method that will not conflict with other traffic control devices .
protect existing retroreflective pavement markers during work activities .
remove existing pavement markers that are coated or damaged by work activities and replace each with an equivalent marker on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials .
a completed traffic stripe must num .
have clean welldefined edges without running or deformation num .
be uniform num .
be straight on a tangent alignment and on a true arc on a curved alignment the width of a completed traffic stripe must not deviate from the width shown by more than num inch on a tangent alignment and num inch on a curved alignment .
the length of the gaps and individual stripes that form a broken traffic stripe must not deviate by more than num inches from the lengths shown .
the gaps and stripes must be uniform throughout the entire length of each section of broken traffic stripe so that a normal striping machine can repeat the pattern and superimpose successive coats on the applied traffic stripe .
a completed pavement marking must have welldefined edges without running or deformation .
a completed thermoplastic traffic stripe or thermoplastic pavement marking must be free from runs bubbles craters drag marks stretch marks and debris .
protect newly placed traffic stripes and pavement markings from traffic and other deleterious activities until the paint is thoroughly dry or the thermoplastic is hard enough to bear traffic .
numb surface preparation use mechanical wire brushing to remove dirt contaminants and loose material from the pavement surface that is to receive the traffic stripe or pavement marking .
use abrasive blast cleaning to remove laitance and curing compound from the surface of new concrete pavement that is to receive the traffic stripe or pavement marking .
numc application of stripes and markings numcnum general apply thermoplastic for a pavement marking with a stencil or a preformed marking .
section num markings num apply paint for a pavement marking by hand with a stencil and spray equipment .
you may use permanent tape for a traffic stripe or a pavement marking instead of paint or thermoplastic .
the permanent tape must be on the authorized material list for signing and delineation materials .
apply the tape under the manufacturers instructions .
immediately remove drips overspray improper markings paint and thermoplastic tracked by traffic with an authorized method .
apply a traffic stripe or a pavement marking only to a dry surface during a period of favorable weather when the pavement surface is above num degrees f. the glass beads must be embedded in the coat of paint or thermoplastic to a depth of num their diameters .
verify the rate of application of the glass beads by stabbing the glass bead tank with a calibrated rod .
where a new broken traffic stripe joins an existing broken traffic stripe allow enough overlap distance between the new and existing striping patterns to ensure continuity at the beginning and end of the transition .
numcnum thermoplastic traffic stripes and pavement markings numcnuma general do not thin the primer .
apply the primer under the manufacturers instructions num .
to asphaltic surfaces over num months old and to all concrete surfaces num .
immediately before and concurrently with the application of the thermoplastic num .
at the manufacturers instructed rate use preheaters with mixers having a numdegree rotation to preheat the thermoplastic material .
apply the thermoplastic in a single uniform layer by spray or extrusion methods .
completely coat and fill voids in the pavement surface with the thermoplastic .
numcnumb extruded thermoplastic traffic stripes and pavement markings apply extruded thermoplastic at a temperature from num to num degrees f unless a different temperature is recommended by the manufacturer .
apply extruded thermoplastic for a traffic stripe at a rate of at least num lb of thermoplastic per foot of num inchwide solid stripe .
the applied thermoplastic traffic stripe must be at least num inch thick .
an applied thermoplastic pavement marking must be from num to num inch thick .
apply glass beads to the surface of the molten thermoplastic at a rate of at least num lb of beads per num sq ft. numcnumc sprayable thermoplastic traffic stripes and pavement markings apply sprayable thermoplastic under state specification pthnumspray at a temperature from num to num degrees f. apply sprayable thermoplastic at a rate of at least num lb of thermoplastic per foot of numinchwide solid stripe .
the applied sprayable thermoplastic material must be at least num inch thick .
numcnumd recessed thermoplastic traffic stripes and pavement markings construct recesses for double traffic stripes in a single pass .
keep the recesses dry and free from debris .
apply primer to the recesses .
after constructing the recesses apply the thermoplastic traffic stripes and pavement markings before the end of the same work shift .
section num markings num numcnume thermoplastic traffic stripes and pavement markings with enhanced wetnight visibility use a ribbonextrusion or screedtype applicator to apply thermoplastic traffic stripes with enhanced wet night visibility .
operate the striping machine at a speed of num mph or slower during the application of the stripe and glass beads .
apply the stripe at a rate of at least num lb of thermoplastic per foot of numinchwide solid stripe .
the applied thermoplastic traffic stripe must be at least num inch thick .
apply thermoplastic pavement marking at a rate of at least num lb of thermoplastic per square foot of marking .
the applied thermoplastic pavement marking must be at least num inch thick .
apply thermoplastic traffic stripe and both types of glass beads in a single pass .
first apply the thermoplastic followed immediately by consecutive applications of highperformance glass beads and then aashto m num type num glass beads .
use a separate applicator gun for each type of glass bead .
you may apply glass beads by hand on pavement markings .
uniformly distribute glass beads on traffic stripes and pavement markings .
apply highperformance glass beads at a rate of at least num lb of glass beads per num sq ft of stripe or marking .
apply aashto m num type num glass beads at a rate of at least num lb of glass beads per num sq ft of stripe or marking .
the combined weight of the num types of glass beads must be greater than num lb of glass beads per num sq ft of stripe or marking .
numcnum painted traffic stripes and pavement markings numcnuma general do not thin paint for traffic stripes and pavement markings .
mix the paint by mechanical means until it is homogeneous .
thoroughly agitate the paint during its application .
use mechanical means to paint traffic stripes and pavement markings and to apply glass beads for traffic stripes .
the striping machine must be capable of superimposing successive coats of paint on the numst coat and on existing stripes at a speed of at least num mph .
the striping machine must num .
have rubber tires num .
be maneuverable enough to produce straight lines and normal curves in true arcs num .
be capable of applying traffic paint and glass beads at the specified rates num .
be equipped with num .
pointer or sighting device at least num feet long extending from the front of the machine num .
pointer or sighting device extending from the side of the machine to determine the distance from the centerline for painting shoulder stripes num .
positive acting cutoff device to prevent depositing paint in gaps of broken stripes num .
shields or an adjustable air curtain for line control num .
pressure regulators and gauges that are in full view of the operator for a pneumatically operated machine num .
paint strainer in the paint supply line num .
paint storage tank with a mechanical agitator that operates continuously during painting activities num .
glass bead dispenser located behind the paint applicator nozzle that is controlled simultaneously with the paint applicator nozzle num .
calibrated rods for measuring the volumes of paint and glass beads in the paint and glass bead tanks airatomized spray equipment must num .
be equipped with oil and water extractors and pressure regulators num .
have adequate air volume and compressor recovery capacity num .
have properly sized orifices and needle assemblies for the spray gun tip section num markings num where the configuration or location of a traffic stripe is such that the use of a striping machine is not practicable you may apply the traffic paint and glass beads by other methods and equipment if authorized .
the engineer determines if the striping machine is not practicable for a particular use .
for an existing surface apply traffic stripes and pavement markings in num coat .
for a new surface except for the black stripe between the num yellow stripes of a double traffic stripe apply traffic stripes and pavement markings in num coats .
the numst coat of paint must be dry before applying the numnd coat .
paint a numcoat numinchwide black stripe between the two numinchwide yellow stripes of a double traffic stripe .
if the two numinchwide yellow stripes are applied in num coats apply the black stripe concurrently with the numnd coat of the yellow stripes .
apply each coat of paint for any traffic stripe in num pass of the striping machine including the glass beads regardless of the number width and pattern of the individual stripes .
do not paint traffic stripes and pavement markings if num .
freshly painted surfaces could become damaged by rain fog or condensation num .
atmospheric temperature could drop below num degrees f for acetonebased paint and num degrees f for waterborne paint during the drying period on numlane highways num .
if the numst coat of the centerline stripe is applied in the same direction as increasing post miles use the righthand spray gun of the num spray guns used to apply the double yellow stripe to apply a single yellow stripe .
num .
if the numst coat of the centerline stripe is applied in the same direction as decreasing post miles use the lefthand spray gun of the num spray guns used to apply the double yellow stripe to apply a single yellow stripe .
num .
apply the numnd coat of centerline striping in the opposite direction of the numst coat .
apply numcoat paint at an approximate rate of num sq ftgal .
apply numcoat paint at the approximate rate shown in the following table twocoat paint application rates coverage sq ftgal paint type numst coat numnd coat waterborne paint num num acetonebased paint num num apply glass beads at an approximate rate of num lb of beads per gallon of paint .
the engineer determines the exact application rate of the paint and glass beads .
verify the application rate of paint by stabbing the paint tank with a calibrated rod .
if the striping machine has paint gauges the engineer may measure the volume of paint using the gauges instead of stabbing the paint tank with a calibrated rod .
numcnumb twocomponent painted traffic stripes and pavement markings do not apply paint for twocomponent painted traffic stripes and pavement markings until authorized .
apply the paint only to clean completely dry surfaces when the pavement surface temperature is above num degrees f and the ambient temperature is above num degrees f. comply with the paint manufacturers instructions for the temperature of the paint during its application .
the striping machine must not travel faster than num mph when applying the paint and glass beads .
apply the paint and glass beads in num pass in the following order section num markings num num .
paint num .
largegradation glass beads num .
smallgradation glass beads apply the glass beads with num separate applicator guns .
uniformly distribute the glass beads on traffic stripes and pavement markings .
you may apply the glass beads by hand methods on pavement markings .
apply the largegradation glass beads at a minimum rate of num lb of beads per gallon of paint .
apply the smallgradation glass beads at a minimum rate of num lb of beads per gallon of paint .
numcnumc recessed twocomponent painted traffic stripes and pavement markings reserved numcnum reserved reserved numcnumcnum reserved num payment the payment quantity for a traffic stripe is the length measured along the line of the traffic stripe without deductions for gaps in the broken traffic stripe .
the payment quantity for a pavement marking is the area covered .
a double extruded thermoplastic traffic stripe consisting of two numinchwide yellow stripes is measured as num traffic stripes .
a double sprayable thermoplastic traffic stripe consisting of two numinchwide yellow stripes is measured as num traffic stripe .
a double traffic stripe consisting of two numinchwide yellow stripes separated by a numinchwide black stripe is measured as a single traffic stripe .
num contrast treatment num reserved num reserved num rumble strips num general numa summary section num includes specifications for constructing rumble strips .
numb definitions rumble strip band of raised material or indentations formed or grooved in the traveled way on the centerline or shoulders that is used to alert or warn drivers .
numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance reserved num materials not used num construction numa general do not construct shoulder rumble strips on structures or approach slabs .
section num markings num construct rumble strips within num inches of the alignment shown .
rumble strip equipment must be equipped with a sighting device that enables the operator to maintain the rumble strip alignment .
indentations must not vary from the dimensions shown by more than num inch in depth or more than num percent in length and width .
grind or remove and replace noncompliant rumble strip indentations at locations determined by the engineer .
ground surface areas must be neat and uniform in appearance .
grinding equipment must be equipped with a vacuum attachment to remove residue from the roadbed .
numb rumble strips in concrete pavement construct rumble strips by grinding indentations in new concrete pavement .
concrete pavement must be hardened before grinding the indentations .
do not construct indentations until num num days after concrete placement and num the concrete has developed a modulus of rupture of num psi when tested under california test num .
numc rumble strips in asphalt concrete pavement construct rumble strips in the top layer of asphalt concrete by grinding indentations in the pavement .
select the method and equipment for constructing groundin indentations .
on ground areas apply a fog seal coat under section num .
num payment the payment quantity for any type of rumble strip is the length measured by the station rumble strip without deductions for gaps between indentations .
num existing markings num general section num includes specifications for removing existing markings .
work performed on existing markings must comply with section num .
num materials not used num construction numa general reserved numb remove traffic stripes and pavement markings remove traffic stripes before making any change to the traffic pattern .
remove traffic stripes and pavement markings including paint in the gaps by methods that do not materially damage the pavement .
remove a pavement marking such that the old message can not be identified .
if removing by grinding make the grinding area rectangular .
the minimum dimensions for the rectangular area are the height and width of the pavement marking .
sweep up or vacuum any residue before it can num be blown by traffic or wind num migrate across lanes or shoulders or num enter a drainage facility .
numc remove traffic stripes and pavement markings containing lead reserved numd remove contrast treatment if contrast treatment is shown to be removed remove it by a method that does not materially damage the pavement .
sweep up or vacuum any residue before it can num be blown by traffic or wind num migrate across lanes or shoulders or num enter a drainage facility .
section num markings num numenumj reserved num payment the payment quantity for remove traffic stripe is the measured length multiplied by num num for a single numinchwide traffic stripe num .
num for a single numinchwide traffic stripe num .
num for a double traffic stripe num .
num for a triple traffic stripe the payment quantity for remove traffic stripe does not include the gaps in broken traffic stripes .
payment for removal of paint evident in a gap is included in the payment for remove traffic stripe of the type involved .
if no bid item is shown on the bid item list for remove pavement marking remove pavement marking is paid for as remove traffic stripe of the types shown in the bid item list and the payment quantity for num square foot of pavement marking is num linear feet .
num reserved num reserved num division x electrical work num reserved num division xi materials num aggregate num general num general section num includes general specifications for furnishing aggregate .
num materials not used num construction not used num payment not used num reserved num num concrete num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for furnishing curing and protecting concrete .
concrete must be composed of cementitious material fine aggregate coarse aggregate admixtures if used and water .
pcc must comply with the specifications for concrete .
numb definitions free water total water in the concrete mixture minus the water absorbed by the aggregates in reaching a saturated surfacedry condition .
reclaimed aggregate aggregate that has been recovered from plastic concrete by washing away the cementitious material .
numc submittals numcnum general reserved numcnum aggregate gradation before starting concrete work submit the gradation of the primary aggregate nominal sizes .
if the aggregate source changes submit the new gradation before using the aggregate .
if a primary coarse aggregate or the fine aggregate is separated into num or more sizes submit the gradation and proposed proportions of each size combined mathematically to show num proposed gradation .
show the percentage passing for each applicable sieve size .
numcnum cementitious materials submit a certificate of compliance for cementitious materials .
include the source name and location .
if the cementitious material is delivered directly to the job site the certificate of compliance must be signed by the cementitious material supplier .
if the cementitious material is used in readymixed concrete the certificate of compliance must be signed by the concrete manufacturer .
if blended cement is used the certificate of compliance must include a statement signed by the blended cement supplier that shows the actual percentage of scm by weight in the blend .
determine the weight of scm by using a weighing device or by chemical analysis .
numcnum admixtures if you propose to use an admixture from the authorized material list for chemical admixture for use in concrete submit a certificate of compliance from the manufacturer certifying that the admixture furnished is the same as that previously authorized .
numcnum curing compound for each batch of curing compound delivered to the job site or casting site submit num .
split curing compound test samples to mets .
the test samples must be from the shipping containers at the manufacturers source of supply .
num .
certificate of compliance to the engineer and to mets .
the certificate of compliance must include num .
test results for the tests specified in section numdnum .
num .
certification that the material was tested within num year before use .
if the curing compound is shipped in tanks or tank trucks submit a shipping invoice with each load .
the invoice must show the same information specified for container labels in section numbnumb .
section num concrete num numcnum mix design submit the concrete mix design before using the concrete in the work and before changing the mix proportions or an aggregate source .
numcnum concrete delivery submit a weighmaster certificate as an informational submittal with each load of concrete delivered to the job site .
the weighmaster certificate must show num .
mix identification number .
num .
nonrepeating load number .
num .
date and time the materials were batched .
num .
total quantity of water added to the load .
num .
for transitmixed concrete the revolution counter reading at the time the truck mixer is charged with cement .
num .
actual scale weights in pounds for the ingredients batched .
do not substitute theoretical or target batch weights for actual scale weights .
submit weighmaster certificates in printed form or if authorized in electronic media .
present electronic media in a tabdelimited format on a cd or dvd .
captured data for the ingredients represented by each batch must be a linefeed carriagereturn and one line separated record with sufficient fields for the specified data .
you may submit a weighmaster certificate with a separate certificate that lists the actual batch weights or measurements for a load of concrete if both certificates are delivered to the job site and are imprinted with the same nonrepeating load number that is unique to the contract .
numcnum testing if the concrete is tested for shrinkage submit the test data with the mix design .
if prequalification is specified submit certified test data or trial batch test reports under section num numdnumb .
if num days are allowed for the concrete to attain the strength described submit test results under section numdnuma .
numcnum stationary mixer certification if you weigh the scm cumulatively with the cement for concrete completely mixed in a stationary mixer submit certification of the stationary mixer under section numfnumc .
numcnum protecting concrete if requested submit a plan for protecting the concrete .
numd quality assurance numdnum general if requested furnish test samples of the freshly mixed concrete and provide satisfactory facilities for obtaining the test samples .
numdnum cementitious material content adjust the batch proportions as necessary to produce concrete having the specified cementitious material content .
the engineer verifies compliance with the specified cementitious material content by testing under california test num for cement content .
for testing purposes scm is considered to be cement .
for all concrete except minor concrete if the cementitious material portland cement or scm content is less than the minimum required and is not within the batching tolerances allowed under section num numfnum you must remove the concrete .
if the engineer determines that the concrete is structurally adequate the concrete may remain in place and num is deducted for each pound of cementitious section num concrete num material portland cement or scm less than the minimum required .
no deductions are made based on the results of california test num .
numdnum shrinkage if shrinkage limitations are specified test the concrete under aashto t num modified as follows num .
prepare specimens that have a num by numinch cross section .
num .
remove each specimen from the mold num num hours after mixing the concrete and place the specimen in lime water at num num degrees f until num days age .
num .
take a comparator reading at num days age and record it as the initial reading .
num .
store the specimens in a humiditycontrolled room maintained at num num degrees f and num num percent relative humidity for the remainder of the test .
num .
take subsequent readings at num num num and num days drying .
perform aashto t num testing at a laboratory that is accredited to perform aashto t num or that maintains a current rating of num or better for the cement and concrete reference laboratory concrete proficiency sample program .
shrinkage test data authorized by the department no more than num years before the numst day of the contract is authorized for the entire contract .
the test data must be for concrete with similar proportions and using the same materials and material sources to be used on the contract .
concrete is considered to have similar proportions if no more than num mix design elements are varied and the variation is within the tolerances shown in the following table mix design element tolerance water to cementitious material ratio num total water content num coarse aggregate content num fine aggregate content num scm content num admixture as originally doseda num aadmixtures must be the same brand .
numdnum concrete uniformity the engineer determines the uniformity of concrete mixtures based on differences in test results between num test samples of mixed concrete from the same batch for the following tests num .
california test num if the mix design specifies a penetration value num .
astm cnum if the mix design specifies a slump value num .
california test num numdnum compressive strength numdnuma general section numdnum applies for either of the following cases num .
concrete is designated by compressive strength .
num .
attaining a minimum concrete compressive strength is specified as a prerequisite to applying loads or stresses to a concrete structure or member .
if the numday compressive strength described is num psi or greater the concrete is designated by compressive strength .
if the concrete is designated by compressive strength the strength of concrete that is not steam cured is determined from cylinders cured under method num of california test num .
if attaining a minimum concrete compressive strength is specified as a prerequisite to applying loads or stresses to a concrete structure or member cylinders for concrete that is not steam cured are cured under method num of california test num and the concrete compressive strength is evaluated based on individual tests .
section num concrete num for concrete with a described numday compressive strength greater than num psi num days are allowed to attain the strength described .
except for concrete specified to be in a freezethaw area num days are allowed to attain the strength described if the cementitious material satisfies the following equation num x uf num x f num x sltc num where f natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with aashto m num class f or n including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd .
f is equivalent to the sum of fa and fb as defined in section num numbnum .
sl ggbfs including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd uf silica fume metakaolin or uffa including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd tc total quantity of cementitious material used lbcu yd for concrete satisfying the equation above test for the compressive strength at least once every num cu yd at num num and num days .
submit the test results to the engineer and to mets attention office of structural materials concrete materials testing branch .
the engineer determines the concrete compressive strength from test cylinders num .
made from concrete sampled under california test num num .
molded and initially field cured under california test num num .
cured and tested under california test num a compressive strength test represents no more than num cu yd of concrete and consists of the average compressive strength of num cylinders made from material taken from a single load of concrete .
if a cylinder shows evidence of improper sampling molding or testing the cylinder is discarded and the test consists of the compressive strength of the remaining cylinder .
if a single compressive strength test result is below the strength described at the maximum age specified or allowed or if the compressive strength of concrete tested at num days indicates to the engineer that the concrete will not attain the strength described at the maximum age specified or allowed correct the mix design or concrete fabrication procedures and obtain authorization before you place additional concrete .
if a single compressive strength test result is below the strength described at the maximum age specified or allowed the concrete represented by the test is subject to one of the following actions num .
if the compressive strength is at least num percent of the strength described num per cubic yard of concrete is deducted .
num .
if the compressive strength is below num percent of the strength described but is at least num percent of the strength described num per cubic yard of concrete is deducted .
num .
if the compressive strength is below num percent of the strength described you must remove the concrete .
if a strength test result at the maximum age specified or allowed is below the strength described but is at least num percent of the strength described the deductions specified above apply unless you obtain and submit evidence that the strength of the concrete placed in the work is greater than or equal to the strength described and this evidence is accepted by the engineer .
if a strength test result at the maximum age specified or allowed is below num percent of the strength described you must remove the concrete represented by the test unless you obtain and submit evidence that the strength of the concrete placed in the work is at least num percent of the strength described and this evidence is accepted by the engineer .
if the evidence consists of tests made on cores taken from the work obtain and test the cores under astm cnum .
section num concrete num numdnumb prequalification if the concrete has a described numday compressive strength greater than num psi or if prequalification is specified prequalify the materials mix proportions mixing equipment and procedures proposed for use in the work before placing the concrete .
submit certified test data or trial batch test reports based on the same materials mix proportions mixing equipment procedures and batch size proposed for use in the work .
certified test data must show that num .
results of num percent or more of at least num consecutive tests exceed the compressive strength described at the maximum number of days specified or allowed and none of the test results are less than num percent of the strength described num .
all tests are the most recent tests made on concrete of the proposed mix design and were made within num year of the proposed use of the concrete trial batch test reports must show that num .
average compressive strength for num consecutive concrete cylinders taken from a single batch and tested at not more than the maximum age specified or allowed is at least num psi greater than the num day compressive strength described num .
no individual cylinder has a strength less than the strength described at the maximum age specified or allowed num .
data contained in the report is from trial batches produced within num year of the proposed use of the concrete if air entrainment is specified the air content of the trial batches must be greater than or equal to the air content specified for the concrete without reduction due to tolerances .
perform tests under the appropriate california test methods or comparable astm test methods .
use testing equipment that is in good condition and properly calibrated .
if tests are performed during the contract notify the engineer in advance so that the engineer can witness the test procedures .
certified test data and trial batch reports must include num .
date of mixing num .
mixing equipment and procedures num .
batch size in cubic yards num .
weight type and source for each ingredient num .
penetration or slump as specified in section numgnum num air content if an airentraining admixture is used num .
concrete age at the time of testing num .
compressive strength for each cylinder tested num .
signature of an official of the testing firm if authorized you may use the concrete from trial batches in the work at locations where lower quality concrete is required .
any change to the prequalified materials mix proportions mixing equipment or procedures that could result in a concrete strength below that described requires additional prequalification by trial batch testing .
numdnum curing compound test each batch of curing compound delivered to the job site or casting site for num .
water loss at num hours under california test num num .
reflectance under astm enum num .
viscosity under astm dnum num .
nonvolatile content under astm dnum num .
pigment content under astm dnum a batch must be no larger than num gal .
section num concrete num the engineer samples the curing compound at any of the following num .
manufacturers supply source num .
job site or casting site the curing compound sampled from shipping containers from the manufacturers supply source or from the job site must match the test results for viscosity nonvolatile content and pigment content within the tolerances specified in the precision and bias statements for the test methods .
additional testing of the curing compound may be required before its use if the compound has not been used within num year or if the engineer believes that the compound may no longer be acceptable .
num materials numa general concrete for pavement approach slabs and bridge decks must comply with the shrinkage limitations shown in the following table when tested under section numdnum type of work maximum length change of laboratory cast specimens at num days drying average of num percent paving and approach slab concrete num bridge deck concrete num when tested for uniformity under section numdnum the differences in test results between the num concrete test samples must comply with the following num .
when tested under california test num the difference in penetration values must not exceed num inch .
num .
when tested under astm cnum the difference in slump values must not exceed the values shown in the following table average slump s in maximum permissible difference in s num num num s num num num s num num num .
when tested under california test num the difference in the proportion of coarse aggregate must not exceed num pounds of aggregate per cubic yard of concrete .
unless a modulus of rupture is specified the minimum required compressive strength for concrete must be the greater of either the strength described or num psi .
proportion the concrete to attain the minimum required compressive strength .
for concrete not designated by compressive strength the concrete must attain at least num percent of the minimum required compressive strength when tested at num days .
numb cementitious materials numbnum general the cementitious materials type and brand must be on the authorized material list for cementitious material for use in concrete when the mix design is submitted .
unless otherwise specified the cementitious material must be one of the following num .
combination of type ii or v portland cement and scm num .
blended cement the cementitious materials used in cip concrete for exposed surfaces of similar elements of a structure must be from the same sources and of the same proportions .
section num concrete num protect cementitious materials from moisture until used .
place sacked cementitious materials in a pile to allow access for tallying inspecting and identifying each shipment .
provide facilities that ensure the cementitious materials to be used in the work are kept separate from each other and from other cementitious materials .
a storage silo containing a cementitious material must be emptied before using the silo for a different cementitious material .
blended cements with a percentage of scm differing by more than num percent are considered different cementitious materials .
sample cementitious materials under california test num .
numbnum cement portland cement must comply with astm cnum except the cnums content of type ii cement must not exceed num percent .
blended cement must comply with portland blastfurnace slag cement type is ms or portland pozzolan cement type ip ms specified in aashto m num except num .
maximum limits on pozzolan content do not apply num .
blended cement must be composed of type ii or v cement and scm produced by one of the following methods num .
intergrinding of portland cement clinker and granulated blast furnace slag ggbfs or pozzolan num .
blending of portland cement and either ggbfs or finely divided pozzolan num .
combination of intergrinding and blending types ii iii and v portland cement must comply with the following num .
alkali content must not exceed num percent by mass of alkalies as nanumo num knumo when determined under aashto t num .
num .
autoclave expansion must not exceed num percent .
type iii portland cement may be used only if specified or authorized .
numbnum supplementary cementitious materials each scm must be one of the following num .
fly ash complying with aashto m num class f and either of the following num .
available alkali as nanumo num knumo must not exceed num percent when tested under astm cnum .
num .
total alkali as nanumo num knumo must not exceed num percent when tested under aashto t num .
num .
uffa complying with aashto m num class f and the chemical and physical requirements shown in the following num tables chemical quality characteristic requirement percent sulfur trioxide sonum max num loss on ignition max num available alkalies as nanumo num knumo max num section num concrete num physical quality characteristic requirement percent particle size distribution less than num microns min num less than num microns min num strength activity index with portland cement num days of control min num num days t of control min num expansion at num days when testing project materials under astm cnuma max num ain the test mix at least num percent by weight of the type ii or v portland cement must be replaced with uffa .
num .
raw or calcined natural pozzolans complying with aashto m num class n and either of the following num .
available alkali as nanumo num knumo must not exceed num percent when tested under astm cnum .
num .
total alkali as nanumo num knumo must not exceed num percent when tested under aashto t num .
num .
metakaolin complying with aashto m num class n and the chemical and physical requirements for the quality characteristics shown in the following num tables chemical quality characteristic requirement percent silicon dioxide sionum aluminum oxide alnumonum min num calcium oxide cao max num sulfur trioxide sonum max num loss on ignition max num available alkalies as nanumo num knumo max num physical quality characteristic requirement percent particle size distribution less than num microns min num strength activity index with portland cement num days of control min num num days of control min num num .
ggbfs complying with aashto m num grade num or num .
num .
silica fume complying with aashto m num with a minimum reduction in mortar expansion of num percent when using the cement from the proposed mix design .
fly ash from different sources may be commingled at uncontrolled ratios if num .
each source produces fly ash complying with aashto m num class f num .
at the time of commingling each fly ash has num .
running average of relative density that does not differ from any other fly ash by more than num num .
running average of loss on ignition that does not differ from any other fly ash by more than num percent num .
final commingled fly ash complies with aashto m num class f num .
fly ash supplier is responsible for testing the commingled fly ash the quantity of portland cement and scm in concrete must comply with the minimum cementitious material content specified .
the scm content in concrete must comply with one of the following section num concrete num num .
any combination of portland cement and at least num scm satisfying equations num and num equation num num x uf num x fa num x fb num x slmc x where uf silica fume metakaolin or uffa including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd fa natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with aashto m num class f or n with a cao content of up to num percent including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd fb natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with aashto m num class f or n with a cao content of greater than num percent and up to num percent including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd sl ggbfs including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd mc minimum quantity of cementitious material specified lbcu yd x num for innocuous aggregate num for all other aggregate equation num mc mscm pc num where mc minimum quantity of cementitious material specified lbcu yd mscm minimum sum of scms that satisfies equation num lbcu yd pc quantity of portland cement including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd num .
num percent class f fly ash with at least num oz of linonum solution added per num lb of portland cement .
the cao content of the fly ash must not exceed num percent .
numc aggregates numcnum general both the coarse and fine aggregate must be on the authorized material list for the aggregate used in concrete to be considered innocuous .
aggregates must be free from deleterious coatings clay balls roots bark sticks rags and other extraneous material .
provide safe and suitable facilities including splitting devices for obtaining aggregate test samples under california test num .
aggregates must have num .
characteristics that enable the production of workable concrete within the limits of water content specified in section numgnum .
num .
no more than num percent loss when tested for soundness under california test num .
the soundness requirement does not apply to fine aggregate if the durability index of the fine aggregate is num or greater when tested under california test num .
each cleanness value sand equivalent or aggregate gradation test represents no more than num cu yd of concrete or num days pour whichever is smaller .
if the results of any num or more of the cleanness value sand equivalent or aggregate gradation tests do not comply with the requirements for operating range but all comply with the requirements for contract compliance num .
suspend the concrete placement at the completion of the current pour num .
do not restart the concrete placement until test results or other information show that the next material to be used in the work complies with the requirements for operating range section num concrete num if the results of either or both of the cleanness value and coarse aggregate gradation tests do not comply with the requirements for contract compliance you must remove the concrete represented by the tests .
if the engineer determines that the concrete is structurally adequate the concrete may remain in place and num per cubic yard for paving concrete and num per cubic yard for other concrete is deducted for the concrete represented by these tests and left in place .
if the results of either or both of the sand equivalent and fine aggregate gradation tests do not comply with the requirements for contract compliance you must remove the concrete represented by the tests .
if the engineer determines that the concrete is structurally adequate the concrete may remain in place and num per cubic yard for paving concrete and num per cubic yard for other concrete is deducted for the concrete represented by these tests and left in place .
the num preceding paragraphs apply individually to the contract compliance requirements for coarse and fine aggregate .
if both coarse and fine aggregate do not comply with the contract compliance requirements both paragraphs apply .
the deductions specified in those paragraphs are in addition to any deductions made under section numdnum .
numcnum coarse aggregate coarse aggregate must consist of gravel crushed gravel crushed rock reclaimed aggregate crushed aircooled iron blast furnace slag or a combination of these .
do not use crushed aircooled iron blast furnace slag in reinforced or ps concrete .
reclaimed aggregate must comply with the specifications for aggregate .
coarse aggregate must have the requirements for the quality characteristics shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement loss in los angeles rattler after num revolutions max california test num num cleanness value operating range min california test num num contract compliance min california test num num for cleanness value an operating range limit of num minimum and a contract compliance limit of num minimum apply if you submit a certificate of compliance certifying that num .
coarse aggregate sampled at the completion of processing at the aggregate production plant had a cleanness value of at least num when tested under california test num num .
prequalification tests performed under california test num showed that the aggregate would develop a relative strength of at least num percent and have a relative shrinkage of no more than num percent based on concrete numcnum fine aggregate fine aggregate must consist of natural sand manufactured sand produced from larger aggregate or a combination of these .
manufactured sand must be well graded .
fine aggregate must have the requirements for the quality characteristics shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirement organic impurities california test num satisfactorya sand equivalent operating range min california test num num contract compliance min california test num num afine aggregate that develops a color darker than the reference standard color may be authorized if num percent relative mortar strength is achieved when tested under astm cnum .
for sand equivalent an operating range limit of num minimum and a contract compliance limit of num minimum apply if you submit a certificate of compliance certifying that section num concrete num num fine aggregate sampled at the completion of processing at the aggregate production plant had a sand equivalent value of at least num when tested under california test num num .
prequalification tests performed under california test num showed that the aggregate would develop a relative strength of at least num percent and have a relative shrinkage of no more than num percent based on concrete numcnum aggregate gradation numcnuma general proposed aggregate gradations must be within the percentage passing limits shown in the following table primary aggregate nominal size sieve size limits of gradation passing num x num inch num in num num inch x no .
num num in num num inch x no .
num num in num num inch x no .
num num in num num inch x no .
num num in num fine aggregate no .
num num fine aggregate no .
num num fine aggregate no .
num num the engineer may waive in writing the specifications for gradation if in the engineers opinion furnishing the gradation is not necessary for the work .
numcnumb coarse aggregate gradation coarse aggregate must be graded within the limits shown in the following table for each size of coarse aggregate sieve size primary aggregate nominal sizes num x num inch num inch x no .
num num inch x no .
num num inch x no .
num operating contract operating contract operating contract operating contract range passing compliance passing range passing compliance passing range passing compliance passing range passing compliance passing num inch num num num inch num num num num num inch x num x num num num num inch num num x num x num num num num inch num num num num num inch num num x num x num x num x num x num x num no .
num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num note x is the percent passing of the gradation that you propose to furnish for the specific sieve size under section numcnuma .
furnish coarse aggregate for the numinch maximum combined aggregate gradation under section num numcnumd in num or more primary aggregate nominal sizes .
you may separate each primary aggregate nominal size into num sizes and store them separately provided that the combined material complies with the gradation specifications for the primary aggregate nominal size .
you may separate the coarse aggregate for the numinch maximum combined aggregate gradation under section numcnumd into num sizes and store them separately provided that the combined material complies with the gradation specifications for the num inch x no .
num primary aggregate nominal size .
section num concrete num numcnumc fine aggregate gradation fine aggregate must be graded within the limits shown in the following table sieve size operating range passing contract compliance passing num inch num num no .
num num num no .
num num num no .
num x num x num no .
num x num x num no .
num x num x num no .
num num num no .
num num num note x is the percent passing of the gradation that you propose to furnish for the specific sieve size under section numcnuma .
fine aggregate sizes must be distributed such that the difference between the total percentage passing the no .
num and no .
num sieves is from num to num and the difference between the percentage passing the no .
num and no .
num sieves is from num to num .
you may separate fine aggregate into num or more sizes and store them separately provided that the combined material complies with the gradation specifications .
numcnumd combined aggregate gradation use combined aggregate gradation limits only for the design of concrete mixes .
design concrete mixes such that aggregates are combined in proportions that produce a mixture within the gradation limits for combined aggregate .
use either the numinch maximum gradation or the numinch maximum gradation unless otherwise specified .
combined aggregate must be graded within the limits shown in the following table sieve size num inch max passing num inch max passing num inch max passing num inch max passing num inch num num inch num num num inch num num num inch num num num num inch num num num inch num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num no .
num num num num num do not change from one aggregate gradation to another during the progress of the work .
numd water water for washing aggregates mixing concrete and curing must not contain num .
oil num .
impurities at concentrations that cause either of the following results when compared to the same test using distilled or deionized water num .
change of more than num percent in the setting time of cement when tested under astm cnum or astm cnum section num concrete num num .
reduction by more than num percent in the mortar compressive strength at num days when tested under astm cnum num .
chlorides as cl or sulfates as sonum in excess of the values shown in the following table type of concrete work quality characteristic nonreinforced reinforced ps chloride as cla ppm max num num num sulfate as sonumb ppm max num num num awhen tested under california test num bwhen tested under california test num water for curing concrete must not contain impurities at concentrations that cause discoloration or surface etching .
water reclaimed from washing out the mixer may be used in mixing concrete .
the water must not contain coloring agents or more than num ppm of alkalis as nanumo num knumo as determined on the filtrate .
the specific gravity of the water must not exceed num and must not vary more than num during a days activities .
nume admixtures numenum general the admixture type and brand must be on the authorized material list at the time of mix design submittal .
admixtures must comply with the following num .
chemical admixtures must comply with astm cnum num .
airentraining admixtures must comply with astm cnum num .
lithium nitrate must be in an aqueous solution that complies with the following num .
lithium nitrate as linonum must be num num percent by weight num .
sulfate as sonum must be less than num ppm num .
chloride as cl must be less than num ppm num .
alkalis as nanumo num knumo must be less than num ppm chemical or airentraining admixtures must not contain more than num percent chlorides as cl by weight of admixture when tested under california test num .
store and dispense the admixtures in liquid form .
admixture properties must be uniform throughout their use in the work .
if more than num admixture is used the admixtures must be compatible with each other such that the desirable effects of all the admixtures used are realized .
use chemical admixtures in compliance with the manufacturers written instructions .
the instructions must include a statement that the admixture is compatible with the types and quantities of scm used .
if you are ordered to use admixtures in the concrete that are not specified furnishing the admixtures and adding them to the concrete is change order work .
numenum chemical admixtures if the use of chemical admixtures is specified use the dosage specified .
if the dosage is not specified use the dosage recommended by the admixture manufacturer .
you may use any of the following admixture types to conserve cementitious material or to facilitate construction num .
type a or f waterreducing num .
type b retarding num .
type d or g waterreducing and retarding section num concrete num if you use a waterreducing admixture or a waterreducing and retarding admixture you may reduce the specified cementitious material content by up to num percent by weight .
the resulting concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
if you reduce the cementitious material content use at least the admixture dosage used in authorizing the admixture as shown on the authorized material list for chemical admixture for use in concrete .
you may use a type s admixture .
you may use a type c accelerating admixture .
inclusion of the type c admixture in the mix design is not required if it is added to counteract changing conditions that contribute to delayed setting of the concrete and if the use or change in dosage of the admixture is authorized .
numenum airentraining admixtures if air entrainment is specified or ordered use the quantity of airentraining admixture that produces concrete having the specified air content when tested under california test num .
if air entrainment is not specified or ordered you may use an airentraining admixture to facilitate the use of a construction procedure or equipment .
the average air content of num successive tests must not exceed num percent and each test value must be no more than num percent when tested under california test num .
numf proportioning concrete numfnum general reserved numfnum storage of aggregates store or stockpile aggregates such that the coarse and fine particles of each size do not separate and various sizes do not intermix before proportioning .
prevent contamination by foreign materials while storing stockpiling and handling aggregates .
if you store the aggregates at a batching or mixing plant that is erected after the contract is awarded and is used for furnishing concrete for the work num .
prevent intermingling of different aggregate sizes by using measures such as the physical separation of stockpiles or the construction of bulkheads of adequate length and height num .
prevent contamination of the aggregates by contact with the ground through measures such as placing the aggregates on wooden platforms or on hardened surfaces made of concrete asphalt concrete or cementtreated material when placing the aggregates in storage or moving the aggregates from storage to the weigh hopper of the batching plant do not use methods that cause either of the following num .
segregation degradation or the combining of materials of different gradations and result in an aggregate size failing to comply with the gradation specifications at the weigh hopper num .
excessive particle breakage you may be required to use devices that reduce the impact of falling aggregates .
numfnum proportioning devices automatic weighing systems must comply with section numfnumc .
for an automatic device the single operation of a switch or starter must be the only manual operation required to proportion the aggregates cement and scm for num batch of concrete .
insulate the weighing equipment against the vibration or movement of other plant equipment .
the weight of each batch of material must not vary from the weight designated by the engineer by more than the specified tolerances .
the weighing and measuring equipment must have the following zero tolerances num .
for cumulative weighing of aggregates num percent of the designated total aggregate batch weight section num concrete num num .
for weighing each aggregate size separately num percent of the designated batch weight for each aggregate size num .
for cumulative weighing of cement and scm num percent of the designated total batch weight of the cement and scm num .
for weighing cement and scm separately num percent of their designated individual batch weights num .
for measuring water num percent of its designated weight or volume the weight indicated for a batch of material must not vary from the preselected scale setting by more than the following num .
aggregates weighed cumulatively must be within num percent of the designated total aggregate batch weight .
num .
aggregates weighed separately must be within num percent of the designated batch weight of each aggregate .
num .
cement weighed separately must be within num to num percent of the designated cement batch weight .
num .
scm weighed separately must be within num to num percent of the designated scm batch weight .
num .
for cement and scm weighed cumulatively the cement must be within num to num percent of the designated cement batch weight and the total for cement and scm must be within num to num percent of the sum of the designated cement and scm batch weights .
num .
water must be within num percent of the designated weight or volume of water .
each scale graduation must be no more than num of the total scale capacity .
for each material being weighed use a scale with single graduations that indicate a weight not exceeding the maximum permissible weight variation above except that graduations less than num lb are not required .
numfnum proportioning numfnuma general proportioning consists of dividing the aggregates into the specified sizes each stored in a separate bin and combining the aggregates with cementitious material admixtures if used and water .
proportion the aggregates by weight .
at the time of batching num .
aggregates must be dried and drained to a stable moisture content such that no visible separation of water from the aggregate occurs during transportation from the proportioning plant to the point of mixing num .
free moisture content of the fine aggregate must not exceed num percent of its saturated surfacedry weight if the proportioning plant has separate supplies of the same size group of aggregate with different moisture content specific gravity or surface characteristics affecting workability exhaust one supply before using another supply .
weigh bulk type ip ms or type is ms cement in an individual hopper and keep it separate from the aggregates until the ingredients are released for discharge into the mixer .
bulk cement and scm may be weighed in separate weigh hoppers or in the same weigh hopper .
keep the cement and scm separate from the aggregates until the ingredients are released for discharge into the mixer .
if the cement and scm are weighed in the same weigh hopper weigh the cement first .
if the cement and scm are weighed in separate weigh hoppers the weigh systems for the proportioning of the aggregate the cement and the scm must be individual and distinct from all other weigh systems .
to constitute an individual and distinct materialweighing device each weigh system must have a hopper a lever system and an indicator .
discharge the cement and the scm into the mixer simultaneously with the aggregate .
the scales and weigh hoppers for bulk weighing cement scm or cement plus scm must be separate and distinct from the aggregate weighing equipment .
section num concrete num for batches of num cu yd or more the batching equipment must comply with one of the following combinations num .
separate boxes and separate scale and indicator for weighing each aggregate size num .
single box and scale indicator for all aggregates num .
single box or separate boxes and automatic weighing mechanism for all aggregates if you are requested to check the accuracy of batch weights determine the gross weight and tare weight of batch trucks truck mixers truck agitators and nonagitating hauling equipment .
weigh the equipment using scales designated by the engineer .
for proportioning pavement concrete install and maintain in good operating condition an electronically actuated moisture meter that indicates on a readily visible scale changes in the moisture content of the fine aggregate as it is batched within a sensitivity of num percent by weight of the fine aggregate .
numfnumb proportioning and dispensing liquid admixtures liquid admixture dispensers must num .
have enough capacity to measure at num time the total quantity of admixture required for each batch of concrete num .
include a graduated measuring unit that is accurate to within num percent of the required quantity for each batch of concrete num .
be located and maintained such that the graduations can be read accurately from the point at which proportioning is controlled to allow a visual check of batching accuracy before discharge num .
have measuring units that are clearly marked for the type and quantity of admixture each liquid admixture dispensing system must be equipped with a sampling device that consists of a valve located in a safe and readily accessible position such that the engineer can slowly withdraw a test sample .
if more than num liquid admixture is used in the concrete mix each admixture must have a separate measuring unit and must be dispensed by injecting equipment located such that the admixtures are not mixed at high concentrations and do not interfere with the effectiveness of each other .
if an airentraining admixture is used with other liquid admixtures incorporate the airentraining admixture into the mix first unless you demonstrate that a different sequence improves performance .
if automatic proportioning devices are used the liquid admixture dispensers must operate automatically with the batching control equipment .
the dispensers must have an automatic warning system in good operating condition that provides a visible or audible signal at the point at which proportioning is controlled .
the signal must activate if the quantity of admixture measured varies from the preselected dosage by more than num percent or if the entire contents of the measuring unit are not emptied from the dispenser .
add liquid admixtures to the premeasured batch water or discharge the admixtures into the stream of water such that they are welldispersed throughout the batch .
you may dispense airentraining admixtures directly into moist sand in the batching bins if you maintain adequate control of the concrete air content .
numfnumc automatic proportioning automatic proportioning devices must be authorized by the department .
the batching of the aggregate and the cement scm or cement plus scm must be interlocked such that a new batch can not start until all weigh hoppers are empty the proportioning devices are within zero tolerance and the discharge gates are closed .
the interlock must not allow any part of the batch to be discharged until all aggregate hoppers and the cement and scm hoppers or the cement plus scm hopper are charged with weights that are within the tolerances specified in section numfnum .
section num concrete num if interlocks are required for the cement and scm charging mechanisms and the cement and scm are weighed cumulatively their charging mechanisms must be interlocked to prevent the introduction of scm until the weight of cement in the cement weigh hopper is within the tolerances specified in section num numfnum .
if the concrete is mixed completely in a stationary mixer weigh the scm in a separate weigh hopper and introduce the scm and cement simultaneously into the mixer proportionately with the aggregate .
if you submit certification that the stationary mixer is capable of mixing the cement scm aggregates and water uniformly before discharge you may weigh the scm cumulatively with the cement .
certification must include num .
test results for num compressive strength test cylinders taken within the first num and num compressive strength test cylinders taken within the last num of a single batch of concrete discharged from the stationary mixer .
strength tests and cylinder preparation must comply with section numdnum .
num .
calculations demonstrating that the average of the num compressive strengths taken within the first num of the batch do not differ by more than num percent from the average of the num compressive strengths taken within the last num of the batch .
num .
mixer rotation speed and time of mixing before discharge that are required to produce a mix that complies with the above requirements .
the discharge gate on the cement and scm hoppers or the cement plus scm hopper must be designed to allow the regulation of the flow of cement scm or cement plus scm into the aggregate .
if separate weigh boxes are used for each aggregate size the discharge gates must allow the regulation of the flow of each aggregate size .
material discharged from each bin must be controlled by gates or by mechanical conveyors .
the means of withdrawal from the bins and of discharge from the weigh box must be interlocked such that not more than num bin can discharge at a time and the weigh box can not be tripped until the required quantity from each bin has been deposited into it .
if a separate weigh box is used for each aggregate size all the weigh boxes may be operated and discharged simultaneously .
if the discharge from the bins is controlled by gates each gate must be actuated automatically such that the required weight is discharged into the weigh box after which the gate must automatically close and lock .
the automatic weighing system must be designed to allow all required proportions to be set on the weighing controller at the same time .
numg mixing and transporting concrete numgnum general mix the concrete in a mechanically operated mixer except if authorized you may mix batches not exceeding num cu yd by hand methods under section numgnum .
do not use equipment with components made of aluminum or magnesium alloys that could have contact with plastic concrete during mixing transporting or pumping .
concrete must be thoroughly mixed homogeneous and free of lumps or evidence of undispersed cementitious material .
numgnum machine mixing concrete mixers must be the revolving drum or revolving blade type .
operate the mixing drum or blades uniformly at the mixing speed recommended by the manufacturer .
do not use a mixer or agitator that has an accumulation of hard concrete or mortar .
immediately before placing the concrete the temperature of the mixed concrete must be from num to num degrees f. cool or heat the aggregates and mixing water as necessary to produce concrete within these temperature limits .
do not heat the aggregates or water above num degrees f. any ice used to cool the concrete must be melted before the concrete is discharged from the mixer .
section num concrete num charge the batch into the mixer such that some water enters before the cementitious materials and aggregates .
add all the water to the drum by the end of the first num of the specified mixing time .
if the concrete is delivered in a truck mixer you may withhold a portion of the mixing water and if authorized add it at the delivery point as specified in section numgnum .
batch and charge the cementitious materials into the mixer by means that will not cause num .
loss of cementitious materials due to the effect of wind num .
accumulation of cementitious materials on the surfaces of conveyors or hoppers num .
other conditions that reduce or vary the required quantity of cementitious material in the concrete mixture operate stationary mixers with an automatic timing device .
the timing device and discharge mechanism must be interlocked such that during normal operation no part of the batch is discharged before the specified mixing time has elapsed .
the total time from the intermingling of damp aggregates and all cementitious materials to the start of mixing must not exceed num minutes .
the batch size must not exceed the manufacturers guaranteed capacity .
for pavement or base concrete install and maintain suitable batch counters in good operating condition at job site batching plants and stationary mixers .
the batch counters must indicate the exact number of batches proportioned and mixed .
mix and deliver the concrete to the job site by one of the following methods num .
centralmixed concrete in which the concrete is mixed completely in a stationary mixer and transported to the delivery point in a truck agitator or nonagitating hauling equipment .
num .
shrinkmixed concrete in which the concrete is mixed partially in a stationary mixer and the mixing is completed in a truck mixer .
num .
transitmixed concrete in which the concrete is mixed completely in a truck mixer .
agitators must be truck mixers operating at agitation speed or truck agitators .
each mixer and agitator must have a metal plate attached in a prominent place that clearly shows num .
various uses for which the equipment is designed num .
manufacturers guaranteed drum or container capacity in terms of the volume of mixed concrete num .
rotation speed of the mixing drum or blades truck mixers must have an electrically or mechanically actuated revolution counter that readily allows verification of the number of revolutions of the drum or blades .
for shrinkmixed concrete transfer concrete that has been partially mixed at a central plant into a truck mixer and comply with the specifications for transitmixed concrete .
partial mixing in a central plant does not count toward the number of revolutions at mixing speed .
numgnum transporting mixed concrete you must transport mixed concrete to the delivery point in one of the following num .
truck agitator operating at the manufacturers designated agitating speed if it num .
does not carry more than the manufacturers guaranteed capacity num .
maintains the mixed concrete in a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass during hauling num .
truck mixer operating at the manufacturers designated agitating speed num .
nonagitating hauling equipment with a body that does not allow leakage of any part of the concrete mix at any time when discharged at the delivery point the consistency and workability of the mixed concrete must be suitable for adequate placement and consolidation in place and the mixed concrete must comply with the specifications for uniformity in section numa .
section num concrete num protect concrete hauled in opentop vehicles from rain or from exposure to the sun for more than num minutes if the ambient temperature exceeds num degrees f. do not add water to the concrete in excess of that in the authorized mix design .
at the delivery point you may add water withheld during batching if authorized .
add the water in num operation before the discharge of more than num cu yd .
the equipment for supplying the water must comply with section numgnum .
after adding the water revolve the drum at least num revolutions at mixing speed before discharging the concrete .
control the rate of discharge of mixed concrete from a truck mixer or agitator by the speed of rotation of the drum in the discharge direction with the discharge gate fully open .
if you use a truck mixer or agitator to transport the concrete to the delivery point comply with the following limits num .
complete the discharge within num hours or before num revolutions of the drum or blades whichever occurs first after introducing the cementitious materials to the aggregates .
num .
under conditions contributing to quick stiffening of the concrete or if the concrete temperature is num degrees f or above the time allowed may be less than num hours .
num .
if you use an admixture to retard the set time num .
concrete temperature must not exceed num degrees f num .
time limit is num hours num .
revolution limit is num if you use nonagitating hauling equipment to transport the concrete to the delivery point num .
complete the discharge within num hour after introducing the cementitious materials to the aggregates num .
under conditions contributing to quick stiffening of the concrete or if the concrete temperature is num degrees f or above complete the discharge within num minutes after introducing the cementitious materials to the aggregates if you add a highrange waterreducing admixture to the concrete at the job site the total number of revolutions must not exceed num .
numgnum time or quantity of mixing mixing of the concrete in a stationary mixer must continue for the required mixing time after all ingredients except water and admixture that is added with the water are in the mixing compartment of the mixer before any part of the batch is released .
the transfer time in multiple drum mixers must not be counted as part of the required mixing time .
for concrete used in concrete structures other than minor structures the mixing time in a stationary mixer must be at least num seconds and no more than num minutes except that if authorized the minimum mixing time may be reduced to num seconds .
for all other concrete the mixing time must be at least num seconds and no more than num minutes .
the minimum required revolutions at the mixing speed for transitmixed concrete must be at least that recommended by the mixer manufacturer and must be enough to produce uniform concrete under section numa .
numgnum hand mixing handmixed concrete must be made in batches of num cu yd or less .
use the following procedure to make handmixed concrete num .
measure the quantity of coarse aggregate in measuring boxes .
num .
spread the coarse aggregate on a watertight level platform .
num .
spread the fine aggregate on the layer of coarse aggregate .
the total depth of the num layers must be num foot or less .
num .
spread the dry cementitious materials on the aggregates .
num .
turn the whole dry mass at least num times .
num .
add and evenly distribute the water .
num .
turn the whole mass at least num more times not including placement in the carriers or forms .
section num concrete num numgnum quantity of water and penetration or slump regulate the quantity of water used in the concrete mix such that the penetration as tested under california test num or the slump as tested under astm cnum complies with the nominal range shown in the following table type of work nominal maximum penetration slump penetration slump in in in in concrete pavement num num nonreinforced concrete members num num reinforced concrete structures with sections over num inches thick num num sections num inches thick or less num num concrete placed under water num num cip concrete piles num num num num if the penetration or slump exceeds the nominal range adjust the mixture for subsequent batches to reduce the penetration or slump to a value within the nominal range .
do not use a batch of concrete with a penetration or a slump that exceeds the maximum value shown in the table above .
if type f or g chemical admixtures are used the penetration requirements do not apply and the slump must not exceed num inches after adding the chemical admixtures .
the quantity of free water must not exceed num pounds per cubic yard of concrete plus num pounds of free water for each required num pounds of cementitious material in excess of num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard of concrete .
when determining the total quantity of free water consider liquid admixtures to be water if the dosage is more than num gallon of admixture per cubic yard of concrete .
if there are adverse or difficult conditions that affect concrete placement you may exceed the specified penetration and free water content limitations if you num .
receive authorization to increase the cementitious material content per cubic yard of concrete num .
increase the water and cementitious material at a ratio that does not exceed num pounds of water per added num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard of concrete the equipment for supplying water to the mixer must accurately measure to within num percent of the quantity of water required to be added to the mix for any position of the mixer .
the tanks used to measure the water must be designed such that water can not enter while water is being discharged into the mixer .
the water must be discharged into the mixer rapidly in num operation without dribbling .
arrange the equipment to allow checking of the quantity of water delivered by discharging into measured containers .
numh concrete in corrosive environments section numh applies to concrete specified in the special provisions to be in a corrosive environment .
the cementitious material to be used in the concrete must be a combination of type ii or v portland cement and scm .
the concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
the reduction of cementitious material content as specified in section numenum is not allowed .
the specifications for scm content in section numbnum do not apply .
section num concrete num the cementitious material must be composed of one of the following by weight num .
num percent natural pozzolan or fly ash with a cao content of up to num percent and num percent portland cement num .
num percent natural pozzolan or fly ash with a cao content of up to num percent num percent silica fume and num percent portland cement num .
num percent silica fume metakaolin or uffa and num percent portland cement num .
num percent ggbfs and num percent portland cement numi concrete in freezethaw areas numinum general section numi applies to concrete for projects specified in the special provisions to be in a freezethaw area .
numinum materials numinuma general the concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard unless a higher cementitious material content is specified .
add an airentraining admixture to the concrete at the rate required to produce an air content of num num percent in the freshly mixed concrete .
for concrete placed at least num feet below the adjacent undisturbed grade or at least num feet below compacted finished grade an airentraining admixture is not required unless the concrete will experience freezing conditions during construction .
the cementitious material must satisfy the following equation num x uf num x f num x sltc num where uf silica fume metakaolin or uffa including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd f natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with aashto m num class f or n including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd .
f is equivalent to the sum of fa and fb as defined in section num numinumb .
sl ggbfs including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd tc total quantity of cementitious material used lbcu yd numinumb concrete exposed to deicing chemicals section numinumb applies to concrete specified in the special provisions to be exposed to deicing chemicals .
the specifications for scm content in section numbnum and the equation in section numinuma do not apply .
the cementitious material must be composed of any combination of portland cement and at least num scm satisfying the following equation equation num num x uf num x fa num x fb num x sltc x the scm must satisfy the following equations equation num num x fa fbtc num equation num section num concrete num num x uftc num equation num num x uf fa fb sltc num the concrete mix design must satisfy the following equation equation num num x tc mcmc num where uf silica fume metakaolin or uffa including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd .
if uf is used the quantity of uf must be at least num percent .
fa natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with aashto m num class f or n with a cao content of up to num percent including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd .
if fa is used the quantity of fa must be at least num percent .
fb natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with aashto m num class f or n with a cao content of greater than num percent and up to num percent including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd .
if fb is used the quantity of fb must be at least num percent .
sl ggbfs including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd tc total quantity of cementitious material lbcu yd x num for innocuous aggregate num for all other aggregate mc minimum quantity of cementitious material specified lbcu yd numj curing compound curing compound water loss must not exceed num kgmnum in num hours when tested under california test num .
num construction numa general reserved numb curing concrete numbnum general unless otherwise specified cure newly placed concrete by one of the method specified in this section .
cure mortar and grout by keeping the surface damp for num days .
numbnum water method the water method must consist of keeping the concrete continuously wet by applying water for a curing period of at least num days after the concrete is placed .
you may use cotton mats rugs carpets or earth or sand blankets as a curing medium to retain the moisture during the curing period .
for curing structures you may use a curing medium consisting of white opaque polyethylene sheeting extruded onto burlap .
the polyethylene sheeting must have a minimum thickness of num mils and must be extruded onto numounce burlap .
for curing columns you may use a curing medium consisting of polyethylene sheeting with a minimum thickness of num mils achieved in a single layer of material .
keep the concrete surface damp by applying water with an atomizing nozzle that forms a mist and not a spray until the surface is covered with the curing medium .
do not apply the water under pressure directly on the concrete or allow the water to flow over or wash the concrete surface .
at the end of the curing period remove the curing medium .
if you use polyethylene sheeting or polyethylene sheeting on burlap as a curing medium section num concrete num num .
secure the sheeting and the sheeting joints as necessary to retain moisture num .
keep the sheeting within num inches of the concrete at all points along the surface being cured num .
monitor the concrete temperature during curing num .
discontinue the use of these curing media if the concrete temperature can not be maintained below num degrees f numbnum curing compound method numbnuma general the curing compound method must consist of uniformly spraying the concrete surfaces exposed to the air with a curing compound .
numbnumb materials the curing compound must comply with the requirements shown in the following table for the curing compound number specified curing compound no .
astm cnum classification num pigmented type num class ba num pigmented type num class b num pigmented type num class a num nonpigmented type num class b num nonpigmented type num class a num nonpigmented with fugitive dye type numd class a athe resin type must be polyalphamethylstyrene .
the infrared scan for the dried vehicle must match the scan on file at mets .
if no curing compound number is specified use any of the curing compounds shown in the table above .
the curing compound must be manufactured to num .
remain sprayable at temperatures above num degrees f num .
control sagging pigment settling leveling and deemulsification num .
maintain the specified properties for at least num year pigmented curing compounds must be manufactured such that the pigment does not settle badly cake or thicken in the container or become granular or curdled .
settlement of pigment must be a thoroughly wetted soft mushy mass allowing the complete and easy vertical penetration of a paddle .
settled pigment must be easily predisposed with minimum resistance to the sideways manual motion of the paddle across the bottom of the container to form a smooth uniform product of the proper consistency .
do not dilute or alter the curing compound after manufacture .
the curing compound must be packaged in clean numgallon totes numgallon barrels or numgallon pails or must be supplied from a suitable storage tank located at the job site or casting site .
the containers must comply with num cfr num .
the numgallon totes and numgallon barrels must have removable lids and airtight fasteners .
the numgallon pails must be round and have standard full open head and bail .
do not use lids with bungholes .
containers must be filled in a way that prevents skinning .
steel containers and lids must be lined with a coating that prevents destructive action by the compound or chemical agents in the air space above the compound .
the coating must not come off the container or lid as skins .
plastic containers and lids must not react with the curing compound .
label each curing compound container with num .
manufacturers name section num concrete num num .
astm cnum classification num .
batch number num .
volume num .
date of manufacture num .
volatile organic compound content num .
warning that curing compound containing pigment must be well stirred before using num .
precautions concerning the handling and application of curing compound in compliance with num ca code of regs num and num num .
statement that the contents fully comply with state air pollution control rules and regulations numbnumc mixing before using a curing compound completely redisperse settled or separated solids in containers except tanks by mixing at low speed in compliance with these specifications and the manufacturers instructions .
mix manually using a paddle or mix using a mixing blade driven by a drill motor at low speed .
mixing blades must be the type used for mixing paint .
keep onsite storage tanks clean and free of contaminants .
each tank must have a permanent system that completely redisperses settled material without introducing air or other foreign substances .
at the time of use compounds containing pigments must be thoroughly mixed .
use a paddle to loosen all settled pigment from the container bottom and use a powerdriven agitator to disperse the pigment uniformly throughout the vehicle .
agitation must not introduce air or other foreign substances into the curing compound .
numbnumd application apply the curing compound at a nominal rate of num sq ftgal .
at any point the application rate must be within num sq ftgal of the nominal rate .
the average application rate must be within num sq ftgal of the nominal rate when tested under california test num .
apply the curing compound such that there are no runs sags thin areas skips or holidays .
apply the curing compound using poweroperated spraying equipment with an operational pressure gauge and a means of controlling the pressure .
the engineer may allow hand spraying for small and irregular areas that in the engineers opinion are not reasonably accessible to poweroperated spraying equipment .
apply the curing compound to the concrete after finishing the surface immediately before the moisture sheen disappears from the concrete surface but before drying shrinkage or craze cracks start to appear .
if the concrete surface cracks or dries immediately and continually apply water with an atomizing nozzle as specified in section numbnum until application of the curing compound is resumed or started .
do not apply the curing compound over freestanding water .
if the film of curing compound is damaged before the expiration of num days after the concrete is placed for structures and num hours for pavement immediately repair it with additional compound .
numbnum waterproof membrane method the waterproof membrane method must consist of num .
spraying the exposed finished concrete surfaces with water using an atomizing nozzle that forms a mist and not a spray until the concrete has set num .
placing the waterproof curing membrane immediately after spraying num .
keeping the membrane in place for at least num hours the membrane must be sheeting material that complies with astm cnum for white reflective materials .
use sheeting material of such a width as to completely cover the entire concrete surface .
cement the sheeting joints together securely such that the joints are waterproof .
the joint seams must have at least a numinch lap .
section num concrete num securely weigh down the sheets by placing an earth bank on the sheet edges or by other authorized means .
if any portion of the sheets are damaged within num hours after being placed immediately repair the damaged portion by cementing new sheets into place .
do not use a membrane that is no longer waterproof or has been damaged such that it is unfit for curing concrete .
numbnum formsinplace method the formsinplace method must consist of curing formed concrete surfaces by keeping the forms in place .
keep the forms in place for at least num days after the concrete is placed except keep the forms in place for at least num days for concrete members over num inches in least dimension .
the joints in the forms and the joints between the end of the forms and the concrete must be kept moisture tight during the curing period .
reseal cracks in the forms and cracks between the forms and the concrete using authorized methods .
numc protecting concrete protect the concrete from damage due to any cause including rain heat cold wind your actions and the actions of others .
do not place the concrete on frozen or icecoated ground or subgrade or on icecoated forms reinforcing steel structural steel conduits pc members or construction joints .
if it is raining you must provide adequate protection against damage or you must stop placing the concrete before the quantity of surface water is sufficient to damage the surface mortar or cause a flow or wash of the concrete surface .
num payment not used num minor concrete num general numa summary section num includes specifications for furnishing and protecting minor concrete .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals if required by the following table submit compressive strength test results with the mix design that verify the minimum required compressive strength scm test submittal required fly ash used alone if portland cement content num lbcu yd ggbfs used alone if portland cement content num lbcu yd natural pozzolan used alone if portland cement content num lbcu yd more than num scm always note compressive strength tests must be performed by an acicertified technician .
submit the concrete mix design before using the concrete in the work and before changing the mix proportions .
submit a proposed combined aggregate gradation .
after authorization of the gradation the aggregate furnished for minor concrete must comply with that gradation .
if requested submit periodic test reports of the aggregate gradation furnished .
section num concrete num the engineer may waive the specifications for gradation if the engineer determines that furnishing a gradation is not necessary for the type or quantity of concrete work to be constructed .
before placing minor concrete from a source not previously used on the contract submit a certificate of compliance stating that the minor concrete to be furnished complies with the contract requirements including the specified minimum cementitious material content .
submit a weighmaster certificate as an informational submittal with each load of readymixed concrete at the concrete discharge location .
the weighmaster certificate must show the date and time the load left the batching plant and if hauled in a truck mixer or agitator the time the mixing cycle started .
numd quality assurance section numdnum and the specifications for uniformity in section numa do not apply to minor concrete .
the engineer may perform tests and inspect the facilities materials and methods for producing the minor concrete to ensure that it is of suitable quality for use in the work .
the engineer verifies compliance with the specified cementitious material content by testing under california test num for cement content .
for testing purposes scm is considered to be cement .
adjust the batch proportions as necessary to produce concrete having the specified cementitious material content .
num materials numa general reserved numb cementitious material minor concrete must contain at least num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard .
you may use rice hull ash as an scm .
rice hull ash must comply with aashto m num and the requirements for the quality characteristics shown in the following tables chemical quality characteristic requirement percent silicon dioxide sionuma min num loss on ignition max num total alkalies as nanumo equivalent max num asionum in crystalline form must not exceed num percent .
physical quality characteristic requirement particle size distribution less than num microns min num less than num microns min num strength activity index with portland cementa num days min of control num num days min of control num expansion at num days when testing project materials under astm cnumb max num surface area when testing by nitrogen adsorption under astm dnum min mnumg num awhen tested under aashto m num for strength activity testing of silica fume .
bin the test mix type ii or v portland cement must be replaced with at least num percent rice hull ash by weight .
for the purpose of calculating the equations for the cementitious material specifications consider rice hull ash to be represented by the variable uf .
section num concrete num numc aggregate sections numcnum and numc do not apply to minor concrete .
the aggregate must be clean and free from deleterious coatings clay balls roots and other extraneous material .
the maximum aggregate size must not be larger than num inches or smaller than num inch .
you may use crushed concrete and reclaimed aggregate if they comply with the specifications for aggregate .
numd water section numd does not apply to minor concrete .
water used for washing mixing and curing must be free from oil salts and other impurities that would discolor or etch the surface or have an adverse affect on the concrete quality .
nume production sections numf numgnum numgnum numgnum and numgnum do not apply to minor concrete .
store proportion mix transport and discharge the cementitious material water aggregate and admixtures in compliance with recognized standards of good practice that result in thoroughly and uniformly mixed concrete suitable for the intended use .
recognized standards of good practice are outlined in various industry publications such as those issued by aci aashto or the department .
use a quantity of water that produces concrete with a consistency that complies with section numgnum .
do not add water during hauling or after arrival at the delivery point unless allowed by the engineer .
discharge readymixed concrete from the transport vehicle while the concrete is still plastic and before stiffening occurs .
take whatever action is necessary to eliminate quick stiffening except do not add water .
conditions contributing to quick stiffening are num .
elapsed time of num hours in agitating hauling equipment or num hour in nonagitating hauling equipment num .
more than num revolutions of the drum or blades after introduction of the cementitious material to the aggregates num .
concrete temperature over num degrees f the mixing time in a stationary mixer must be at least num seconds and no more than num minutes .
the minimum required revolutions at mixing speed for transitmixed concrete must be at least that recommended by the mixer manufacturer and must be increased as needed to produce thoroughly and uniformly mixed concrete .
if you add a highrange waterreducing admixture to the concrete at the job site the total revolutions must not exceed num .
num construction maintain a concrete temperature of at least num degrees f for num hours after placing .
num payment not used num rapid strength concrete num general numa summary section num includes specifications for furnishing and curing rsc .
section num applies only where the specifications allow the use of rsc .
section num concrete num numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general reserved numcnum volumetric proportioning for volumetricproportioned rsc submit num .
aggregate moisture test results num .
log of production data num .
test samples of freshly mixed concrete for uniformity testing sampling facilities must be safe accessible and clean and must produce a test sample that is representative of production .
the sampling devices and methods must comply with california test num .
numcnum certificate of compliance submit a certificate of compliance with each delivery of aggregate cementitious material and admixtures used for calibration tests .
include certified copies of the weight of each delivery .
the certificate of compliance must state that the source of the materials used for the calibration tests is the same source as to be used for the planned work .
the certificate must be signed by your assigned representative .
numcnum weighmaster certificate submit weighmaster certificates for rsc .
regardless of the proportioning method used the certificates must include all the information necessary to trace the manufacturer and manufacturers lot number for the cement used .
the weighmaster certificate for the cement must include num .
date of proportioning num .
location of proportioning num .
actual net draft cement weight if proportioned into fabric containers num .
net draft cement weight used in the load if proportioned at the pour site from a storage silo numcnum production data for volumetricproportioned rsc submit the daily production data in electronic or printed media at the end of each production shift .
report the data including data titles in the following order num .
weight of cement per revolution count num .
weight of each aggregate size per revolution count num .
gate openings for each aggregate size num .
weight of water added to the concrete per revolution count num .
moisture content of each aggregate size num .
individual volume of admixtures per revolution count num .
time of day num .
day of week num .
production start and stop times num .
volumetric mixer identification num .
name of supplier num .
specific type of concrete being produced num .
source of the individual aggregate sizes num .
source brand and type of cement num .
source brand and type of individual admixtures num .
name and signature of the operator the device controlling the proportioning of cement aggregate and water must produce production data that is captured at numminute intervals throughout daily production .
each capture of production data must section num concrete num represent the production activity at that time and must not be a summation of data .
the quantity of material represented by each production capture is the quantity produced in the period from num minutes before to num minutes after the capture time .
production data must be input by hand into a preprinted form or captured and printed by the proportioning device .
present electronic media containing recorded production data in a tabdelimited format on a cd or dvd .
each capture of production data must be followed by a line feed carriage return with sufficient fields for the specified data .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum penetration the specifications for penetration in section numgnum do not apply to rsc .
numdnum aggregate moisture for volumetricproportioned rsc determine the aggregate moisture under california test num at least every num hours during proportioning and mixing .
record the aggregate moisture determinations and submit them at the end of each production shift .
numdnum concrete uniformity for volumetricproportioned rsc the engineer determines the uniformity of concrete mixtures based on differences in penetration measurements when tested under california test num .
differences in penetration are determined by comparing the penetration tests on num test samples of mixed concrete from the same batch or volumetric mixer load .
num materials numa general rsc must be one of the following num .
concrete complying with section num .
you may use type iii portland cement .
num .
concrete complying with section num except num .
you may use any cement that complies with the definition of hydraulic cement or blended hydraulic cement in astm cnum and must have the requirements for the quality characteristics shown in the following table quality characteristic test method requirementb contraction in air max california test num wc ratio num num num mortar expansion in water max astm cnum num soluble chloridea max california test num num soluble sulfatea max california test num num thermal stability min california test num num compressive strength at num days psi min astm cnum num aperform the test on a cube specimen fabricated in compliance with astm cnum cured for at least num days and then pulverized such that num percent passes the no .
num sieve .
bif you use chemical admixtures include them when testing .
num .
you may use citric acid or borax if you submit a written request from the cement manufacturer and a test sample .
the requirement for air entrainment of concrete in freezethaw areas applies only when portland cement is used .
scm is not required in rsc .
when tested for uniformity under section numdnum the difference in penetration between the num concrete test samples must not exceed num inch .
section num concrete num numb volumetric proportioning numbnum general rsc may be proportioned and placed using a volumetric mixer .
numbnum proportioning volumetric mixers must proportion cement water aggregate and additives by volume .
proportion aggregate using a belt feeder that is operated with an adjustable cutoff gate delineated to the nearest quarter increment .
the gate opening height must be readily determinable .
proportion cement by any method that complies with the accuracy tolerance specifications in section num numfnum .
proportion water with a meter .
proportion liquid admixtures under section numfnumb except proportion liquid admixtures with a meter .
numbnum mixer requirements mix volumetricproportioned rsc in a mechanically operated mixer .
you may use an augertype mixer .
operate the mixer uniformly at the mixing speed recommended by the manufacturer .
do not use a mixer that has an accumulation of hard concrete or mortar .
volumetric mixers must comply with the following num .
aggregate feeders must connect directly to the drive on the cement vane feeder .
num .
cement feed rate must be tied directly to the feed rate for the aggregate and other ingredients .
the ratio of cement to aggregate must be changed only by changing the gate opening for the aggregate feed .
num .
drive shaft of the aggregate feeder must have a revolution counter reading to the nearest full or partial revolution of the aggregate delivery belt .
do not use equipment with components made of aluminum or magnesium alloys that could have contact with plastic concrete during mixing or transporting of the rsc .
cover the rotating and reciprocating equipment on volumetric mixers with metal guards .
the identifying numbers of volumetric mixers must be at least num inches in height and must be located on the front and rear of the vehicle .
each mixer must have metal plates that state the designed usage the manufacturers guaranteed mixed concrete volumetric capacity and the rotation speed .
locate cement storage immediately before the cement feeder .
equip the system with a device that automatically shuts down power to the cement feeder and aggregate belt feeder if the cement storage level is less than num percent of the total volume .
equip each aggregate bin with a device that automatically shuts down the power to the cement feeder and the aggregate belt feeder if the aggregate discharge rate is less than num percent of the scheduled discharge rate .
the proportioning device indicators must be in working order before starting proportioning or mixing and must be visible when standing near the volumetric mixer .
numbnum mixer calibration calibrate the cutoff gate for each volumetric mixer used and for each aggregate source .
calibrate each volumetric mixer at num different aggregate gate settings that correspond to production needs .
perform at least num calibration runs for each aggregate gate .
individual aggregate delivery rate checkruns must not vary by more than num percent from the mathematical average of all runs for the same gate and aggregate type .
each test run must be at least num lb .
section num concrete num individual cement delivery rate checkruns must not vary by more than num percent from the mathematical average of num runs of at least num lb each .
when the water meter operates from num to num percent of production capacity the indicated weight of water delivered must not differ from the actual weight delivered by more than num percent for each of num runs of num gal for pavement or num gal for structures .
calibrate the water meter under california test num .
the water meter must be equipped with a resettable totalizer and must display the operating rate .
conduct the calibration tests for aggregate cement and water proportioning devices using a platform scale located at the calibration site .
platform scales for weighing testrun calibration material must have a maximum capacity of num tons with maximum graduations of num lb .
error test the platform scale within num hours of calibrating the volumetric mixer proportioning devices .
perform error testing with test weights under california test num .
furnish a witness scale that is within num graduations of the test weight load .
the witness scale must be available for use at the production site throughout the production period .
equipment needed for the calibration of proportioning systems must remain available at the production site throughout the production period .
the volumetric mixer must be equipped such that accuracy checks can be made .
after production starts recalibrate the proportioning devices at least every num days for pavement or num days for structures or when you change the source or type of any ingredient .
each time num tons of cement passes through the volumetric mixer perform a numrun spot calibration of only the cement proportioning system .
if the spot calibration shows that the cement proportioning system does not comply with the specifications complete a full calibration of the cement proportioning system before you resume production .
numbnum mixing concrete at the time of batching volumetricproportioned rsc num .
aggregates must be dried and drained to a stable moisture content .
do not proportion aggregates with visible separation of water from the aggregate .
num .
free moisture content of the fine aggregate must not exceed num percent of its saturated surfacedry weight .
if the proportioning plant has separate supplies of the same size group of aggregate with different moisture content specific gravity or surface characteristics affecting workability exhaust one supply before using another supply .
do not use ice to cool volumetricproportioned rsc directly .
if ice is used to cool the water used in the mix it must be melted before entering the mixer .
proportion and charge the cement into the volumetric mixer such that there is no variance of the required quantity due to conditions such as wind or accumulation on equipment .
do not mix more material in the volumetric mixer than will allow complete mixing .
reduce the volume of material in the mixer if complete mixing is not achieved .
continue mixing until a homogeneous mixture is produced at discharge .
do not add water to the rsc after discharge .
num construction for rsc using a cement other than portland cement cure the concrete as recommended by the cement manufacturer .
the method of curing must be authorized before starting construction .
num payment if volumetric mixer calibration is performed more than num miles from the project limits num per calibration session is deducted .
section num concrete num num precast concrete num general numa summary section num includes specifications for furnishing and curing pc concrete members .
the specifications for shrinkage in section numa do not apply .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general for reports and logs type or clearly print the name next to the signature of the person signing the report or log .
submit expansion test data under section num if required .
numcnum certificates of compliance submit a certificate of compliance for the cementitious material used in pc concrete members .
the certificate must be signed by the pc concrete product manufacturer .
submit a certificate of compliance for each pc concrete member .
the certificate of compliance for tier num and tier num members must be signed by the qc manager .
the certificate of compliance for tier num members must be signed by the qc inspector .
numcnum precast concrete quality control plan before performing any precasting activities for tier num and tier num pc concrete members submit num copies of the projectspecific qc plan for the pc plant .
the qc plan must supplement the information from the authorized facility audit .
submit a separate qc plan for each plant .
allow num days for review .
each projectspecific qc plan must include num .
name of the precasting plant concrete plants and any testing laboratory to be used .
num .
manual prepared by the precasting plant that includes num .
equipment description num .
testing procedures num .
safety plan num .
personnel names qualifications and copies of certifications num .
qc manager and qc inspector names qualifications and copies of certifications .
num .
organizational chart showing qc personnel and their assigned qc responsibilities .
num .
methods and frequencies for performing qc procedures including inspections material testing and any survey performed for all components of pc concrete members .
components include prestressing concrete grout reinforcement steel miscellaneous metal and formwork .
num .
system for reporting noncompliant pc concrete members to the engineer .
num .
system for identification and tracking repairs and repair methods .
num .
procedure for the reinspection of repaired pc concrete members .
num .
forms for certificates of compliance daily production logs and daily reports .
submit a revised qc plan for any changes to num .
concrete plants num .
material sources num .
material testing procedures num .
testing laboratory num .
procedures and equipment num .
updated systems for tracking and identifying pc concrete members num .
qc personnel after authorization submit num copies of each authorized qc plan and make num copy available at each location where work is performed .
section num concrete num allow num days for review of a revised qc plan .
numcnum daily production log the qc inspector must provide reports to the qc manager for each day that precasting activities are performed .
the qc manager must maintain a daily production log of pc activities for each days precasting .
pc activities include setting forms placing reinforcement setting prestressing steel casting curing post tensioning and form release .
this daily log must be available at the precasting plant .
the daily log must include num .
plant location num .
specific description of casting or related activities num .
any problems or deficiencies discovered num .
any testing or repair work performed num .
names of qc inspectors and the specific qc inspections they performed that day num .
reports for that days precasting activities from each qc inspector including before during and after precast inspections immediately notify the engineer when any precasting problems or deficiencies are discovered and submit the proposed repair or process changes necessary to correct them .
numcnum precast concrete report before shipping pc concrete members submit a pc concrete report .
the report must include num .
reports of all material tests and any survey checks num .
documentation that num .
you have evaluated all tests num .
you corrected all rejected deficiencies num .
repairs have been reexamined with the required tests and found acceptable num .
daily production logs num .
certificates of compliance num .
documentation of inspections each person who performs a material test or survey check must sign the corresponding report and submit the report directly to the qc manager .
numd quality assurance numdnum general quality assurance for pc concrete includes num .
your qc program num .
departments acceptance of pc concrete members pc concrete members are categorized into the following num tiers num .
tier num consists of num .
components of bridge structures including girders deck panels bent caps abutments slabs closure wall panels and piling num .
prestressed pavement num .
tier num consists of num .
components of earth retaining systems num .
wingwalls num .
types a b and c pipe culvert headwalls endwalls and wingwalls num .
pavement num .
box culverts num .
sound wall panels and supports num .
tier num consists of num .
pipes num .
pipe drainage facilities section num concrete num num .
straight and l pipe culvert headwalls except those listed under tier num num .
drainage inlets num .
flared end sections num .
tier num consists of any member not described as tier num tier num or tier num numdnum quality control numdnuma general for tier num and tier num pc concrete members num .
fabricate pc concrete members at a plant on the authorized facility audit list num .
assign a pc concrete qc manager to the plant num .
assign a qc inspector who is either registered as a civil engineer in the state or num .
for tier num has a plant quality personnel level ii certification from the precastprestressed concrete institute num .
for tier num has a plant quality personnel level i certification from the precastprestressed concrete institute num .
prepare a pc concrete qc plan num .
perform pc concrete materials testing num .
maintain a daily production log num .
prepare a pc concrete report num .
prepare a certificate of compliance for tier num pc concrete members num .
assign a qc inspector who has one of the following qualifications num .
registration as a civil engineer in the state .
num .
plant quality personnel level i certification from the precastprestressed concrete institute .
num .
competency to perform inspection of pc operations .
an inspector is competent if the individual has completed training or has experience in pc operations and inspection .
num .
prepare a certificate of compliance for tier num pc concrete members prepare a certificate of compliance .
for each astm test method specified in this section the materials test result must comply with the requirement specified for the comparable test elsewhere in section num unless otherwise specified .
if curing compound is used provide certificate of compliance as specified in section numcnum .
if pc concrete is manufactured at an established pc concrete plant a trial batch and prequalification of the materials mix proportions mixing equipment and procedures under section numdnumb are not required .
numdnumb quality control meeting after submitting the pc concrete qc plan hold a meeting to discuss the requirements for pc concrete qc .
the meeting attendees must include the engineer the pc concrete qc manager and a representative from each plant performing pc concrete activities for the contract .
numdnumc sampling testing and inspecting the qc laboratory testing personnel or the qc inspector must witness sampling .
the qc laboratory testing personnel must perform testing .
qc laboratory testing personnel must have the following certifications as applicable num .
aci strength testing technician num .
aci concrete laboratory testing technician level num num .
aci aggregate testing technician level num the qc inspector must perform inspections before during and after casting is complete .
qc field testing and inspection personnel must have an aci concrete field testing technician grade i certification .
section num concrete num for each mix design used for tier num and tier num pc concrete members perform sampling and testing at the minimum frequencies shown in the following tables aggregate qc tests quality characteristic test method minimum testing frequency aggregate gradation astm cnum once per num cu yd of concrete cast or every num days whichever is more frequent sand equivalent astm dnum percent fines under num micronsa astm cnum moisture content of fine aggregate astm cnum or electronically actuated moisture meterb num times per each day of pour depending on conditions apercent fines under num microns test replaces the cleanness test in section numc with the requirements of num percent maximum for operating range and num percent maximum for contract compliance .
the numth paragraph of section numcnum does not apply .
belectronically actuated moisture meter must be calibrated every num days per astm cnum .
concrete qc tests quality characteristic test method minimum testing frequency compressive strengtha astm cnumcnumm astm cnumcnumm and astm cnumcnumm once per num cu yd of concrete cast or every day of casting whichever is more frequent slump astm cnumcnumm temperature astm cnumcnumm density astm cnum once per num cu yd of concrete cast or every num days of batching whichever is more frequent air content astm cnumcnumm or astm cnumcnummb if concrete is air entrained once for each set of cylinders and when conditions warrant acylinders must be num by num inches .
bastm cnumcnumm must be used for lightweight concrete .
if concrete is batched at more than num plant perform the tests at each plant .
cure test cylinders for determining time of prestressing loading in the same manner as the concrete in the member .
cure test cylinders for determining compliance with numday strength requirements in the same manner as the member until completion of the steam curing process followed by a water bath or moist room at num to num degrees f until tested .
for pc concrete that is steam cured concrete designated by compressive strength is acceptable if its compressive strength reaches the described numday compressive strength in no more than the maximum number of days specified or allowed after the concrete is cast .
numdnum department acceptance for pc concrete that is steam cured the engineer evaluates the compressive strength based on individual tests representing specific portions of production .
num materials you may use type iii portland cement in pc concrete .
the specifications for scm content in section numbnum do not apply to pc concrete .
for pc concrete the scm content must comply with one of the following num .
any combination of portland cement and scm satisfying the following equation equation num section num concrete num num x uf num x fa num x fb num x sltc x where uf silica fume metakaolin or uffa including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd fa natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with aashto m num class f or n with a cao content of up to num percent including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd fb natural pozzolan or fly ash complying with aashto m num class f or n with a cao content of greater than num percent and up to num percent including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd sl ggbfs including the quantity in blended cement lbcu yd tc total quantity of cementitious material lbcu yd x num for innocuous aggregate num for all other aggregate num .
num percent class f fly ash with at least num oz of linonum solution added per num lb of portland cement .
the cao content of the fly ash must not exceed num percent .
num .
any combination of scm and portland cement for which the expansion of cementitious material and aggregate does not exceed num percent when tested under astm cnum .
submit test data with each mix design .
test data authorized by the department no more than num years before the numst day of the contract is authorized for the entire contract .
the test data must be for the same concrete mix and must use the same materials and material sources to be used on the contract .
if municipally supplied potable water is used for pc concrete the testing specified in section numd is waived unless requested .
portland cement based repair material must be on the authorized material list for precast portland cement based repair material .
num construction cure pc concrete using steam curing or any of the methods specified in section numb .
cure for the minimum time specified for each method or until the concrete reaches its design strength whichever is less .
steam curing must comply with the following num .
after placing the concrete hold it for a numhour minimum presteaming period .
if the ambient air temperature is below num degrees f apply steam during the presteaming period to hold the air surrounding the concrete at a temperature of num to num degrees f. num .
to prevent moisture loss on the exposed surfaces during the presteaming period cover the concrete as soon as possible after casting or keep the exposed surfaces wet by fog spray curing compound or wet blankets .
num .
enclosures for steam curing must allow free circulation of steam around the concrete and must be constructed to contain the live steam with a minimum moisture loss .
the use of tarpaulins or similar flexible covers is allowed if they are kept in good repair and secured in such a way that prevents the loss of steam and moisture .
num .
steam at the jets must be at low pressure and in a saturated condition .
steam jets must not impinge directly on the concrete test cylinders or forms .
during application of the steam the temperature rise within the enclosure must not exceed num degrees f per hour .
the curing temperature throughout the enclosure must not exceed num degrees f and must be maintained at a constant level for the time necessary to develop the required transfer strength .
cover control cylinders to prevent moisture loss and place them in a location where the temperature is representative of the average enclosure temperature .
num .
use a minimum of num temperature recording device per num feet of continuous bed length for checking the temperature .
temperature recording devices must provide an accurate continuous permanent record of the curing temperature .
num .
detension the concrete in pretension beds immediately after the steam curing is completed while the concrete and forms are still warm or maintain the temperature under the enclosure above num degrees f until the stress is transferred to the concrete .
num .
curing is complete at the end of the steam curing cycle .
section num concrete num for dimensional tolerances of pc concrete members comply with the precastprestressed concrete institutes tolerance manual for precast and prestressed concrete construction mnl num .
for tier num and tier num pc concrete members apply curing compound using poweroperated spraying equipment .
you may request application by hand spraying for small quantities of pc concrete members .
for tier num and tier num pc concrete members the application of curing compound may be hand sprayed .
num payment not used num selfconsolidating concrete num general numa summary section num includes specifications for furnishing scc .
section num applies only where the specifications allow the use of scc .
you may use scc for pc concrete .
numb definitions selfconsolidating concrete scc flowing concrete that is capable of spreading to a level state without segregation and without the use of internal or external vibrators .
numc submittals submit the following before placing scc num .
mix design and placement procedures .
num .
trial batch test report including test results for the tests specified in section numdnumc .
num .
if a mockup is specified num .
details and placement procedures for the mockup num .
test samples and test results from the mockup submit test results for slump flow and visual stability index .
if the engineer rejects the scc for slump flow and visual stability index make corrective changes and resubmit the scc mix design or placement procedures .
submit the aggregate gradation as an informational submittal .
numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb compressive strength prepare scc specimens for compressive strength testing under california test num except fabricate test specimens as follows num .
place the test molds on a firm flat surface to prevent distortion of the bottom surface .
num .
if more than num specimen is to be made from the same batch make all the specimens simultaneously .
num .
fill the mold in num lift pouring the concrete from a larger container .
num .
pat the sides of the mold lightly by hand or jig by rocking the mold from side to side .
num .
strike off the surface of the concrete even with the top edge of the mold .
num .
wipe the sides of the mold free of excess concrete and press the lid on .
section num concrete num numdnumc prequalification of mix design prequalify the scc mix design with a trial batch using the same materials mix proportions mixing equipment procedures and batch size to be used in scc production .
the scc trial batch must comply with the requirements for the quality characteristics shown in the following table scc mix design requirements quality characteristic test method requirement slump flow min inches astm cnum num flow rate tnum seconds astm cnum num visual stability index max astm cnum num jring flowa max inches astm cnum num column segregation static max astm cnum num bleeding capacity max astm cnum num compressive strengthbc min psi california test num strength described compressive strengthc min psi average of num cylinders california test num num strength described adifference between jring flow and slump flow bfor an individual test cylinder cat the maximum age specified or allowed numdnumd mockup if the construction of a mockup is specified in the special provisions construct a mockup before placing the scc .
the mockup must demonstrate that the scc will num .
flow for the distance required by the proposed construction procedure num .
completely fill the forms num .
encapsulate the reinforcement and embedments prequalify the scc mix design before constructing the mockup .
the mockup forms must be similar to those used for the production elements .
include in the mockup the concrete reinforcement and concrete embedments shown except the reinforcement and embedments must stop num inches from both longitudinal ends of the mockup .
the mockup must simulate the flow of concrete for the maximum distance anticipated during production or for a minimum of num feet if the anticipated flow travel is less than num feet .
place the scc in the mockup in the engineers presence .
take a test sample of at least num lb of concrete from within the forms at the discharge point and at the point farthest from the discharge point .
determine the coarse aggregate content of each test sample under california test num .
the coarse aggregate content of the test samples must not differ from each other by more than num pounds of aggregate per cubic foot of concrete .
sawcut the mockup fulldepth in the transverse direction approximately num feet from the end of the pour .
voids or honeycombing in the scc or between the concrete and embedded elements are not acceptable .
if the engineer rejects the scc placed in the mockup construct additional mockups until the scc is accepted by the engineer .
dispose of the mockup .
section num concrete num numdnume field quality control numdnumei general reserved numdnumeii fine aggregate moisture content determine the fine aggregate moisture content for each batch of scc .
numdnumeiii slump flow and visual stability index at the start of scc placement and whenever a set of concrete cylinders is prepared determine the slump flow and the visual stability index under astm cnum .
numdnum department acceptance reserved num materials section numcnum does not apply to scc .
the minimum allowable slump flow is num inches .
the slump flow must not vary by more than num inches from the mix design slump flow .
the visual stability index must not exceed num .
num construction not used num payment not used num lightweight concrete num general numa summary section num includes specifications for furnishing lightweight concrete .
lightweight concrete must be composed of cementitious material lightweight coarse aggregate fine aggregate admixtures if used and water .
section num applies only where the use of lightweight concrete is specified in the special provisions .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general submit the prequalification data or reports and the proposed mix design at least num days before placing the lightweight concrete .
submit certified copies of the manufacturers test reports showing the estimated fresh concrete unit weight that results in the selected airdry unit weight .
numcnum mix design submit the mix design .
include the type brand weight and absolute volume of each ingredient for each concrete type and strength .
report the weight for each aggregate for a surfacedry condition including moisture absorbed in the aggregate for an ovendry condition or for the condition proposed for use .
include with the mix design written verification that arrangements have been made for the engineer to obtain test samples .
the test samples of lightweight aggregates will not exceed num lb for each separate gradation .
section num concrete num numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum quality control numdnuma general reserved numdnumb prequalification prequalify the lightweight concrete by submitting certified test data or trial batch test reports under section numdnumb except for pc concrete you must prequalify by submitting trial batch test reports .
dispose of the trial batches .
numdnumc unit weight of fresh concrete determine the unit weight of fresh concrete under california test num .
numdnumd airdry unit weight determine the airdry unit weight as follows num .
test three numinchdiameter by numinchtall cylinders .
num .
prepare the cylinders under astm cnumcnumm or astm cnumcnumm whichever is applicable .
num .
cure the cylinders for num days .
num .
on the numth day remove the cylinders from the molds or curing media and immerse them in water at num num degrees f for num hours .
num .
determine the suspendedimmersed weights of the cylinders .
num .
remove the cylinders from the water and determine the saturated surfacedry weights .
num .
dry the cylinders for num days at num num degrees f and a relative humidity of num num percent .
num .
weigh the dried cylinders .
num .
use the following equation to calculate the airdry unit weight w a x numb c where w airdry unit weight pcf a numday dried weight of the cylinder lb b saturated surfacedry weight of the cylinder lb c suspendedimmersed weight of the cylinder lb numdnum department acceptance numdnuma general reserved numdnumb penetration the engineer performs penetration testing under california test num .
numdnumc air content the engineer determines the concrete air content under astm cnumcnumm .
numdnumd compressive strength the engineer determines the compressive strength under section numdnum .
num materials numa general the unit weight of the fresh concrete used in the work must not vary from the weight shown in the test report by more than num pcf .
the airdry unit weight of lightweight concrete furnished for each mix design must be a single weight from num to num pcf for prestressed concrete and from num to num pcf for nonprestressed concrete .
section num concrete num the total air content of freshly mixed concrete must not exceed num percent .
lightweight concrete must have a numday compressive strength of at least that shown .
numb aggregate the fine aggregate must consist of lightweight fine aggregate natural sand or manufactured sand fine aggregate or a combination of these as required to comply with the airdry unit weight requirements .
lightweight aggregates must comply with astm cnumcnumm except the splitting tensile strength and drying shrinkage requirements do not apply .
lightweight aggregates must be rotary kiln expanded shale or clay having a surface sealed by firing .
do not crush the coarse aggregate after firing except aggregate that is num inch and smaller may be crushed as necessary to produce the required coarse aggregate gradation .
the final coarse aggregate size must not exceed num inch .
the shrinkage characteristics of lightweight aggregates must be such that the drying shrinkage of the lightweight concrete produced does not exceed num percent after num days of drying when tested under california test num .
lightweight aggregates must have no more than num percent loss when tested for soundness under california test num .
numc proportioning at the time of batching adjust the authorized aggregate weight to compensate for surface moisture and absorbed moisture .
after authorization of the mix design do not alter the materials and batch proportions during the work except as required to maintain the authorized cementitious material content and unit weight .
the cementitious material content of individual batches must not vary from the authorized cementitious material content by more than from num to num pounds of cementitious material per cubic yard of concrete .
batch the lightweight fine aggregate and natural sand by weight .
batch the lightweight coarse aggregate by weight or volumetric methods .
if volumetric methods are used the batching equipment must allow the engineer to check the weight of each aggregate size in the batch .
limit the absolute volume of coarse aggregate such that no concrete segregation occurs during mixing transporting placing consolidating or finishing .
for sitecast concrete the absolute volume of coarse aggregate must not exceed num cubic feet per cubic yard of concrete .
uniformly prewet or presaturate the aggregates such that uniform penetration of the concrete is maintained .
for lightweight concrete that is to be pumped presaturate the aggregates using thermal vacuum or equivalent methods .
lightweight concrete must have adequate workability such that proper placement consolidation and finishing are attained .
num construction not used num payment not used num reserved num num paint num general num general numa summary section num includes general specifications for furnishing paint used for highway construction .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance the department tests samples of paint taken from the source .
do not use paint until authorized .
num materials paint containers must be num .
new num .
round num .
no more than num gallons in capacity num .
standard full open head with bails num .
nonreactive with contents num .
equipped with compatible gaskets num .
free of bungholes in the lids num .
labeled with num .
state specification number if described num .
manufacturers name product number and batch number num .
date of manufacture num .
precautions required by num ca code of regs num and num concerning the handling and application of paint paint must num .
be manufactured ready for application .
do not add materials such as thinners after manufacture .
num .
be homogenous and free of contaminants .
num .
be smooth .
settled pigment must be soft and easily dispersed before using .
num .
retain the properties that affect its application adhesion and curing for at least num year after the date of manufacture .
num construction not used num payment not used num paint for metal num general section num includes specifications for furnishing paint for metal .
num materials numa general zincrich primer must be on the authorized material list for inorganic and organic zincrich primers .
numb exteriorgrade latex paint exteriorgrade latex paint must be recommended by the manufacturer of the zincrich primer .
section num paint num exteriorgrade latex paint must comply with sspcpaint num .
no visible color change in the finish coat must occur when tested for num hours under astm dnum test cycle num .
the vehicle must be an acrylic or modified acrylic copolymer with a minimum of necessary additives .
numc moisturecured polyurethane coating reserved num construction not used num payment not used num paint for timber num general section num includes specifications for furnishing paint for timber .
num materials numa general reserved numb latexbase wood primer wood primer must be latexbase paint suitable for priming unpainted wood or exterior woodwork .
wood primer must comply with the mpi detailed performance standards for exterior wood primers and be listed on the mpi approved product list no .
num for primer latex for exterior wood .
numc latexbase paint for exterior wood latexbase paint for exterior wood must comply with the mpi detailed performance standards for exterior latex paint and must be listed on one of the mpi approved products lists shown in the following table mpi list no .
category name num latex exterior flat mpi gloss level num num latex exterior semigloss mpi gloss level num num latex exterior gloss mpi gloss level num you may use recycled paint .
recycled paint must comply with the mpi detailed performance standards for exterior latex paint and must be listed on one of the following mpi approved products lists mpi list no .
category name numrr latex recycled remanufactured exterior flat gnum numrc latex recycled consolidated exterior flat gnum numrr latex recycled remanufactured exterior low sheen g num num construction not used num payment not used num miscellaneous paint num general section num includes specifications for furnishing paint for materials other than metal or timber .
num materials numa general reserved section num paint num numb acrylic emulsion paint for exterior masonry acrylic emulsion paint for exterior masonry must comply with the mpi detailed performance standards for exterior latex paint and must be listed on one of the following mpi approved products lists mpi list no .
category name num latex exterior flat mpi gloss level num num latex exterior semigloss mpi gloss level num num latex exterior gloss mpi gloss level num acrylic emulsion paint may be tinted by using universal or allpurpose concentrates .
numcnumf reserved num construction not used num payment not used num num asphalt binders num general numa summary section num includes specifications for furnishing asphalt binders .
numb definitions asphalt binder asphalt from refined petroleum or from a mixture of refined liquid asphalt and refined solid asphalt prepared from crude petroleum .
modified asphalt binder asphalt binder modified with polymers crumb rubber or both .
numc submittals reserved numd quality assurance numdnum general reserved numdnum certification asphalt binder suppliers must comply with the departments certification program for suppliers of asphalt .
for a copy of the certification program go to the mets website .
numdnum sampling a sampling device must be located in the asphalt binder feed line connecting the plant storage tanks to the asphalt binder weighing system or spray bar .
the sampling device must be accessible from num to num inches above the platform .
provide a receptacle for flushing the sampling device .
the valve for the sampling device must be num to num inch in diameter and must allow a numquart sample to be taken slowly at any time during plant activities .
in the engineers presence take two numquart samples per day during plant activities for the project .
sample containers must be numquart capacity and include round frictiontop lids .
num materials numa general asphalt binder must not include residues caused by artificial distillation of coal coal tar or paraffin .
asphalt binder must be homogeneous and free of water .
numb performance grade asphalt binders pg asphalt binder must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num asphalt binders num pg asphalt binders quality characteristic test method requirement pg numa pg num pg num pg num pg num original binder flash point min c aashto t num num num num num num solubilityb min aashto t num num num num num num viscosity at num cc max pas aashto t num num num num num num dynamic shear test temperature at num rads c gsindelta min kpa gsindelta max kpa aashto t num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num rtfof teste mass loss max aashto t num num num num num num rtfof test aged binder dynamic shear test temperature at num rads c gsindelta min kpa aashto t num num num num num num num num num num num ductility at num c min cm aashto t num num num num num num pavg test temperature c aashto r num num num num num num rtfof test and pavg aged binder dynamic shear test temperature at num rads c gsindelta max kpa aashto t num numd num numd num numd num numd num numd num creep stiffness test temperature c svalue max mpa mvalue min aashto t num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num ause as asphalt rubber base stock for high mountain and high desert area .
bthe engineer waives solubility requirements if the supplier is an authorized material source as defined by the departments certification program for suppliers of asphalt .
cthe engineer waives this specification if the supplier provides written certification the asphalt binder can be adequately pumped and mixed at temperatures meeting applicable safety standards .
dtest the sample at num c higher if it fails at the specified test temperature .
gsindelta remains num kpa maximum .
ethe residue from mass change determination may be used for other tests .
frtfo means rolling thin film oven .
gpav means pressure aging vessel .
pg modified asphalt binder must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num asphalt binders num pg modified asphalt binders quality characteristic test method requirement pg num m pg num m pg num m original binder flash point min c aashto t num num num num solubility min aashto t numa num num numb viscosity at num cc max pas aashto t num num num num dynamic shear test temperature at num rads c gsindelta min kpa aashto t num num num num num num num rtfog testd mass loss max aashto t num num num num rtfog test aged binder dynamic shear test temperature at num rads c gsindelta min kpa aashto t num num num num num num num dynamic shear test temperature at num rads c delta max degree aashto t num nume nume nume elastic recoveryf test temperature c recovery min aashto t num num num num num num num pavh temperature c aashto r num num num num rtfog test and pavh aged binder dynamic shear test temperature at num rads c gsindelta max kpa aashto t num num num num num num num creep stiffness test temperature c svalue max mpa mvalue min aashto t num num num num num num num num num num athe department allows astm dnum or astm dnum instead of aashto t num .
particles recovered from astm dnum or astm dnum or aashto t num must be less than num m .
breport only for spray application .
cthe engineer waives the viscosity requirements if the supplier provides written certification the asphalt binder can be adequately pumped and mixed at temperatures meeting applicable safety standards .
dthe residue from mass change determination may be used for other tests .
etest temperature is the temperature at which gsindelta is num kpa .
a graph of log gsindelta plotted against temperature may be used to determine the test temperature when gsindelta is num kpa .
a graph of delta versus temperature may be used to determine delta at the temperature when gsindelta is num kpa .
the graph must have at least num points that envelope gsindelta of num kpa and the test temperature must not be more than num degree c apart .
the engineer also accepts direct measurement of delta at the temperature when gsindelta is num kpa .
ftests without a force ductility clamp may be performed .
grtfo means rolling thin film oven .
hpav means pressure aging vessel .
do not modify pg modified asphalt binder using polyphosphoric acid .
section num asphalt binders num crumb rubber must be from automobile and truck tires and must be free from contaminants including fabric metal minerals and other nonrubber substances .
pg modified asphalt binder modified with crumb rubber must be homogeneous and must not contain visible particles of crumb rubber .
the supplier of pg modified asphalt binder modified with crumb rubber must num .
report the quantity of crumb rubber by weight of asphalt binder num .
certify a minimum of num percent of crumb rubber by weight of asphalt binder num construction not used num payment if asphalt binder is paid for as a bid item the payment quantity for any type of asphalt binder is measured by weight if a partial load of asphalt binder is used and a scale is not available within num miles the weight of asphalt binder remaining on the transporting vehicle may be determined from volumetric measurements provided that the asphalt binder is delivered in a calibrated tank with a measuring stick and calibration card or trucks equipped with a vehicle tank meter and a calibrated thermometer that determines the asphalt binder temperature at delivery .
before converting the volume to weight the volume measured must be reduced to what the asphalt binder would occupy at num degrees f. use the following conversion table to convert asphalt binder volume to weight section num asphalt binders num conversion table t a b t a b t a b num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num notes t observed temperature in degrees f a multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of num f for asphalt binder with density at num f of num pcf or higher b multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of num f for asphalt binder with density at num f of from num to num pcf section num asphalt binders num conversion tablecontinued t a b t a b t a b num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num notes t observed temperature in degrees f a multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of num f for asphalt binder with density at num f of num pcf or higher b multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of num f for asphalt binder with density at num f of from num to num pcf section num asphalt binders num conversion tablecontinued t a b t a b t a b num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num notes t observed temperature in degrees f a multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of num f for asphalt binder with density at num f of num pcf or higher b multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of num f for asphalt binder with density at num f of from num to num pcf section num asphalt binders num conversion tablecontinued t a b t a b t a b num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num notes t observed temperature in degrees f a multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of num f for asphalt binder with density at num f of num pcf or higher b multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of num f for asphalt binder with density at num f of from num to num pcf section num asphalt binders num conversion tablecontinued t a b t a b t a b num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num notes t observed temperature in degrees f a multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of num f for asphalt binder with density at num f of num pcf or higher b multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of num f for asphalt binder with density at num f of from num to num pcf section num asphalt binders num conversion tablecontinued t a b t a b t a b num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num notes t observed temperature in degrees a multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of num f for asphalt binder with density at num f of num pcf or higher b multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of num f for asphalt binder with density at num f of from num to num pcf num reserved num num asphaltic emulsions num general numa summary section num includes specifications for furnishing asphaltic emulsions .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals submit an sds for each shipment of asphaltic emulsion to the job site .
if you use the asphaltic emulsion before the departments sampling and testing is complete submit a certificate of compliance for each shipment to the job site .
the certificate of compliance must include num .
shipment number and shipment date num .
source refinery consignee and destination num .
type and description of material with specific gravity and quantity num .
contract or purchase order number num .
signature by the manufacturer of the material and a statement that the material complies with the contract num .
test results showing the material complies with section num if no certificate of compliance is submitted do not use asphaltic emulsion until authorized .
numd quality assurance sample asphaltic emulsion under aashto t num .
store samples in clean and airtight sealed containers .
storage temperature must be at least num degrees f until tested .
the engineer may waive the settlement test if the asphaltic emulsion is used in less than num days from the time the sample is taken .
num materials numa general asphaltic emulsions must be composed of a bituminous material uniformly emulsified with water and an emulsifying or a stabilizing agent .
polymer modified asphaltic emulsion must contain a polymer .
asphaltic emulsion must be homogeneous .
within num days after delivery and if freezing has not caused separation the asphaltic emulsion must be homogeneous after thorough mixing .
asphaltic emulsion must be anionic cationic polymer modified or quick setting .
numb anionic asphaltic emulsions anionic asphaltic emulsion must be rapid setting medium setting or slow setting .
rapidsetting anionic asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num asphaltic emulsions num rapidsetting anionic asphaltic emulsion requirements quality characteristic test method requirement grade rsnum grade rsnum saybolt furol viscosity num c saybolt furol seconds aashto t num num saybolt furol viscosity num c saybolt furol seconds num settlement num days max num num storage stability test num day max a num num demulsibility num ml num n caclnum min b num num sieve test max num num residue by distillation min num num tests on residue from distillation test penetration num c numcnum numcnum ductility num c num mmminute min mm num num solubility in trichloroethylene min num num athe numhour storage stability test may be used instead of the numday settlement test .
bthe demulsibility test must be made within num days from date of shipment .
ca harder base asphalt meeting current asphalt binder specifications may be specified if the test requirements on the residue from distillation are waived .
mediumsetting anionic asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table mediumsetting anionic asphaltic emulsion requirements quality characteristic test method requirement grade msnum grade msnum grade msnumh saybolt furol viscosity num c saybolt furol seconds aashto t num num num min num min settlement num days max num num num storage stability test num day max a num num num coating ability and water resistance coating dry aggregate good good good coating after spraying fair fair fair coating wet aggregate fair fair fair coating after spraying fair fair fair sieve test max num num num residue by distillation min num num num tests on residue from distillation test penetration num c num num num ductility num c num mmminute min mm num num num solubility in trichloroethylene min num num num athe numhour storage stability test may be used instead of the numday settlement test .
slowsetting anionic asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num asphaltic emulsions num slowsetting anionic asphaltic emulsion requirements quality characteristic test method requirement grade ssnum grade ssnumh saybolt furol viscosity num c saybolt furol seconds aashto t num num num settlement num days max num num storage stability test num day max a num num cement mixing test max num num sieve test max num num residue by distillation min num num tests on residue from distillation test penetration num c num num ductility num c num mmminute min mm num num solubility in trichloroethylene min num num athe numhour storage stability test may be used instead of the numday settlement test .
numc cationic asphaltic emulsions cationic asphaltic emulsion must be rapid medium or slow setting .
rapidsetting cationic asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table rapidsetting cationic asphaltic emulsion requirements quality characteristic test method requirement grade crsnum grade crsnum saybolt furol viscosity num c saybolt furol seconds aashto t num num num settlement num days max num num storage stability test num day max a num num demulsibility num ml num sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate min b num num particle charge test positive positive sieve test max num num distillation oil distillate by volume of emulsion max num num residue min num num tests on residue num num tests on residue from distillation test penetration num c numcnum numcnum ductility num c num mmminute min mm num num solubility in trichloroethylene min num num athe numhour storage stability test may be used instead of the numday settlement test .
bthe demulsibility test must be made within num days from date of shipment .
ca harder base asphalt meeting current asphalt binder specifications may be specified if the test requirements on the residue from distillation are waived .
mediumsetting cationic asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num asphaltic emulsions num mediumsetting cationic asphaltic emulsion requirements quality characteristic test method requirement grade cmsnums grade cmsnum grade cmsnumh saybolt furol viscosity num c saybolt furol seconds aashto t num num num num settlement num days max num num num storage stability test num day max a num num num coating ability and water resistance coating dry aggregate good good good coating after spraying fair fair fair coating wet aggregate fair fair fair coating after spraying fair fair fair particle charge test positive positive positive sieve test max num num num distillation oil distillate by volume of emulsion max num num num residue min num num num tests on residue from distillation test penetration num c num num num ductility num c num mmminute min mm num num num solubility in trichloroethylene min num num num athe numhour storage stability test may be used instead of the numday settlement test .
slowsetting cationic asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table slowsetting cationic asphaltic emulsion requirements quality characteristic test method requirement grade cssnum grade cssnumh saybolt furol viscosity num c saybolt furol seconds aashto t num num num settlement num days max num num storage stability test num day max a num num particle charge test positiveb positiveb sieve test max num num cement mixing test max num num residue by distillation min num num tests on residue from distillation test penetration num c num num ductility num c num mmminute min mm num num solubility in trichloroethylene min num num athe numhour storage stability test may be used instead of the numday settlement test .
bmust comply with a ph requirement of num maximum under astm enum if the particle charge test result is inconclusive .
numd polymer modified asphaltic emulsions polymer modified asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num asphaltic emulsions num polymer modified asphaltic emulsion requirements quality characteristic test method requirement anionic cationic grade pmrsnum grade pmrsnumh grade pmcrsnum grade pmcrsnumh saybolt furol viscosity num c saybolt furol seconds aashto t num num num num num settlement num days max num num num num storage stability test num day max num num num num sieve test max num num num num demulsibility min numa numa numb numb particle charge positive positive ash content max astm dnum num num num num residue by evaporation min california test num num num num num tests on residue from evaporation test penetration num c aashto t num num num num num ductility num c min mm aashto t num num num num num torsional recovery min or polymer content at num by weight min california test num california test num num num num num num num num num ause num ml of num n caclnum solution .
buse num ml of num sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate solution .
nume quicksetting asphaltic emulsions quicksetting asphaltic emulsion must comply with the requirements shown in the following table section num asphaltic emulsions num quicksetting asphaltic emulsion requirements quality characteristic test method requirement anionic cationic grade qsnum grade qsnumh grade cqsnum grade cqsnumh saybolt furol viscosity num c saybolt furol seconds aashto t num num num num num storage stability test num day max num num num num sieve test max num num num num particle chargea negative negative positive positive residue by distillation min num num num num tests on residue from distillation test penetration num c aashto t num num num num num ductility num c min mm aashto t num num num num num solubility in trichloroethylene min aashto t num num num num num aif the result of the particle charge test is inconclusive the asphaltic emulsion must be tested for ph under astm enum .
grade qsnumh asphaltic emulsion must have a minimum ph of num .
grade cqsnumh asphaltic emulsion must have a maximum ph of num .
num construction not used num payment the quantity of asphaltic emulsion is the weight determined before the addition of any water .
the weight of asphaltic emulsion is determined from volumetric measurements if num .
partial loads are used num .
scale is not available within num miles num .
asphaltic emulsion is delivered in num .
trucks with each tank calibrated and accompanied by its measuring stick and calibration card num .
trucks equipped with a vehicle tank meter and a calibrated thermometer that determines the asphalt temperature at delivery for volumetric measurements the measured volume of asphaltic emulsion is reduced to the volume the material would occupy at num degrees f. one ton of asphaltic emulsion at num degrees f equals num gal .
one gallon of asphaltic emulsion at num degrees f equals num lb .
convert volume to weight using the factors shown in the following table section num asphaltic emulsions num conversion table t m t m t m t m num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num t observed temperature in degrees f m multiplier for reducing volumes to the basis of num f num num epoxy num general num general numa summary section num includes specifications for mixing and applying epoxy .
numb definitions kit two proportioned epoxy components packaged together .
numc submittals submit a certificate of compliance for epoxy .
numd quality assurance reserved num materials numa general furnish epoxy as num components and mix them together at the job site .
numb packaging labeling and storing each epoxy component must be packaged in containers of a size proportional to the amount of that component in the mix so that num container of each component is used in mixing num batch of epoxy .
the containers must be sealed to prevent leakage and must not react with the components .
each container must be clearly labeled by the epoxy manufacturer with num .
astm cnumcnumm class and type num .
component designation a or b num .
manufacturers name num .
manufacture date num .
batch number num .
expiration date num .
directions for use num .
warnings or precautions required by state and federal laws and regulations store epoxy components at temperatures greater than num degrees f. numc epoxy binder epoxy binder must be a lowviscosity epoxy formulated primarily for use in num .
making hs epoxy concrete and epoxy mortar num .
pressure grouting cracks in concrete for loadbearing applications the epoxy must comply with astm cnumcnumm type iv grade num class b or c. for nonloadbearing applications the epoxy must comply with astm cnumcnumm type i grade num class b or c. use class b whenever the surface temperature is from num to num degrees f. use class c whenever the surface temperature is above num degrees f. if epoxy binder is used for hs epoxy concrete or epoxy mortar thoroughly mix the components before adding aggregate .
the mix proportions must be num part epoxy to num parts aggregate by volume .
aggregate must be clean and have a moisture content of not more than num percent when tested under california test num .
numd epoxy adhesive for bonding freshly mixed concrete to hardened concrete epoxy adhesive for bonding freshly mixed concrete to hardened concrete must comply with astm cnumcnumm type v grade num class b or c. section num epoxy num use class b whenever the surface temperature is from num to num degrees f or if a faster cure is required .
use class c whenever the surface temperature is above num degrees f. nume rapid set epoxy adhesive for pavement markers rapid set epoxy adhesive for bonding pavement markers to concrete and hma must comply with astm cnumcnumm type iv grade num class b or c. the gel time for rapid set epoxy adhesive may be less than num minutes .
use class b whenever the surface temperature is from num to num degrees f. use class c whenever the surface temperature is above num degrees f. the epoxy adhesive must comply with the requirements shown in the following table rapid set epoxy adhesive for pavement markers quality characteristic test method requirement gel time max minutes at num f california test num num bond strength to concrete minutes maximum to reach not less than num psi at num num f num at num num f num slant shear strength min psi num days at num num f num num days at num num f plus water soak num tensile adhesion and cohesion min psi ceramic marker bottom num ceramic marker bottom including post cure num retroreflective pavement marker bottom num color of mixed epoxy gray glass transition temperaturea tg minimum num f abefore testing samples must be conditioned at num f for num hours under astm dnum numf standard set epoxy adhesive for pavement markers standard set epoxy adhesive for bonding pavement markers to concrete and hma must comply with astm cnumcnumm type iv grade num class b or c. use class b whenever the surface temperature is from num to num degrees f. use class c whenever the surface temperature is above num degrees f. the epoxy adhesive must comply with the requirements shown in the following table standard set epoxy adhesive for pavement markers quality characteristic test method requirement bond strength to concrete hours maximum to reach not less than num psi california test num at num num f num at num num f num slant shear strength min psi num days at num num f num num days at num num f plus water soak num tensile adhesion and cohesion min psi ceramic marker bottom num ceramic marker bottom including post cure num reflective pavement marker bottom num color of mixed components gray glass transition temperaturea tg minimum num f abefore testing samples must be conditioned at num f for num hours under astm dnum section num epoxy num numg epoxy sealant for inductive loops the epoxy for sealing inductive loops and leads imbedded in hma and concrete must comply with astm cnumcnumm type i grade num .
the epoxy sealant must comply with the requirements shown in the following table epoxy sealant for inductive loops quality characteristic test method requirement tensile strengtha min psi california test num num elongationa min num shore d hardnessa minimum num atest on a numinchthick cast sheet cured num hours at num f plus num hours at num f numh epoxy resin adhesive for pressure injection grouting of concrete pavement the epoxy resin adhesive for injection grouting of concrete pavement must comply with the requirements shown in the following table epoxy resin adhesive for injection grouting of concrete pavement quality characteristic test method requirement brookfield viscosity no .
num spindle at num rpm max poise at num f california test num num gel time minutes num slant shear strength on dry concretea min psi after num days of cure in air at num num f num slant shear strength on wet concretea min psi after num days of cure in air at num num f num tensile strength min psi after num days of cure at num num f num elongation max after num days of cure at num num f num atest for slant shear strength as follows except item num in the list does not apply for testing on dry concrete num .
soak blocks in water for num hours at num num f. remove and wipe off excess water .
num .
apply a coat of epoxy numinchthick to each diagonal surface .
place num pieces of shim stock on num block to control final film thickness .
shim stock pieces must be num by num inch and num inch thick .
before pressing the coated surfaces together leave the blocks such that the coated surfaces are horizontal until the epoxy reacts slightly to prevent excessive flow .
num construction mix and apply the epoxy under the manufacturers instructions .
do not use an epoxy component if any of the following occur num .
evidence of crystallization num .
permanent increase in viscosity too thick to be adequately mixed num .
settled pigments that can not be readily dispersed with a paddle num .
component is older than the manufacturers recommended expiration date thoroughly stir each epoxy component before mixing them together .
do not mix partial kits .
do not add solvents .
automatic mixing equipment must have positive displacement pumps and be capable of metering a num component mix in the specified ratio num percent by volume of either component .
mix the num epoxy components until no trace of black or white streaks is present in the mixed epoxy .
clean surfaces to receive the epoxy of rust paint grease asphalt loose and deleterious material .
apply the epoxy and place materials to be bonded before the epoxy starts to thicken .
do not use epoxy that has exceeded its working life .
prime surfaces with epoxy immediately before placing epoxy concrete or mortar .
section num epoxy num when bonding freshlymixed concrete to hardened concrete coat the blastcleaned concrete surface with epoxy using a brush or roller .
place freshlymixed concrete while the epoxy is tacky .
apply new coat of epoxy if the epoxy sets .
num payment not used num reserved num num geosynthetics num general numa summary section num includes specifications for furnishing geosynthetics .
numb definitions reserved numc submittals numcnum general for each type of geosynthetic submit num .
certificate of compliance num .
test sample representing each lot num .
minimum average roll value label submittals with the manufacturers name and product information .
numcnum geotechnical subsurface reinforcement submit the ltds and its supporting calculations at least num days before placing geotechnical subsurface reinforcement .
the calculations must be signed by an engineer registered as a civil engineer in the state .
numd quality assurance geosynthetics must be on the datamine list for geotextiles and geosynthetics at the national transportation product evaluation program website .
the product name manufacturing source and date of manufacture must be printed every num meters along the edge of the material except for num .
paving mat num .
paving grid class num and num num .
biaxial geogrid num materials numa general treat geosynthetics to resist degradation from exposure to sunlight .
furnish geosynthetics in covers to protect against damage from moisture sunlight and shipping and storage .
numb filter fabric geosynthetics used for filter fabric must be permeable and nonwoven .
filter fabric must be manufactured from one of the following num .
polyester num .
polypropylene num .
combined polyester and polypropylene section num geosynthetics num filter fabric must comply with the requirements shown in the following table filter fabric quality characteristic test method requirement class a class b class c permittivity min secnum astm dnum num num num apparent opening size average roll value max us standard sieve size astm dnum num num num grab breaking load numinch grip in each direction min lb astm dnum num apparent elongation in each direction min percent astm dnum num puncture strength min lb astm dnum num trapezoid tearing strength min lb astm dnum num uv resistance retained grab breaking load num hours min percent astm dnum num numc geocomposite wall drain geocomposite wall drain must consist of a polymeric core with filter fabric integrally bonded to one or both sides of the core creating a stable drainage void .
filter fabric must comply with section numb .
geocomposite wall drain must be from num to num inches thick .
geocomposite wall drain must comply with the requirements shown in the following table geocomposite wall drain quality characteristic test method requirement transmissivity galminft gradient num normal stress num psf astm dnum num numd geotechnical subsurface reinforcement numdnum general geosynthetic reinforcement used for geotechnical subsurface reinforcement must be either geotextile or geogrid .
when tested under astm dnum geotextile permittivity must be at least num secnum .
geogrid must have a regular and defined open area .
the open area must be from num to num percent of the total grid area .
numdnum long term design strength determine the ltds of geosynthetic reinforcement from the ultimate tensile strength in the primary strength direction divided by reduction factors .
calculate ltds from the guidelines in geosynthetic research institute standard practice ggnuma gri ggnumb or gri gtnum .
the product of the reduction factors must be at least num .
determine the reduction factor for creep using a num year design life for permanent applications .
for temporary applications use a num year design life to determine the reduction factor .
determine the installation damage reduction factor from the characteristics of backfill materials used .
if test data is not available use default values of reduction factors in the geosynthetic research institute standard practice to determine ltds .
section num geosynthetics num nume silt fence fabric silt fence fabric must comply with the requirements shown in the following table silt fence fabric quality characteristic test method requirement woven nonwoven grab breaking load numinch grip in each direction min lb astm dnum num num apparent elongation in each direction min percent astm dnum num num water flow rate average roll value min and max gal per minutesq ft astm dnum num num permittivity min secnum astm dnum num num apparent opening size average roll value max inches astm dnum num num uv resistance retained grab breaking load num hours min percent astm dnum num num numf gravelfilled bag gravelfilled bag must comply with the requirements shown in the following table gravelfilled bag quality characteristic test method requirement grab breaking load numinch grip in each direction min lb astm dnum num water flow rate average roll value min and max gal per minutesq ft astm dnum num permittivity min secnum astm dnum num apparent opening size average roll value max inches astm dnum num uv resistance retained grab breaking load num hours min percent astm dnum num numg sediment filter bag the sediment filter bag must comply with the requirements shown in the following table sediment filter bag quality characteristic test method requirement woven nonwoven grab breaking load numinch grip in each directionmin lb astm dnum num num apparent elongation in each direction min percent astm dnum num num water flow rate average roll value min and max gal per minutesq ft astm dnum num num permittivity min secnum astm dnum num num apparent opening size average roll value max inches astm dnum num num uv resistance retained grab breaking load num hours min percent astm dnum num num section num geosynthetics num numh temporary cover temporary cover must comply with the requirements shown in the following table temporary cover quality characteristic test method requirement woven nonwoven grab breaking load numinch grip in each direction min lb astm dnum num num apparent elongation in each direction min percent astm dnum num num water flow rate average roll value min and max gal per minutesq ft astm dnum num num permittivity min secnum astm dnum num num apparent opening size average roll valuemax inches astm dnum num num uv resistance retained grab breaking load num hours min percent astm dnum num num numi rock slope protection fabric rsp fabric must be a permeable nonwoven needlepunched geotextile .
the fabric must be manufactured from one of the following num .
polyester num .
polypropylene num .
combined polyester and polypropylene polymers must be either virgin compounds or clean reworked material .
do not subject virgin compounds to use or processing other than required for initial manufacture .
clean reworked material must be previously processed material from the processors own production that has been reground pelletized or solvated .
the fabric must not contain more than num percent of clean reworked material by weight .
do not use recycled materials from either postconsumer or postindustrial sources .
rsp fabric must comply with the requirements shown in the following table rsp fabric quality characteristic test method requirement class num class num massmin ozsq yd astm dnum num num grab breaking load num inch grip in each direction min lb astm dnum num num apparent elongation in each direction min percent astm dnum num num permittivity min secnum astm dnum num num apparent opening size min and max us standard sieve size astm dnum num num uv resistance retained grab breaking load num hours min percent astm dnum num num numj paving fabric geosynthetics used for paving fabric must be nonwoven .
section num geosynthetics num paving fabric must comply with the requirements shown in the following table paving fabric quality characteristic test method requirement mass per unit area min ozsq yd astm dnum num grab breaking load numinch grip in each direction min lb astm dnum num apparent elongation in each direction min percent astm dnum num hydraulic bursting strength min psi astm dnum num melting point min f astm dnum num asphalt retention min galsq yd astm dnum num numk paving mat geosynthetics used for paving mat must be a nonwoven fiberglass and polyester hybrid material .
paving mat must comply with the requirements shown in the following table paving mat quality characteristic test method requirement breaking force min lbnum inch cut strip astm dnum num ultimate elongation max percent astm dnum num mass per unit area min ozsq yd astm dnum num melting point min f astm dnum num asphalt retention min galsq yd astm dnum num numl paving grid geosynthetics used for paving grid must be a geopolymer material formed into a grid of integrally connected elements with openings .
paving grid must comply with the requirements shown in the following table paving grid quality characteristic test method requirement class i class ii class iii tensile strength at ultimate min lbina astm dnum num x num num num aperture size min inch calipered num num num elongation max percent astm dnum num num num mass per area min ozsq yd astm dnum num num num melting point min f astm dnum num num num a for class i machine direction x cross direction .
for class ii and class iii both directions .
numm paving geocomposite grid paving geocomposite grid must consist of a paving grid specified in section numl bonded or integrated with a paving fabric as specified in section numj .
paving geocomposite grid must have a peel strength of at least num lbft when tested under astm dnum .
numn geocomposite strip membrane geocomposite strip membrane must be various widths of strips manufactured from asphaltic rubber and geosynthetics .
section num geosynthetics num geocomposite strip membrane must comply with the requirements shown in the following table geocomposite strip membrane quality characteristic test method requirement strip tensile strength min lbinch astm dnum num elongation at break min percent astm dnum num resistance to puncture min lb astm enum num permeance max perms astm enumenumm num pliability num inch mandrel with sample conditioned at num f astm dnum no cracks in fabric or bitumen melting point f astm dnum num numo subgrade enhancement geotextile subgrade enhancement geotextile must be either polyester or polypropylene .
subgrade enhancement geotextile must comply with the requirements shown in the following table subgrade enhancement geotextile quality characteristic test method requirementa class anum class anum class bnum class bnum class bnum elongation at break percent astm dnum num num num num num grab breaking load numinch grip in each direction min lb astm dnum num num num num wide width tensile strength at num percent strain min lbft astm dnum num wide width tensile strength at ultimate strength min lbft astm dnum num tear strength min lb astm dnum num num num num puncture strength min lb astm dnum num num num num num permittivity min secnum astm dnum num num num num num apparent opening size min inches astm dnum num num num num num uv resistance retained grab breaking load num hours min percent astm dnum num num num num num avalues are based on minimum average roll value in the weaker principal direction except apparent opening size is based on maximum average roll value .
nump biaxial geogrid geosynthetics used for biaxial geogrid must be a punched and drawn polypropylene material formed into an integrally formed biaxial grid .
section num geosynthetics num biaxial geogrid must comply with the requirements shown in the following table biaxial geogrid quality characteristic test method requirement aperture size min and max incha calipered num x num rib thickness min inch calipered num junction thickness min inch calipered num tensile strength num strain min lbfta astm dnum num x num tensile strength at ultimate min lbfta astm dnum num x num uv resistance retained tensile strength num hours min percent astm dnum num junction strength min lbfta astm dnum num x num overall flexural rigidity min mgcm astm dnum num torsional rigidity at num cmkg min mmkgdegb gri ggnum num amachine direction x cross direction bgeosynthetic research institute test method ggnum torsional behavior of bidirectional geogrids when subjected to inplane rotation numq geosynthetic bond breaker geosynthetic bond breaker must be nonwoven needle punched not heat treated polypropylene polyethylene material .
geosynthetic bond breaker material must comply with the requirements shown in the following table geosynthetic bond breaker quality characteristic test method requirement mass per unit area min ozsq yd astm dnum num thickness at num psi min mm astm dnum num tensile strength at ultimate min lbft astm dnum num elongation max percent astm dnum num permittivity at num psi min ms astm dnum num hydraulic transmissivity at num psi min ms astm dnum num uv resistance retained grab breaking load num hours min percent astm dnum num numrnumy reserved num construction not used num payment not used num reserved num division xii building construction num building construction reserved index num a abandon num abbreviations num abrasives blast cleaning num access gates num access openings bridge num act of god num num num num activity num addresses num num adjust num adjust frames covers grates and manholes num inlets num admixtures dispensing liquid num types num aerially deposited lead num num aggregate coarse num fine num gradations num minor concrete num washing num aggregate bases num approach slabs num compacting num grade tolerance num spreading num subgrade num aggregate subbases num grade tolerance num agreements num air pollution control num air quality num air release valve assembly num alternative dispute resolution num alternative earth retaining systems num alternative slotted pipe num alternative sound wall systems num anchor assemblies overside drains steel num antitrust claims num apprentices num approach slabs num cementitious material content num coefficient of friction num compressive strength num rapid strength concrete num smoothness num type n num type r num arbitration num num num num num num archaeological resources num archaeological monitor num archaeological monitoring area num arches structural metal plate num index num areas for use num armorclad conductors irrigation systems num asbestos num asbuilt drawings num asphalt binders num asphalt concrete num asphalt rubber binder hot mix asphalt num num num seal coats num asphalt treated permeable base num num spreading and compacting num asphalt treated permeable material num asphaltic emulsions num nonpolymer seal coats num polymer seal coats num seal coats num asphaltic plug joint seals num authorized facility audit list num authorized laboratory num authorized material list num authorized material source list num b backfill structure cement treated for slotted corrugated steel pipe num backflow preventer assembly irrigation systems num ball valves irrigation systems num barricades num barrier thrie beam num barriers num concrete num base num basement material num bases aggregate num num cement treated permeable num bending reinforcement num bent plates steel structures num bid item num bid item list num bid items applicable sections num bid items incidental num bidders bonds num insurance num security num bidding num bids protest num biological resources num bird protection num contractorsupplied biologist num fish protection num natural resource protection plan num species protection num index num wetland protection num bird protection num bituminous seals num blast cleaning num painting num blasting earthwork num bolted connections steel structures num bonded wearing course num bonded wearing coursegap graded num bonding materials num num num magnesium phosphate concrete num modified highaluminabased concrete num portlandcementbased concrete num bonds num booster pumps num borrow num bracing wood structures num bridge num bridge deck surface texture num bridge deck drainage system num num bridge joint restrainers num bridge railings cable railing num california bridge rail num chain link railing num pipe handrailing num tubular handrailing num bridge rehabilitation remove asphalt concrete surfacing num remove concrete deck surface num bridge removal num protective covers num bridges wood num buildingconstruction contract num buried manmade objects earthwork num buy america num c cable railing num california bridge rail num california test num num cam coupler assembly irrigation system num casings for bridges miscellaneous drainage facilities num castings carbon steel num num gray iron num num malleable iron num num castinplace concrete piles num cidh concrete piles num ciss concrete piles num driven steel shells filled with concrete num cattle guards num cement num cement mortar reinforced concrete pipe joints num index num cement treated permeable base num spreading and compacting num cement treated bases num compacting num construction joints num curing seal num grade tolerance num operation time requirement num plantmixed num roadmixed num subgrade num cement treated permeable material num cement treated structure backfill for slotted corrugated steel pipe num cementitious material content concrete structures num num num num corrosive environment num freezethaw area num minor concrete num precast concrete num rapid strength concrete num certificate of compliance num num certifications num certified industrial hygienist num certified payroll records num certify backflow preventers num chain link fence num chain link railing num change order num approval num bills num change order work num changeable message signs portable num changes num work character num num channelizers num charpy vnotch testing structural steel num check testing num check valves irrigation systems num checks num chemical adhesives num num cidh concrete piles num ciss concrete piles num class num surface finish num class num surface finish num class n steel pipe piles num class r steel pipe piles num cleanup num clearing and grubbing num closure num coated welded steel pipe miscellaneous drainage facilities num coatings num coatings miscellaneous num cofferdam waterfilled num cofferdams num cold planing asphalt concrete pavement num colored concrete num num num index num column casings num commercial quality num commercial source num compaction num compaction equipment cement treated permeable bases num compaction equipment earthwork num composite steel spiral rib pipe with smooth interior num compressive strength concrete num num concrete structures num minor concrete num rapid strength concrete num num selfconsolidating concrete num concrete num admixtures num aggregate num aggregate gradations num backfill pipe trenches num cementitious material content num num cementitious materials num channel lining num compressive strength num num num num corrosive environment num curing num num deicing chemicals exposed to num ditch lining num form liners num freezethaw area num gutter depressions num gutter lining num members prestressing num minor num mixing num num num pavement portland cement num pavement sealed joints num precast num precast members num prequalification num num proportioning num num num protecting num num rapid strength num selfconsolidating num shrinkage num slope paving num slope protection num supplementary cementitious materials num num textured and colored num transporting num num uniformity num num num water mixing num num water quantity of num num num concrete anchorage devices installation num materials num concrete backfill num concrete barriers num concrete removal num concrete structures index num cementitious material content num num num compressive strength num num construction joints num finishing num pier columns num placing concrete num precast members num prequalification num seal course num sealed joints num sliding joints num waterstops num concretedrock slope protection num cones traffic num confined space num construction area signs num construction surveys num containment systems painting num contract num acceptance num num num award num compliance failure num execution num failure of enforcement num form num hierarchy of components num intent num termination num time num num num contract time num contractor num representative num contractorgenerated hazardous waste num contractorsupplied biologist num control pump booster num pump pumping plant electrical equipment num control and neutral conductors irrigation systems num controlled lowstrength material num num controlling activity num conversion table asphaltic emulsions num coordination other entities num core and pressure grout dowels num core concrete num corrugated aluminum pipe num corrugated metal pipe num aluminum num steel num corrugated metal pipe arch num corrugated metal pipe miscellaneous drainage facilities num corrugated steel pipe num costs flagging num cottonwood cuttings num coupling bands corrugated metal pipe num crack and seat num crack treatment num index num crash cushion module temporary num crib walls num critical path num critical path method num critical path method schedule level num num level num num level num num crumb rubber modifier hot mix asphalt num num num seal coats num num num num num cultivation num cultural resources num culvert num culvert beddings num num culvert rehabilitation num machine spiral wound pvc pipeliners num curb construction extruded num slipform num curbs and sidewalks existing num curing compound num testing num water loss num curing concrete num concrete structures num curing compound method num formsinplace method num precast steam num water for num num water method num waterproof membrane method num curing seal cement treated bases num cuttings planting num d damage repair and restoration num dampproofing num data cores num num data date num deck bleeder drain num deck seal num decks bridge bleeder drains num cementitious material content num coefficient of friction num crack intensity num curing num placing concrete num rapid strength concrete num removing forms num smoothness num decomposed granite num deduction num deficiency thickness aggregate bases num index num thickness aggregate subbases num thickness cement treated bases num delay num delineators num portable num delivery storage and handling steel structures num density cores num department num departmentfurnished material num departmentgenerated hazardous waste num departmentowned float num depressions concrete gutter num described interpretation num determination of pile length num detour num detours obliterating num devices temporary traffic control num differing site conditions num direct design method reinforced concrete pipe num director num disabled veteran business enterprise num disadvantaged business enterprise num disposal num num material on nonhighway property num district num disturbance of existing paint systems on bridges num divided highway num douglas fir num downdrains pipe aluminum num plastic num steel num drainage inlets num drainage appurtenances miscellaneous drainage facilities num drainage inlet markers miscellaneous drainage facilities num drainage pumping equipment num drains horizontal num overside num plastic pipe horizontal num subsurface num drill and bond dowel chemical adhesive num drill and bond dowels num drilled holes num drilling to assist pile driving num predrilled holes num drip irrigation tubing irrigation systems num drip valve assemblies irrigation systems num driven piles num precast prestressed concrete piles num steel pipe piles num steel sheet piles num steel shells num structural shape steel piling num driven steel shells num index num driving system submittal num drums traffic plastic num dynamic monitoring num e early completion time num earth retaining systems num alternative num earthwork num borrow material num cofferdams num num compaction num deficiency material num ditch excavation num embankment construction num ground anchor walls num num relative compaction num roadway excavation num selected material num settlement periods num slides and slipouts num slopes num soil nail walls num num soldier pile walls num structure excavation and backfill num surcharge num surplus material num edge drains num edging landscape num elastomeric bearing pads num electrical systems falsework lighting num painting num pavement illumination falsework num pedestrian walkway illumination through falsework num embankment mechanically stabilized num embankment construction num emissions reduction num emulsions asphaltic num enclosures painting num engineer num authority num by the num to the num entrance tapers aluminum num steel num environmentally sensitive area num num epoxy num binder num bonding freshly mixed concrete to hardened concrete num pressure injection grouting of concrete pavement num rapid set for pavement markers num sealant for inductive loops num index num standard set for pavement markers num epoxy crack injection bridge num epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement num num reinforcement num num epoxycoated and epoxycoated prefabricated reinforcement num equipment booster pumps num drainage pumping num identification num pumping and controls num pumping plant electrical num erosion control num quality assurance num submittals num erosion control application num bonded fiber matrix num compost num compost socks num drill seed num dry seed num duff num fiber rolls num hydromulch num hydroseed num incorporate materials num rolled erosion control products num straw num topsoil num erosion control materials num compost num compost socks num duff num fasteners num fertilizer num fiber num fiber rolls num imported topsoil num local topsoil num rolled erosion control products num blankets num jute mesh num netting num turf reinforcement mats num seed num straw num tackifier num bonded fiber matrix num topsoil num erosion control payment num num estimated cost num excavation num num num num num num num regional notification center num existing curbs and sidewalks num existing asphalt concrete num existing facilities num num abandon num adjust num index num culvert rehabilitation num culvert rehabilitation machine spiral wound pvc pipeliners num modify num remove drainage facilities num remove irrigation facilities num existing irrigation facilities num existing planting num existing planting num existing plants maintaining num pruning of num transplanting num existing structures num access opening num bridge deck rehabilitation num bridge removal num bridge removal protective covers num core concrete num epoxy crack injection num methacrylate resin bridge deck treatment num polyester concrete overlay num prepare concrete deck surface num rapid setting concrete patch num refinish bridge deck num rehabilitate structures num remove chip seal num remove unsound concrete num repair spalled surface area num structure removal num expanded polystyrene num expansion joints concrete sidewalks num exploratory work horizontal drains num extra work num num extra work performed by specialists num extruded curb construction num f fabrication steel structures num falsework lighting num pavement illumination num pedestrian walkway illumination num portal illumination num steel structures num fastener threads num fasteners steel structures num faying and bearing surfaces steel structures num federalaid contract num fences num chain link num existing fences num gates num high visibility num temporary num index num type cl num types bw and wm num fertilizer num field tests irrigation systems num filter fabric num final pay item num num finished grade num finishing roadway num fish protection num fixed cost num flag trees telescoping num flagging costs num flared end sections miscellaneous drainage facilities num flashing arrow signs num flexible hose irrigation systems num float num num flow sensors irrigation systems num flume downdrains aluminum num steel num foliage protectors num force account equipment rental num general num labor num material num force account work num form panels num form panels concrete structures num formed relief texture num forms num forms concrete structures num foundation preparation num fractured rib texture num framed bents wood structures num framing wood structures num freezethaw areas num full depth reclamationcement num full depth reclamationfoamed asphalt num g gabions num galvanized reinforcement num galvanizing num gammagamma logging num garden valve assemblies irrigation systems num garden valves irrigation systems num gate valves irrigation systems num geocomposite drain systems num geocomposite strip membrane num geosynthetic pavement interlayer num num geosynthetic reinforced embankment num num geosynthetic reinforcement num geosynthetics num filter fabric num geocomposite strip membrane num geosynthetic reinforcement num index num gravelfilled bag num paving fabric num paving geocomposite grid num paving grid num paving mat num rock slope protection fabric num sediment filter bag num silt fence fabric num subgrade enhancement geotextile num temporary cover num wall drain num grade tolerance aggregate bases num tolerance cement treated bases num grade tolerance earthwork num grading plane num grates num gravel mulch num gravelfilled bag num groove and grind pavement num ground anchor walls earthwork num ground anchors num num load testing num submittals num num ground covers inert num grout num guarantee num gutter depressions concrete num h handrailing pipe num handrailing tubular num hardware wood structures num hazardous waste and contamination num hazardous waste management num headed bar reinforcement num headings num heavy abrasive blast texture num hemfir num high strength fasteners steel structures num highway num holiday definition num document submittal num horizontal drains num hot mix asphalt num bonded wearing course num bonded wearing coursegap graded num bridge decks num data cores num num density cores num dispute resolution num edge treatment num geosynthetic pavement interlayer num num job mix formula num modification num renewal num index num verification num joints longitudinal num leveling num lime treatment num num num liquid antistrip num num num material transfer vehicle num method compaction num num miscellaneous areas and dikes num num open graded friction course num plants num plasticity index num production startup num reclaimed asphalt pavement num num num rubberized hot mix asphaltgap graded num smoothness corrections num superpave num num tack coat num num hot mix asphalt type a num hours of darkness num i idle equipment num imperative mood num indemnification num inertial profiler num informalbid contract num information handout num inlet depressions miscellaneous drainage facilities num inspection access num final num request num inspection job site num installation tension testing steel structures num insurance num irrigation conduit irrigation systems num irrigation controllers irrigation systems num irrigation supply line irrigation systems num irrigation system testing num irrigation systems num armorclad conductors num backflow preventer assembly num cam coupler assembly num certify backflow preventers num check and test existing irrigation facilities num conductors num flow sensors num irrigation conduit num irrigation controller enclosure cabinet num irrigation controllers num irrigation supply line num pipe num pressure tests num sprinkler assemblies num temporary num testing num num index num trenching and backfilling num valve boxes and covers num valves num wiring plans and diagrams num j jacking pavement num job mix formula num job site num job site appearance num job site management num joint seal assemblies mr num inches num joint seal assemblies mr num inches num joints culvert and drainage pipe num culvert and drainage pipe performance specifications num expansion concrete sidewalks num plastic pipe culvert num rubber gasketed reinforced concrete pipe num siphons corrugated metal pipe num slip overside drains aluminum num steel num l labor code num labor surcharge and equipment rental rates num lagging timber num landscape num cultivation num definition num irrigation num landscape elements num pesticides num plant damage num plant establishment work num planting num repair of damage num roadside clearing num weed germination num landscape elements num decomposed granite num edging num gravel mulch num inert ground cover and mulches num rock blanket num site furnishings num wood mulch num laws num federal num lead compliance plan num lean concrete backfill num legal actions against the department num license contractor federalaid contract num contractor nonfederalaid contract num index num joint venture bidder num subcontractors num licenses num lighting falsework num falsework portal illumination num pavement illumination falsework num portal illumination num walkway illumination through falsework num lime stabilized soil num lime treatment num num num liquid antistrip num num num liquidated damages num lists num load limits num load test piles num location marker irrigation systems num m magnesium phosphate concrete num mailboxes relocating num resetting num maintaining traffic bridge painting and cleaning operations num maintaining traffic num maintenance and protection relief num manhole frames and covers num markings num existing markings num mass concrete num num material num control of num department furnished num found on the job site num furnishing of num local num new num on hand num procurement from nonhighway property num proportioning num source num source inspection num source testing num storage num material hauling equipment lane num material shortage num material transfer vehicle num materials steel structures num structural steel num num materialsource facility audit num measurement num aggregate num imported top soil num mulch num roadway material num soil amendment num index num measuring devices num mechanically stabilized embankment num median num members prestressed concrete num membrane waterproofing and protective cover num asphalt num deck seal num preformed num methacrylate resin bridge deck treatment num methacrylate resin treatment bridge num method compaction num microsurfacing num num midwest guardrail system num end anchor assembly num num rail tensioning assembly num steel posts num num wood posts num num milestone num mineral grit blast cleaning num minor concrete num minor hot mix asphalt num minor structures num miscellaneous areas and dikes num miscellaneous bridge metal num bolted connections num construction num materials num miscellaneous drainage facilities num casings for bridges num corrugated metal pipe num drainage appurtenances num drainage inlet markers num flared end sections num inlet depressions num precast concrete pipe num welded steel pipe num miscellaneous iron and steel num miscellaneous metal num miscellaneous traffic control devices num delineators num pavement markers num mobilization num modified highaluminabased concrete num modify num modify inlets manholes and risers num pipes num mortar num cement reinforced concrete pipe joints num mulch landscape num n narrative report num natural resource protection plan num near critical path num noise control num index num nondiscrimination num nonhighway facilities num nonskid abrasive finish num nonsmall business substitution num numeric action level num o obliterate num open graded friction course num ordinary surface finish num osha num outlets edge drains num underdrains num overside drains num p paint num painting num antigrafitti coating num application num concrete num containment sytems num electrical systems num enclosures num faying surfaces num galvanized surfaces num machinery num painting quality work plan num preparing structural steel num sign structures num steel soldier piles num steel structures num structural steel num num thermal spray coating num timber num ventilated containment systems num num weather conditions num wood structures num zinc coatings num paints miscellaneous num paleontological resources num parking area seals num parking bumpers num partnering num pavement num grind num groove num jacking num portland cement concrete num replacement num subsealing num transition tapers num pavement markers num pavement smoothness inertial profiler num index num straightedge num paving fabric num paving geocomposite grid num paving grid num paving mat num paving notch extension num num payment num alternatives num eliminated items num progress num scope num pc concrete members num cementitious material content num pc drainage inlets num pcc pavement side forms for num slip form construction num perforated pipe aluminum underdrains num plastic underdrains num steel underdrains num permanent steel casings num num permanent steel deck forms num num permeable base asphalt treated num cement treated num permeable material asphalt treated num cement treated num untreated num permits num personal liability num pervious backfill material num num pesticides num pier columns num pile driving equipment num pile reinforcement num num pin connections steel structures num pipe alternative slotted num arches structural metal plate num composite steel spiral rib with smooth interior num corrugated metal num corrugated metal aluminum num corrugated metal arch num corrugated metal bituminous coated num corrugated metal bituminous lined num corrugated metal coupling bands num num corrugated metal paved inverts num corrugated metal polymeric sheet coating num corrugated metal protective coatings linings and paving num corrugated metal steel num corrugated metal thickness num corrugated steel damaged aluminum coating num corrugated steel damaged galvanizing num corrugated steel siphons num downdrains aluminum num downdrains plastic num index num downdrains steel num end finish corrugated aluminum num end finish corrugated steel num irrigation supply line num joints culvert and drainage pipe num exfiltration and infiltration testing num joint systems and couplers num low pressure air test num other tests num performance specifications num plastic pipe num rubber gasketed num watertightness num metal liner plate num perforated aluminum underdrains num perforated plastic .
underdrains num perforated steel underdrains num plastic culvert num plastic horizontal drains num reinforced concrete num reinforced concrete circular num reinforced concrete class num reinforced concrete direct design method num reinforced concrete joints cement mortar num resilient material num rubber gasketed num reinforced concrete marking num reinforced concrete oval shaped num reinforced concrete siphons num slotted corrugated steel num slotted plastic edge drains num spiral rib num structural metal plate num temporary culverts num pipe handrailing num pipe irrigation systems num placs num plans num project plans num revised standard plans num standard plans num plant establishment period num plant establishment work num plant group designations num plant stakes num plant ties num plant pumping num plant pumping electrical equipment num planting num materials num watering num planting work planting plants num preparing planting areas num plantmixed cement treated bases num plants maintenance of num pruning num index num replacement of num staking of num watering num num plaster sand num plastic pipe culvert num underdrain couplings num plastic lumber composite num reinforced recycled num structures num unreinforced recycled num plastic traffic drums num plugs edge drains num polyester concrete expansion dams num polyester concrete overlay bridge num portable changeable message signs num delineators num signs num portal illumination falsework num portland cement num portland cement concrete pavement num portland cement concrete pcc pavement num potential claims num full and final potential claim record num initial potential claim record num supplemental potential claim record num precast concrete num precast concrete members num precast concrete pipe miscellaneous drainage facilities num preconstruction conference num preconstruction scheduling conference num predrilled holes num premolded expansion joint filler num prepare concrete deck surface num preparing planting areas num prepaving grinding num prepaving inertial profiler num prequalification concrete num rapid strength concrete num selfconsolidating concrete num preservative treatment of lumber timber and piling num pressure regulating valves irrigation systems num pressure relief valves irrigation systems num pressure rinsing num pressure tests irrigation systems num pressure washing num prestressing concrete num anchorages and distribution num ducts num equipment and calibration num grout num prestressing steel num shop drawings num test samples num vents num price adjustment index num changed quantities num for changed quantities num quantity decreases of more than num percent num quantity increases of more than num percent num price index fluctuations num production startup num proportioning automatic num concrete num minor concrete num volumetric num protecting cementitious materials num concrete num num protecting concrete structures num protection stray current num protest num num num num pruning num ptfe spherical bearings num public convenience num public safety num num num public works contractor registration number num pull boxes irrigation systems num pulverized roadbed num pumping booster pumps num equipment and controls num equipment drainage num plant electrical equipment num pumping equipment and controls num pumping plant electrical equipment num pumping plant metal work num pumps booster num drainage num use of before contract acceptance num q qc inspector welding num qc manager welding num qc plans welding num qc procedure certification num quality characteristic num quality control num num welding num quality control plan num quick coupling valves irrigation systems num r railings num cable railing num california bridge rail num chain link railing num midwest guardrail system num index num pipe handrailing num tubular handrailing num type dtb transition railing num type k temporary num type stb transition railing num type wbnum transition railing num railroad relations num railroads property num rapid setting concrete patch bridge num rapid strength concrete num num num num reclaimed asphalt pavement num num num reclaimed pavement num crack and seat num full depth reclamationcement num full depth reclamationfoamed asphalt num pulverized roadbed num reconstruct num reconstruct metal bridge railing num records auditing num change order bills num copying num cost accounting num inspection num retention num recycled water identification irrigation systems num redwood num reference to a code num to a department num to a document num to a law num refinish bridge deck num regulated species num rehabilitate structures num reinforced concrete extensions num reinforced concrete pipe num reinforcement num epoxycoated num num epoxycoated and epoxycoated prefabricated num galvanized num headed bar num prefabricated epoxycoated num num splicing num stray current protection num welded wire num num relocate num remote control valves irrigation systems num removal of yellow traffic stripe and pavement marking with hazardous waste residue num remove num remove asphalt concrete surfacing bridge num concrete deck surface num drainage facilities num guardrail num irrigation facilities num remove asphalt concrete dike num index num remove base and surfacing num remove chip seal bridge num remove unsound concrete bridge num replace asphalt concrete surfacing num request for information num num required contract provisions federalaid construction contracts num reset num resilient joint material reinforced concrete pipe num resources furnishing of num retaining wall type num num retroreflective bands portable delineators num cone sleeves num sheeting num revised standard specifications num rfi num num risers underdrains num roadbed num roadmixed cement treated bases num roadmixing machines cement treated bases num roads obliterating num roadside num roadside clearing num roadside signs num constructing roadside signs num existing roadside signs and markers num type n ca type p ca and type r ca marker panels num roadway num rock blanket num rock slope protection num rock slope protection fabric num root barrier num root protectors num root stimulant num rotational capacity testing steel structures num num rubber gasketed joints reinforced concrete pipe num rubberized hot mix asphaltgap graded num rumble strips num s salvage num salvage guardrail num salvaging facilities num sand blast cleaning num schedule num num baseline num num num num critical path method num num num revised num num num num updated num num num num num num schedule of values num scheduled completion date num seal coat claims num seal coats num index num asphalt rubber binder num asphaltic emulsions num num asphaltic emulsions nonpolymer num asphaltic emulsions polymer num flush coats num fog seal coat num num stress absorbing membrane interlayer num sealed joints num asphaltic plug joint seals num joint seal assemblies mr num inches num joint seal assemblies mr num inches num type a and al joint seals num type b joint seals num seals bituminous num slurry num sediment filter bag num selfconsolidating concrete num mockup num settlement periods earthwork num shear connectors num shop drawings num num steel structures num shotcrete num structural num shoulder num shoulder backing num shown interpretation num side form pcc pavement num sign panels and markers num existing roadside signs and markers num fabricating and installing markers num furnishing sign panels num sign overlays num sign structures fabrication num welding num signs bridge painting and cleaning operations num construction area num flashing arrow num portable num portable changeable message num stationary mounted construction area num signs removal of warning regulatory or guide num silt fence fabric num siphons corrugated steel pipe num reinforced concrete pipe num site furnishings landscape num slab replacement num sliding joints num slip form curb construction num slip form pcc pavement num slope paving num exposed aggregate finish num slope protection num concrete slope protection gutter lining ditch lining and channel lining num concretedrock num index num gabions num rock num slope paving num smallrock num slopes earthwork num slotted corrugated steel pipe num slotted pipe edge drains num horizontal drains num slurry mineral slurry num synthetic slurry num slurry cement backfill num num slurry leveling course num slurry seal num small business num participation report num small tool num smallrock slope protection num smoothness num snowplow deflectors num sod num soil amendment num soil nail walls earthwork num soil nails num load testing num num submittals num num soldier pile walls num num num num solid waste disposal and recycling num sound walls num alternative sound wall systems num masonry block num source inspection expense deductions num southern yellow pine num spall repair num special provisions num specifications num specified interpretation num spiral rib pipe num splicing reinforcing steel num sprinkler assemblies irrigation systems num stabilized soil num stabilized soils lime num staining concrete num rock num sculpted shotcrete num shotcrete num textured concrete num staking plants num standard specifications num standards and poles fabrication num welding num start of job site activities num state num state parks num state reclamation board num index num state specification num stationary mounted signs construction area num steam cleaning num steel lists reinforcement num prestressing num steel grit blast cleaning num steel pipe piles num class n num class r num steel sheet piles num steel shot blast cleaning num steel soldier piles num painting num storm water pollution prevention plan numeric action level num sampling and analysis day num stormwater pollution prevention plan num construction site monitoring program num rain event action plan num sampling and analysis reports num stormwater annual report num stray current protection num stress absorbing membrane interlayer num stringers wood structures num strip waterstops num structural aluminum plate pipe num structural metal plate pipe arches and pipe arches num structural metal wood structures num structural shotcrete num structural steel num erection num painting num thermal spray coating num structural steel plate pipe num structural timber and lumber wood structures num structure approach drainage systems num structure backfill num num num structure design num structure excavation and backfill num structures plastic lumber num wood num stud connectors num num subbase num subbases aggregate num subcontracting num subgrade num aggregate bases num aggregate subbases num cement treated bases num treated permeable bases num subgrade enhancement geotextile num submittals num num action num informational num num subsealing index num pavement num substantial defects num num substructure num subsurface drains num superstructure num supplemental information num supplemental project information num supplementary cementitious materials concrete num corrosive environment num deicing chemicals exposed to num freezethaw area num minor concrete num precast concrete num supply line on structures num surcharge earthwork num surface mining and reclamation act num surfacing num survey monuments num t tack coat num num num tapered inlets overside drains aluminum num steel num telephone numbers num telescoping flag trees num temporary active treatment systems num temporary concrete washouts num temporary cover num temporary culverts num temporary facilities construction mats num general num job site water control num miscellaneous num pedestrian num temporary irrigation systems num temporary linear sediment barriers num temporary sediment control num temporary soil stabilization num temporary steel casings num temporary structures num temporary tracking control num street sweeping num temporary construction roadways and entrances num temporary traffic control num temporary traffic control devices num termination contract num contractors control num test borings num num test panels num test samples num check testing num testing job site num thrie beam barrier num timber index num catwalk num lagging num painting num time impact analysis num num num num num num timerelated overhead num timescaled network diagram num topsoil erosion control num total bid num total float num trade name num traffic num cones num traffic lane num traffic stripes and pavement markings num glass beads num painted traffic stripes and pavement markings num thermoplastic traffic stripes or pavement markings with enhanced wetnight visibility num twocomponent painted traffic stripes and pavement markings num transition railings type dtb num type stb num type wbnum num traveled way num treated permeable bases num asphalt num cement num grade tolerance num subgrade num treated timber wood structures num treated wood waste num treatment of lumber timber and piling preservative num tubular handrailing num tunnel num num type a and al joints seals num type b joint seals num type dtb transition railing num type k temporary railing num type stb transition railing num type wbnum transition railing num u unauthorized work num underdrains num outlets num perforated aluminum pipe num perforated plastic pipe num perforated steel pipe num risers num unions irrigation systems num units num num unsuitable material num use of pumps before contract acceptance num utilities num utility facilities num num v value analysis num index num value engineering change proposal num valve boxes irrigation systems num valves irrigation systems num vehicle code num verification tension testing steel structures num volume conversion table asphalt binder num asphaltic emulsions num volumetric proportioning num w wages num wall drain num wall drains num warm mix asphalt technology num num num num num num water control and foundation treatment earthwork num water meter charges num water pollution control num water pollution control manager num water pollution control program num water quality monitoring report num water erosion control num watering planting num watering plants num waterproofing num asphalt membrane num deck seal num membrane and protective cover num preformed membrane num waterstops num watertightness culvert joints num weather conditions painting num websites num weed germination num weep holes num welded steel pipe miscellaneous drainage facilities num welded wire reinforcement num num welding num quality control num sign structures num standards and poles num steel structures num structural steel num wetland protection num wheel guards and railings wood structures num wildlife passage way num num willow cuttings num withhold num withholds num wood mulch num wood structures num work num alternatives num assignment num completion num control of num index num description num maintenance num means and methods num noncompliant num rejection num scope num unauthorized num work plan num colored concrete num deck placement num painting quality num thermal spray coating quality num work zone num worker character num working hours num writing from the contractor num from the department num wye strainer assemblies irrigation systems num wye strainers num
