standard specifications construction of transportation systems approved by the state transportation board april num num johnny floyd chairman keith golden p.e .
commissioner russell mcmurry p.e .
chief engineer num edition iii preface the text included in specification sections num num and num through num is written in the imperative mood sentences often begin with commands .
all commands and references in or in connection with these specifications including all text related documents electronic media graphics or photographs are written to imply contractor responsibility for actionunless otherwise specified .
text placed in text boxes within a specification does not imply any greater significance than any other text in the specification .
the specifications contain dual units of measurementthe united states standard measure english units and the international system of units si or metric units .
the english units are expressed first with the si metric units following in parentheses .
the measurements expressed in the two systems of units are not necessarily equal .
in most cases the measurement in si units is a hard conversion of the english measurement .
that is the si metric unit is a rounded rationalized si measurement that is easy to work with and remember .
the proposal will designate whether the project was designed and is to be constructed in either english units english project or si units metric project .
the dimensions measurements and requirements stated in the system of units designated in the proposal are the applicable specification requirements for the contract .
all contractor submittals shall be prepared in the designated system of units .
pay item quantities will be measured in the designated system of units .
georgia department of transportation one georgia center num west peachtree nw atlanta georgia num num num main office num num fax gdot website www.dot.ga.gov iv table of contents general provisions section numdefinitions and terms num section numbidding requirements and conditions num section numaward and execution of contract num section numscope of work num section numcontrol of work num section numcontrol of materials num section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public num section numprosecution and progress num section nummeasurement and payment num section numpilot vehicles num section numconstruction layout num section numtraffic control num auxiliary items section nummobilization num section numfield laboratory building num section numfield engineers office num section numconstruction vibration monitoring num section numinsect control num section numsurvey aids num section numtraining program num construction erosion control section numreclamation of material pits and waste areas num section numcontrol of soil erosion and sedimentation num section numerosion control check dams num section nummiscellaneous erosion control items num section nummaintenance of temporary erosion and sedimentation control devices num section numrestoration or alteration of lakes and ponds num section numwater quality monitoring num section numcomprehensive monitoring program num section numsilt retention barrier num section numsilt fence num earthwork section numsoil test boring num section numclearing and grubbing right of way num section numrandom clearing and grubbing num section numfoundation exploration num section numchannel excavation num section numroadway excavation num section numborrow excavation num section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures num v section numembankments num section numsubgrade construction num section numgrading complete num section numbridge excavation and backfill num section numgranular embankment num section numsand backfill num section nummitigation site construction num section numremoval of solid waste num section numunpaved shoulders num section numremoval of underground storage tanks num section numblanket for fill slopes num section numcrushed aggregate subbase num section numspecial subgrade compaction and test rolling num bases and subbases section numaggregate drainage courses num section numsoillime construction num section numgrading modified num section numlump sum construction num section nummiscellaneous construction unpaved roads and streets num section numrailroad construction num section numhaul roads num section numgeneral specifications for base and subbase courses num section numsoilcement construction num section numsandbituminous stabilized base course num section numtopsoil sandclay or chert construction num section numsoil aggregate construction num section numcement stabilized soil aggregate construction num section numreclaimed liquid stabilized base num section numimpermeable membrane for subgrades basins ditches and canals num section numgraded aggregate construction num section numcrushed stone base num section numcrushed rap base num section numcement stabilized graded aggregate construction num section numreconstructed base course num section numselected material surface course num section numlimefly ash soil construction num section numstabilized base material for patching num section numportland cement concrete subbase num section nummining crushing and stockpiling aggregates num section numfoamed asphalt stabilized base course num section numreclaiming crushing and stockpiling of concrete and asphalt pavements num vi pavements section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num section numcold mix for patching num section numhot mix recycled asphaltic concrete num section numhot inplace recycled asphaltic concrete num section numpaverlaid surface treatment num section numhot asphaltvulcanized rubber seal treatment num section numcoal tar emulsion seal coat num section numasphaltrubber joint and crack seal num section numjoint and crack cleaning and seal num section numlatex modified asphalt concrete num section numwarm mix recycled asphaltic concrete num section numasphaltic concrete pavement partial removal num section numbituminous prime num section numbituminous tack coat num section numhot asphaltrubber seal treatment for stress relieving interlayer num section numasphalt concrete open graded interlayer num section numintelligent compaction for asphalt concrete num section numpaver mounted temperature equipment num section numbituminous surface treatment num section numsprinkle overlay treatment num section numemulsified asphalt slurry seal num section nummicro surfacing num section numrumble strips num section numportland cement concrete pavement num section numgrind concrete pavement num section nummill asphaltic concrete pavement num section numreinforced concrete approach slabs num section numasphalt paved ditches num section numrapid setting cement concrete end dams and patches num section numasphaltic concrete curb num section numgranite curb num section numprecast concrete header curb num section numportland cement concrete pavement special num section numplain portland cement concrete shoulders num section nummiscellaneous concrete num section numroller compacted concrete pavement num section numelastomeric profile bridge joint seals num section numsawed joints in existing pavements num section numwaterproofing pavement joints and cracks num section numplacement of pavement reinforcement fabric num section nummodular expansion joints num section numportland cement concrete end dams and patches num section numbridge deck joint seals num section numpressure grouting portland cement concrete pavement num vii section numpatching portland cement concrete pavement spall repair num section numfull depth slab replacement num section numportland cement concrete whitetopping num section numfilter fabric for embankment stabilization num section numindentation rumble strips num section numgeogrid reinforcement num section numsealing roadway and bridge joints and cracks num bridges section numconcrete structures num section numsteel structures num section numtimber structures num section numfour hour accelerated strength concrete num section numtwentyfour hour accelerated strength concrete num section numcorrugated steel bridge plank num section numexpanded mortar num section numprestressed concrete bridge members num section numasphalt plank bridge floor num section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num section numprotective platforms num section numreinforcement steel num section numshear connectors num section numprecast reinforced concrete box culverts barrel sections and end sections num section numepoxy coated steel reinforcement num section numhandrailferrous metal and pipe num section numaluminum handrail num section numprotective concrete collar for existing columns num section numraise existing bridge num section numpiling num section numpatching concrete bridge num section numshoring num section numdynamic testing of pile num section numdrilled caisson foundations num section numcofferdams num section numsteel girder flooring num section numbridge rehabilitation num section numepoxy pressure injection of concrete cracks num section numnavigation lighting num section numwaterproofing fabrics num section numdampproofing num section numbridge deck waterproofing membrane num section numpedestrian overpass bridge num section numpainting structures num section numcattle pass num section numposttensioned prestressed concrete construction num section numinspection traveler num viii section numremoval of existing bridge num section numdetour bridges num section numcontractor proposed alternate to reinforced concrete deck girder num section numbridge complete num minor drainage structures section numdeck drain system num section numpile encasement num section numstorm drain pipe pipearch culverts and side drain pipe num section numpile protection in earth walls num section numtunnel liner num section numstructural plate pipe pipearch and arch culverts num section numrenovating existing pipe num section numminor drainage structures for detours num section numunderdrains num section numedgedrains num section numslope drain pipe num section nummetal drain inlets num incidental items section numpot bearings num section numrock dowels num section numfiber reinforced polymer fpr composite material num section numcontrolled low strength flowable fill num section numcriblock retaining wall num section numrip rap num section numrubble masonry num section numbrick masonry num section numremoval of portland cement concrete roadway slabs num section numremoval of miscellaneous roadway items num section numrelaying reconstructing or adjusting to grade of misc .
roadway structures num section numconstruct maintain and remove median crossover num section numdocks num section numjacking or boring pipe num section numpermanent anchored walls num section numpermanent anchored tiedown wall num section numpermanent anchored slurry diaphragm wall num section numtemporary barrier num section numconcrete barrier num section numpneumatically applied concrete num section numsound barriers num section numvisual barrier num section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls num section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining wallcontractor design num section numpermanent soil nailed wall num section nummodular block retaining wall system num ix section numpermanent changeable message signs num section numportable changeable message signs num section nummodification of existing signs num section nummonuments and road markers num section numbarricades num section numhighway signs num section numilluminated sign system num section numstructural supports for overhead signs num section numstrain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies num section numretroreflectorized railroad cross buck sign num section numguardrail num section numcable barrier num section numfence num section numrepair of galvanized coatings num section numtraffic signal installation num section numtraffic impact attenuator num section numconcrete glare screen num section numraised traffic bars num section numpainting traffic stripe num section numthermoplastic traffic stripe num section numraised pavement markers num section numpavement arrow with raised reflectors num section numremoval of pavement markings num section num preformed plastic pavement markings num section numpolyurea traffic stripe num section numhot applied preformed plastic pavement markings num section numsanitary sewers num section numelectric distribution systems num section numgas distribution system num section numvertical drainage wicks num section numhorizontal drain num section nummiscellaneous drainage structures num section numwater distribution system num section numappurtenances for water systems num section numhighway lighting num section numlighting standards and luminaires num section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num section numhigh level lighting systems num section numblast cleaning portland cement concrete structures num section numradio tower antenna num section numtraffic signal timing num section nummotorist aid call box num section numstatic scale system num section numweighin motion scale system num section numautomatic vehicle identification system tws num section numtruck weigh station operations system num x section numweather monitoring and reporting system num section numelevator systems num section numgrassing num section numwildflower seeding num section numvine shrub and tree planting num section numtree wells tree walls and root protection num section numtransplanting trees num section numturf establishment num section numplant topsoil num section numturf reinforcement matting num section numfiberglass blanket num section numorganic and synthetic material fiber blanket num section numjute mesh erosion control num section numerosion control mats slopes num section numwood fiber num section numsilt filter bag num section numtriangular silt barrier num section numfabric formed concrete rip rap num section numweed control num building installations section numrest room building num section numwater supply system num section numpneumatic ejector lift station num section numwaste water treatment plant num section numoutdoor furniture num section numelectrical work num section numdrilled wells num section numwell pumps num section numtravel trailer sanitary disposal station num section numwater storage tanks num section numwelcome station building num section numinformation center building num section numtruck weighing station building num section numbus pavilion num section numflag pole num section numirrigation system num section numsprinkler system num section numtruck weigh station traffic control signs num section numtruck weigh station height checking device num section numtruck weigh station length estimating device num section nummobile operations office num section numcheck point shelter num section numtruck weigh station communications system num section numsolar application num section numwater intake stucture num xi section numdisplay and interior furnishings num section numvehicle maintenance building num section numsewage pumping station num section numbuildings num section numbuilding equipment num materials section numcoarse aggregate num section numfine aggregate num section numaggregates for asphaltic concrete num section numstabilizer aggregate num section numabrasives for blast cleaning num section numrip rap and curbing stone num section numaggregate for drainage num section numgeogrid materials num section numroadway materials num section numrock embankment num section numbackfill materials num section numpond sand num section numsoil base materials num section numgraded aggregate num section numsoil aggregate bases num section numshoulder material num section numcrushed aggregate subbase num section numfiber stabilizing additives num section numasphalt cement num section numcutback asphalt num section numemulsified asphalt num section numcutback asphalt emulsion num section numcationic asphalt emulsion num section numasphalt plank num section numdampproofing or waterproofing material num section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures num section numportland cement num section numadmixtures num section numcuring agents num section numjoint fillers and sealers num section nummasonry materials num section numaluminum powder num section numspecial surface coating for concrete num section numpolymer concrete num section numgraffiti proof coating for concrete num section numcorrugated polyethylene underdrain pipe num section numcorrugated aluminum alloy pipe num section numiron pipe num section numclay pipe num xii section numconcrete pipe num section numsteel pipe num section numsmooth lined corrugated polyethylene pe culvert pipe num section numpolyvinyl chloride pvc drain pipe num section nummiscellaneous pipe num section numpipe appurtenances num section numaluminum alloy metals num section numstructural steel num section nummiscellaneous steel materials num section numreinforcement and tensioning steel num section numcastings and forgings num section numsteel pile num section numbronze bushings bearings and expansion plates num section nummiscellaneous metals num section numguard rail num section numlumber and timber num section numpiling and round timber num section numwood posts and bracing num section numpreservative treatment of timber products num section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num section numprecast concrete catch basin drop inlet and manhole units num section numepoxy coated reinforcement strips num section numbituminous adhesive for raised pavement markers num section numpaint num section numwater num section numfabrics num section numlime num section nummineral filler num section numchlorides num section num elastomeric bearing pads num section numepoxy resin adhesives num section num bearing plates with polytetrafluoroethylene surfaces num section numwaterproofing membrane materials num section numseed and sod num section numfertilizers num section nummiscellaneous planting materials num section numfencing num section numpolyacrylamide pam num section nummiscellaneous num section numsign fabrication num section numsign posts num section numsign blanks and panels num section numreflectorizing materials num section numsign paint num section nummast arm assemblies num section numdelineators num xiii section numreflectors and nonreflective characters num section numwild animal warning reflector system num section numraised pavement markers num section numlighting standards and towers num section numluminaires num section numelectrical wire and cable num section numelectrical conduit num section num miscellaneous electrical materials num section numtraffic signal equipment num section numwireless communications equipment num section numrapid setting patching materials for portland cement concrete num section numfiber optic system num section numclosed circuit television cctv num section numdetection systems num section numcommunication and electronic equipment num section numnavigator advanced transportation management system integration num section nummacrosynthetic fibers for concrete reinforcement num section numtelecommunication facilities num section numcable systems num section numnoninvasive magnetoinductivevehical sensor num section numhighway advisory radio system num section numprecast reinforced concrete three sided culvert num section nummowing num num section numdefinitions and terms whenever in these specifications or in other contract documents the following terms or pronouns in place of them are used the intent and meaning shall be interpreted as follows num abbreviations wherever the following abbreviations are used in the specifications or on the plans they are to be construed the same as the respective expressions represented .
abbreviation term aan american association of nurserymen aar association of american railroads aashto american association of state highway and transportation officials aci american concrete institute agc associated general contractors of america aia american institute of architects aiee american institute of electrical engineers aisc american institute of steel construction aisi american iron and steel institute ams aerospace materials specification ansi american national standards institute ara american railway association arema american railway engineering and maintenance of way association asce american society of civil engineers asla american society of landscape architects astm american society of testing and materials awpa american wood preservers association awwa american water works association aws american welding society crsi concrete reinforcing steel institute dot georgia department of transportation eeo equal employment opportunity fhwa federal highway administration fss federal specifications and standards general services administration gdt georgia department of transportation ies illuminating engineering society mutcd manual on uniform traffic control devices nec national electrical code nema national electrical manufacturers association nesc national electrical safety code section numdefinitions and terms num abbreviation term nfpa national fire protection association sae society of automotive engineers spib southern pine inspection bureau sspc steel structure painting council ul underwriters laboratories inc. num acceptance plans a defined method of taking and evaluating measurements for the purpose of determining the acceptability of a lot of material or construction .
num advertisement the public announcement as required by law inviting bids for work to be performed or materials to be furnished .
num available day any calendar day exclusive of saturdays sundays and legal holidays on which the engineer determines that the contractor is not prevented from accomplishing at least five hours of productive work on the controlling item or items of work which would normally be in progress at that time by causes beyond his control and not due to his fault or negligence including but not restricted to unsuitable weather and its aftermath suspension order of the engineer acts of god acts of public enemy fire flood epidemic quarantine strikes or freight embargo .
num award the formal acceptance by the department of a bid .
num base course one or more layers of specified material of designed thickness placed on a subgrade or a subbase to support a surface course .
num bid see proposal .
num bid item a specifically described unit of work for which a price is requested in the proposal .
num bidder a qualified individual firm or corporation or combination thereof submitting a written proposal for the work advertised .
num board the state transportation board .
num bridge a structure including supports erected over a depression or an obstruction such as water a highway or a railway etc .
and having a track or passageway for carrying traffic water or other moving loads and having an opening measured along the center of the roadway of more than num ft num m between undercopings of abutments or extreme ends of openings for multiple boxes .
section numdefinitions and terms num a. bridge length the overall length of a structure measured along the center of the roadway between backs of abutment backwalls or between ends of bridge floor .
b. bridge roadway width the clear width of a structure measured at right angles to the center of the roadway between the bottom of curbs or if curbs are not used between the inner faces of parapet or railing .
c. bridge complete an entire bridge including its substructure and superstructure .
d. completed bridge site unless otherwise shown on the plans or indicated in the proposal a completed bridge site is one in which all grading is completed to subgrade elevation except for the stage construction providing a bench for the end bent .
the minimum acceptable length of completed fulldepth embankment shall equal the maximum width of fill between slope stakes at the particular end of bridge .
this minimum length of fulldepth embankment will be measured along the roadway centerline away from the endofbridge station .
in cut sections a completed bridge site shall be considered to be complete when the excavation is down to the subgrade elevation and extends num ft num m beyond the outer limits of the bridge in each direction .
in all cases positive surface drainage shall be in place and functioning and all temporary erosion control measures shall be installed functioning and maintained .
num calendar day every day shown on the calendar beginning at num midnight .
num chief engineer the engineering executive appointed by the state transportation board or other authority as may be provided by law and acting for the department within the authority and scope of duties assigned .
num commissioner the commissioner of the department of transportation .
num completion date the calendar date by which the contract shall be completed when such date is shown in the proposal in lieu of the stipulation of a number of available days or calendar days .
num contract the written agreement between the department and the contractor setting forth the obligations of the parties thereunder including but not limited to the performance of the work the furnishing of labor and materials and the basis of payment .
the contract includes the advertisement proposal contract form and contract bond specifications supplemental specifications special provisions general and detailed plans notice to proceed and also any supplemental agreements that are required to complete the construction of the work in an acceptable manner including authorized extensions thereof all of which constitute one instrument .
no oral agreement or orders are to be considered as valid or as a part of the contract .
num contract bond performance and payment bond the approved form of security executed by the contractor and his surety or sureties which guarantees complete execution of the contract and all supplemental agreements pertaining thereto and the payment of all legal debts pertaining to the construction of the project .
section numdefinitions and terms num num contract item pay item a specifically described unit of work for which a price is provided in the contract .
num contract time the number of available days or calendar days allowed for the completion of the contract including authorized time extensions .
if a completion date is shown in the proposal the contract time then shall be the period between the issuance of the notice to proceed and the calendar date shown in the proposal as the completion date .
num contractor the individual firm corporation or combination thereof or governmental organization contracting with the department for performance of prescribed work .
num culvert any structure under the roadway with a clear opening of num ft numm or less measured along the center of the roadway .
num department the department of transportation state of georgia .
num easement a right other than the acquisition of title acquired to use or control property for a designated purpose .
num engineer the chief engineer of georgia acting directly or through a duly authorized representative .
num equipment all machinery apparatus and tools necessary for the proper construction and acceptable completion of the work plus the necessary repair parts tools and supplies for upkeep and maintenance .
num extension agreement a written agreement entered into by and between the department and the contractor extending the work beyond its original boundaries and prescribing additional work to be done including the basis of payment and time allowed for completion .
num extra work an item of work not provided for in the contract as awarded but found essential to the satisfactory completion of the contract within its intended scope .
num force account a method of payment for extra work when a supplemental agreement is not arrived at between the engineer and the contractor .
num general terms whenever the following words or similar terms appear herein they shall be understood to imply by or to the engineer unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning section numdefinitions and terms num acceptable approved authorized called for considered necessary contemplated deemed designated directed established given indicated ordered permission permitted required satisfactory specified sufficient suitable suspended unacceptable unsatisfactory unsuitable .
num highwayroadstreet each of these words is a general term denoting a public way for the purpose of vehicular travel including the entire area within the rights of way .
num holidays in the state of georgia holidays occur on date holiday january num new years day numrd monday in january kings birthday january num lees birthday numrd monday in february washingtons birthday april num confederate memorial day last monday in may national memorial day july num independence day numst monday in september labor day numnd monday in october columbus day november num veterans day numth thursday in november thanksgiving day december num christmas day if any of these holidays fall on sunday the following monday is considered to be the holiday if any of the holidays fall on saturday the preceding friday is considered to be the holiday .
num inspector the engineers authorized representative assigned to make a detailed inspection of contract performance of any or all portions of the work or materials thereof .
num invitation for bids see num advertisement .
num laboratory the testing laboratories of the department or any other testing laboratory that may be designated by the engineer .
num liquidated damages the fixed charges assessed against the successful bidder or the contractor for failure to execute the contract or to complete the contract within the contract time .
num materials any substances specified for use in the construction of the work .
section numdefinitions and terms num num materials allowance payment for materials on hand as defined in subsection num not to be confused with partial payments for work completed .
num median the portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways for traffic moving in opposite directions .
num minor structures any structure not defined as a bridge .
num notice to contractors a written notice soliciting proposals mailed to contractors suppliers and others in the construction industry which will indicate with reasonable accuracy the quantity and location of the work to be done or the character and quantity of the material to be furnished and the time and place of the opening of proposals .
num notice to proceed written notice to the contractor to proceed with the contract work .
num pavement structure the combination of subbase base course and surface course placed on a subgrade to support the traffic load and distribute it to the roadbed .
num pay item see num contract item pay item .
num performance and payment bond see num contract bond performance and payment bond .
num plans the approved plans profiles typical cross sections working drawings and supplemental drawings or exact reproductions thereof which show the location character dimensions and details of the work .
num prequalification the procedure established and administered by the department by virtue of which prospective bidders are required to establish their responsibility and competence in advance of submission of proposals .
num project the specific section or sections of the transportation system together with all appurtenances and construction to be performed thereon under the contract .
num proposal the offer of a bidder on the prescribed form to perform the work and to furnish the labor and materials at the prices quoted .
num proposal guaranty acceptable surety furnished by a bidder as a guaranty that he will enter into a contract and will furnish contract performance and payment bonds if a contract is awarded to him .
section numdefinitions and terms num num rightofway a general term denoting land property or interest therein usually but not required to be in a strip acquired for or devoted to a highway and its appurtenant structures .
num roadbed the graded portion of a highway within top and side slopes prepared as a foundation for the pavement structure and shoulder .
num roadside development those items necessary to the complete highway which provide for the preservation of landscape materials and features the rehabilitation and protection against erosion of all areas disturbed by construction through seeding sodding mulching and the placing of other ground covers such suitable planting and other improvements as may increase the effectiveness and enhance the appearance of the highway .
num roadway the portion of a highway within the limits of construction .
num salvaged material material having value that is to be removed preserved or stockpiled as directed for later use by the department .
specific reference is made to subsection num.a .
num shall or will should may as used in these specifications the following definitions apply shall or willa mandatory condition .
when certain requirements are described with the shall or will stipulation it is mandatory that the requirements be met .
shouldan advisory condition .
considered to be recommended but not mandatory .
maya permissive condition .
no requirement is intended .
num shoulder the portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodations of stopped vehicles for emergency use and for lateral support of base and surface courses .
num sidewalk that portion of the roadway primarily constructed for the use of pedestrians .
num skew or skew angle the acute angle between the centerline of the roadway and a line parallel to a pier bent or abutment of a bridge or parallel to the centerline of a culvert .
num special provisions additions or revisions to the standard or supplemental specifications applicable to an individual project .
num specifications a general term applied to all directions provisions and requirements pertaining to performance of the work .
num standard specifications a publication titled section numdefinitions and terms num department of transportation state of georgia standard specifications construction of transportation systems .
transportation systems are defined as all modes of transportation including but not limited to highways airports rail and ports .
num state highway engineer see num chief engineer .
num state the state of georgia .
num station when used as a term of measurement will be num linear ft num km measured horizontally .
num structures bridges culverts catch basins drop inlets retaining walls cribbing manholes endwalls buildings sewers service pipes underdrains foundation drains and other features that may be encountered in the work and not otherwise classified herein .
num subbase the layer or layers of specified or selected material of designed thickness placed on a subgrade to support a base course .
num subcontractor any individual firm corporation or combination thereof to which the contractor with the written consent of the department sublets any part of the contract .
num subgrade the top surface of a roadbed upon which the pavement structure and shoulders are constructed generally the top num in num mm within cuts and fills .
num subgrade treatment modification of subgrade material by stabilization .
num stabilization modification of soils or aggregates by incorporating materials which will increase load bearing capacity firmness and resistance to weathering or displacement .
num substructure all of that part of the bridge structure below the bearings of simple and continuous spans skewbacks of arches and top of footings of rigid frames including backwalls wingwalls and wing protection railings .
num superintendent the contractors authorized representative directly and solely responsible for the supervision and direction of the work .
num superstructure the entire bridge structure except the substructure .
section numdefinitions and terms num num supplemental agreement a written agreement entered into by and between the department and the contractor covering modifications or alterations to the original contract and establishing any necessary new contract items any other basis of payment and any time adjustments for the work affected by the changes .
this agreement becomes a part of the contract when properly executed and approved .
num supplemental specifications approved additions to or revisions of the standard specifications .
num surety the corporation partnership or individual other than the contractor executing a bond furnished by the contractor .
num the work the work shall mean the furnishing of all labor materials equipment superintendence and other incidentals necessary or convenient to the successful completion of the project and the carrying out of all the duties and obligations imposed by the contract .
num titles or headings the titles or headings of the sections and subsections in these specifications are intended for convenience of reference and shall not be considered as having any bearing on the interpretation of the specifications .
num traveled way the portion of the roadway for the movement of vehicles exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes .
num treasurer the treasurer of the department of transportation .
num working drawings any supplementary drawings or similar data which the contractor is required to submit to the engineer for approval including but not limited to stress sheets shop drawings erection plans falsework plans framework plans cofferdam plans and bending diagrams for steel .
num related references listing of specifications and documents contained in the section are intended for convenience of reference and shall not be considered as having any bearing on the interpretation of the specifications .
num section numbidding requirements and conditions num prequalification of bidders before submitting a bid in excess of num the bidder shall have been prequalified with the department and received a certificate of qualification in accordance with the rules and regulations approved and adopted by the state transportation board .
bidders submitting bids of num or less shall have been registered with the department .
in addition the aggregate total amount a nonprequalified bidder may have under contract shall not exceed num .
bidders intending to consistently submit proposals shall prequalify at least once every two years .
however qualifications may be changed during that period upon the submission of additional favorable reports or upon unsatisfactory performance .
in addition the department reserves the right at any time to require the contractor to furnish a current financial and experience statement .
num competency of bidders the department may limit the amount of work awarded to any contractor based on the information furnished the department in the prequalification process .
the department may also limit the aggregate amount of work awarded to any nonprequalified contractor .
the department may refuse any contractor proposals to bid on additional work if the contractor is behind schedule on work he has with the department as determined from the progress schedule called for in the specifications .
this refusal will apply to all applications for proposals made in the name of an individual firm partnership or corporation with which the delinquent contractor is affiliated .
num contents of proposal forms the department will make available to the prospective bidder a void for bidding proposal form which may be accessed on the office of construction bidding administration web page .
this form will state the location and description of the contemplated construction and will show the approximate estimate of the various quantities and kinds of work to be performed or materials to be furnished and will have a schedule of items for which unit bid prices are invited .
the proposal form will state the time in which the work must be completed the amount of the proposal guaranty and the date of the opening of proposals .
the form will also include any special provisions or requirements that vary from or are not contained in the specifications .
also included with each proposal form will be a noncollusion certificate construction contractors bid opportunity list and request for eligibility to bid .
all papers contained in the proposal form are considered a part thereof and must not be detached or altered .
the plans specifications and other documents designated in the proposal form will be considered a part of the proposal whether attached or not .
num interpretation of estimates the quantities of work to be performed and materials to be furnished to complete the construction of the work as shown on the plans and contained in the proposal are approximate and are to be used for comparing bids .
the department does not guarantee that the quantities indicated on the plans or given in the proposal will be the actual construction quantities .
the contractor shall not plead deception or misunderstanding because of variation from these quantities or minor variations from the locations or character of the work .
payment to the contractor will be made only for the actual quantities of work performed in accordance with the plans and specifications .
if when construction is completed the actual quantities are more or less than the quantities given in the proposal the unit prices bid in the proposal will still prevail except as otherwise provided in subsection num and subsection num .
num examinations of plans specifications special provisions and site of the work the bidder is expected to examine carefully the site of the proposed work the proposal plans specifications supplemental specifications special provisions and contract forms before submitting a proposal .
the submission of a proposal shall be considered prima facie evidence that the bidder has made such examination and is satisfied as to the conditions to be encountered in performing the work and as to the requirements of the plans specifications supplemental specifications special provisions and contract .
section numbidding requirements and conditions num it is the obligation of the bidders to make their own interpretation of all subsurface data that may be available as to the nature and extent of the materials to be excavated graded or driven through .
such information if available and furnished to the bidders by the department does not in any way guarantee the amount or nature of the material which may be encountered .
num preparation of proposal the bidder shall submit its proposal on the form furnished by the department gadot .
the blank spaces on the proposal shall be filled in correctly for each pay item except alternate items and the bidder shall write in ink the unit price or a lump sum price as called for in the proposal for each pay item listed therein .
in addition the bidder shall also show the products of the respective unit prices and quantities and the total amount of the bid by adding the amounts of all bid items .
in the event of a discrepancy in any of the figures the unit price will govern and the bid will be recalculated .
in the case of alternate items unit prices shall be entered for only one alternate .
the noncollusion certificate on the departments standard form included in the proposal shall be executed .
the certificate of current capacity shall be executed under oath and substantiated by the report of status of contracts on hand .
the construction contractors bid opportunity list standard form shall be completed with the required information .
the georgia security and immigration compliance act affidavit shall be completed with the required information .
the bidder shall notify the gadot office of construction bidding administration by transmitting the completed request for eligibility to bid form d. o. t. rfetb for each letting call order number in which the bidder intends to submit a bid by no later than num p.m. the day prior to the letting .
if the proposal is made by an individual its name and post office address shall be shown if by a partnership the name and post office address of one member of the partnership shall be shown if by a corporation the proposal shall show the name title and business address of the officer signing the proposal .
the bidders proposal shall be signed in ink or by digital signature by the individual by one or more members of a partnership or by one or more of the officers of a corporation whichever is applicable .
in the event of a joint venture the proposal shall be signed in ink or by digital signature by each individual involved by each partnership through one or more of its members or by each corporation through one or more officers of the corporation whichever is applicable .
proposals not properly signed may be disqualified and rejected .
all bids shall be submitted using the gadotaashto american association of state highway and transportation officials electronic bidding system expedite .
when submitting a bid electronically the bidders proposal shall consist of the bid pages generated by the expedite software including the cover page bid item pages disadvantaged business enterprise dbe pages if applicable miscellaneous data pages and the signature page .
by submitting a bid electronically the bidder acknowledges all requirements included in the proposal amendments plans standard specifications and supplemental specifications are a part of the bid and contract .
the electronic bid shall be submitted by one of the following methods a .
hand delivery of the electronic bid to the department at the place specified in the notice to contractors .
the bid shall include the num ½ inch num mm electronic diskette or cd rom or usb drive and the bid pages described above .
b .
electronic bid submission via the internet and bid express .
note the bidder shall secure an account and a valid digital signature from bid express www.bidx.com in order to use this method .
instructions for preparing and submitting bids by these two methods are as follows a .
hand delivery of bid to the department num .
access to the electronic bidding information is available on bid express at www.bidx.com and the gadot construction bidding administration internet web site at www.dot.ga.govdoingbusinesscontractorspagesdefault.aspx .
section numbidding requirements and conditions num num .
electronic bids shall be prepared through the use of a computer controlled printer .
num .
the bidder shall sign the electronic bid in the appropriate areas .
num .
when installing the bid program the bidder shall enter their vendor code in the following format numdonum .
before running the electronic bidding programs the bidder shall read the online help documentation for the expedite software .
num .
zero num is considered to be a valid bid .
the bidder shall not enter num in any unit price field unless zero is the intended bid for that item .
num .
all addenda shall be included in the electronic bid submitted .
num .
for joint bids the bidder shall select tools from the windows expedite menu and mark the electronic bid as joint bid .
num .
the bidder shall select tools and then check bid to check the bid and assure there are no errors prior to printing the electronic bid .
after final printing the bidder may make changes to the electronic bid by indicating the changes in ink and initialing prior to submitting the bid .
num .
once the bidder has completed the bid and made all desired changes the diskettecd romusb drive a printout of the cover sheet bid item pages dbe pages if applicable miscellaneous data pages and signature page shall be submitted to the department .
in case of a discrepancy between the diskette and the hard copy of the bid item pages the hard copy will govern .
num .
electronic bid pages shall be num ½ inch num mm horizontal by num inch num mm vertical .
bid information shall be placed across the horizontal width on each page .
num .
the paper used for an electronic bid shall be of sufficient quality and durability to maintain clear and concise images and to withstand frequent handling .
num .
if originally printed on continuous roll paper electronic bids shall be separated before submitting the bid to the department .
num .
all computer printed characters shall be legible .
the electronic bid pages shall be submitted in the bid envelope provided .
num .
the diskette shall be submitted in a separate sealed envelope from the bid pages .
the bidder shall submit all electronic bids on one diskettecd romusb drive .
the envelope containing the diskette shall include the bidders name and the letting call order numbers for which electronic bids are submitted .
b .
electronic bid submission via the internet and bid express num .
access to the electronic bidding information is available on bid express at www.bidx.com and the gadot construction bidding administration internet web site at www.dot.ga.govdoingbusinesscontractorspagesdefault.aspx .
num .
when installing the bid program the bidder shall enter their vendor code in the following format numdonum .
before running the electronic bidding programs the bidder shall read the online help documentation for the expedite software .
num .
zero num is considered to be a valid bid .
the bidder shall not enter num in any unit price field unless zero is the intended bid for that item .
num .
all addenda shall be included in the electronic bid submitted .
num .
joint bids are allowed with electronic bid submission via the internet and bid express num .
the bidder shall select tools and then check bid from the windows expedite menu to check the bid and assure there are no errors prior to submitting the electronic bid .
the electronic bid may be changed and resubmitted electronically to bid express as many times as desired prior to the advertised cutoff time specified in the notice to contractors .
the last bid submitted for a given letting call order number prior to the cutoff time will be the bid .
num .
the bidder shall make no claim against the department in the event it is unable to submit its bid to bid express andor bid express is unable to submit the bids to the department .
the department reserves the right to postpone the public posting of bids in the event of technical difficulties .
c. a fully executed proposal guaranty and power of attorney for each letting call order number bid shall be submitted by one of the following methods section numbidding requirements and conditions num num .
delivery to the gadot office of construction bidding administration room num in a sealed envelope by num noon on the day prior to the bid opening .
each proposal guaranty shall be clearly and legibly marked with the letting call order number .
num .
electronic submission via the internet and bid expresstm by the time and date set in the notice to contractors for submission of proposals .
the proposal guaranty for a joint bid shall include the names of all joint venture parties involved in the bid .
num rejection of proposals proposals may be rejected as irregular if their consideration is conditioned upon the acceptance or rejection of other proposals submitted by the same bidder if the georgia security and immigration compliance act affidavit is not completed if the request for eligibility to bid d.o.t form rfetb has not been submitted if the certificate of current capacity is not executed under oath and substantiated if a unit price is not shown for each pay item or if they fail to comply with the electronic bidding system ebs bidding requirements .
in the case of alternate items unit prices shall be entered for only one alternate .
the department reserves the right to disqualify and reject any proposal that is not properly signed in accordance with the requisite of subsection num .
a .
collusion any and all proposals will be rejected if the department believes that collusion exists among the bidders and no participant in such collusion may submit future proposals for the same work .
the department reserves the right to review and to refuse to consider any proposal if the bidder fails to execute the noncollusion certificate .
b .
single proposals only one proposal from any person partnership or corporation under the same or different names shall be submitted on any project .
c. unbalanced bids proposals may be rejected if any of the unit prices are obviously unbalanced .
the department will decide whether any unit prices are unbalanced either excessively above or below a reasonable cost analysis value determined by the engineer particularly if these unbalanced amounts are substantial and contrary to the interest of the department .
d. omissions and alterations proposals may be rejected as irregular if they show any omissions alterations of form additions or conditions not called for unauthorized alternate bids erasures or changes not initialed or other irregularities .
e. debts the department reserves the right to reject proposals from bidders who have not paid or satisfactorily settled all legal debts due on other contracts at the time proposals are received .
f. technicalities the department reserves the right to reject any and all proposals and to waive technicalities at any time before the contract has been signed by the department .
g. nonprequalified bidders proposals submitted in excess of num by nonprequalified contractors under rule num of the departments rules and regulations governing the prequalification of prospective bidders will be disqualified and rejected .
section numbidding requirements and conditions num h. failure to list disadvantaged business enterprise dbe participants if the contract has an established dbe goal the department reserves the right to reject and disqualify any proposal if the bidder has failed to list bona fide dbe participants with sufficient participation to achieve at least the established goal .
the department may consider for award a proposal with less participation than the established goal if both the bidder can demonstrate that no greater participation could be obtained and the participation proposed by the low bidder is not substantially less than the participation proposed by the other bidders on the same contract .
i .
failure to submit georgia security and immigration compliance act affidavit no proposal will be considered without submission of the completed georgia security and immigration compliance act affidavit for each letting call order number by no later than the num p.m. the day prior to the letting .
j .
failure to submit request for eligibility to bid no proposal will be considered without submission of the completed request for eligibility to bid form for each letting call order number by no later than the deadline num p.m. the day prior to the letting .
num proposal guaranty no proposal will be considered unless it is accompanied by a proposal guaranty of the character and in an amount not less than the amount indicated in the proposal .
each bid submitted must be accompanied by a separate proposal guaranty .
no proposal guaranty will be considered to cover any bid except the one to which it is attached .
num delivery of proposals each proposal together with the proposal guaranty shall be submitted in a sealed envelope so marked as to identify its contents without being opened see section num.a unless submitted electronically via the internet and bid express see section num.b .
proposal forms are not transferable .
proposals will be received until the time and date set in the notice to contractors and shall be in the hands of the officials indicated by that time .
proposals received after the advertised cutoff time established for submission of proposals will be returned unopened to the bidder .
num withdrawal or revision of proposals any bidder may withdraw his proposal by submitting by telegram letter or facsimile transmission received prior to the advertised cutoff time specified in the notice to contractors and verified by the department a department of transportation bid proposal withdrawal form completed by an authorized officer of the company whose signature is legally binding upon said company .
any bidder may submit a bid change by telegram letter or facsimile transmission received prior to the advertised cutoff time specified in the notice to contractors and verified by the department completed by an authorized officer of the company whose signature is legally binding upon said company .
in which case the department will change the bid at the time of opening and at such time will announce that a change was received .
num public bid bid results will be posted and available on bid expresstm at www.bidx.com and the gadot construction bidding administration internet web site at www.dot.ga.govdoingbusinesscontractorspagesdefault.aspx .
at the time specified in the notice to contractors .
num material guaranty the department reserves the right before the contract is awarded to require the bidder to furnish a complete statement of the origin composition and manufacture of any or all materials to be used in the construction of the work together with samples which may be subjected to the tests provided for in the specifications to determine their quality and fitness for the work .
section numbidding requirements and conditions num num combination or conditional proposals if the department so elects proposals may be issued for projects in combination andor separately so that bids may be submitted either on the combination or on separate units of the combination .
the department reserves the right to make awards on combination bids or separated bids to the best advantage of the department .
no combination of bids other than those specifically set up in the proposals by the department will be considered .
separate contracts will be written for each individual project included in the combination .
conditional proposals will be considered only when so stated in the special provisions .
num landscape projects only qualified landscape contractors shall submit bids for landscape projects .
qualifications required are as follows num .
the contractor shall ensure that all nursery stock used on this project is obtained from a state certified nursery .
all work done by the contractor on this project shall be done under the direct supervision of a licensed nurseryman .
num .
the contractor shall have a certified pesticide operators license for the state of georgia and shall furnish evidence of such with the bid .
num .
the contractor shall have satisfactorily executed landscape plantings of a similar nature and shall furnish with this bid a certified statement of such compliance .
num submittal of georgia security and immigration compliance act affidavit all bidders for each letting call number shall submit the completed georgia security and immigration compliance act affidavit to the gadot office of construction bidding administration room num in a sealed envelope by num p.m. on the day prior to the bid opening as a matter of bidder responsibility .
if the georgia security and immigration compliance act affidavit is not delivered to the gadot office of construction bidding administration room num in a sealed envelope by num p.m. on the day prior to the bid opening the bid will be subject to rejection .
num submittal of request for eligibility to bid all bidders for each letting call number shall submit the completed request for eligibility to bid form d. o. t. rfetb to the gadot office of construction bidding administration room num by no later than num p.m. on the day prior to the bid opening .
if the request for eligibility to bid form d. o. t. rfetb is not received by the gadot office of construction bidding administration room num by no later than num p.m. on the day prior to the bid opening the bid will be subject to rejection .
num submittal of certificate of current capacity and status of contracts on hand the apparent low bidder for each letting call number shall submit the executed certificate of current capacity and the status of contracts on hand to the gadot office of construction bidding administration room num in a sealed envelope by num p.m. on the first working day after the bid opening .
if the certificate of current capacity and the status of contracts on hand are not delivered to the gadot office of construction bidding administration room num in a sealed envelope by num p.m. on the first working day after the bid opening the bid may be subject to rejection .
num submittal of construction contractors bid opportunity list all bidders for each letting call number shall submit the completed construction contractors bid opportunity list to the gadot office of construction bidding administration room num in a sealed envelope by num p.m. on the third working day after the bid opening as a matter of bidder responsibility .
section numbidding requirements and conditions num if the construction contractors bid opportunity list is not delivered to the gadot office of construction bidding administration room num in a sealed envelope by num p.m. on the third working day after the bid opening the bid may be subject to rejection .
section numaward and execution of contract num consideration of proposals after the proposals are opened and read the correct sum of the products of the quantities shown in the proposal multiplied by the unit prices bid will be considered the amount of the bid .
if there is a discrepancy between unit bid prices and extensions the unit bid price shall govern in accordance with subsection num .
in determining unit bid prices fractional parts of a cent less than num cent num will not be considered significant and will be dropped .
the amounts will then be compared and the results of this comparison will be made public at the time specified in notice to contractors .
until the final award of the contract however the right will be reserved to reject any and all proposals to waive technicalities to advertise for new proposals or to proceed to do the work otherwise if the interest of the department will be promoted thereby .
if prior to the award of a contract the low bidder discovers that an obvious error was made in the preparation of the bid a request to the department may be made to allow the withdrawal of the bid without bid bond forfeiture .
the decision whether or not to grant such a request rests entirely with the department and in the discretion of the department .
if such a request is granted the department may in its discretion award the contract to the next lowest reliable bidder readvertise perform the work itself or abandon the project .
num award of contract if a contract is awarded it will be awarded to the lowest reliable bidder whose proposal shall have met all the prescribed requirements .
the contract will be awarded if at all within num calendar days after the opening of the proposals unless a longer period is specified in the proposal or the successful bidder agrees in writing to a longer period of time for the award .
single as well as multiple proposals for a project will be publicly opened and read .
if only one proposal is received on a project and the amount of that proposal is equal to or less than the departments cost estimate for the project as certified by the chief engineer the cost estimate will be read .
if only one proposal is received and the amount of that proposal exceeds the departments cost estimate for the project the department may at its option award the contract or reject the proposal and readvertise perform the work itself or abandon the project .
the award of contracts involving work financed entirely or in part by federal funds is conditioned upon the concurrence of the federal agency involved .
no bids will be negotiated or adjusted .
award to the successful bidder will be made public through the publication of the award announcement .
if the successful bidder fails to execute the contract and file acceptable bonds within the period set forth in subsection num thereby causing cancellation of the award and forfeiture of the proposal guaranty the department may award the contract to the next lowest reliable bidder readvertise abandon the project or perform the work itself .
num cancellation of award the department reserves the right to cancel the award of any contract at any time before the execution of said contract by all parties without any liability against the department .
num return of proposal guaranty all proposal guaranties may be retained until the contract and the contract bond have been signed and approved .
early release of proposal guaranties will be considered if a request is made in writing .
the department reserves the right to return all proposal guaranties by registered or certified mail and its responsibility pertaining to them will end when they are mailed .
section numaward and execution of contract num num requirements of contract bonds the penal sum of the contract shall be defined as num percent of the original contract amount .
at the time of the execution of the contract and as a part thereof the successful bidder shall furnish contract bonds as specified below georgia resident contractor georgia resident contractors shall furnish performance and payment bonds as follows performance bond in the full penal sum of the contract and payment bond in an amount equal to num percent of the full penal sum of the contract .
the aggregate amount of the bonds shall be num percent of the full penal sum of the contract .
nonresident contractor nonresident contractors shall furnish contract bonds as follows performance bond in the full penal sum of the contract payment bond in the full penal sum of the contract and tax bond in the amount of num percent of the full penal sum of the contract .
the aggregate amount of the bonds shall be num percent of the full penal sum of the contract .
the tax bond shall represent the nonresident contractor bond required by the revenue department in accordance with sections num through num of the official code of georgia annotated .
the bonds shall be made on forms furnished by the department and executed by the contractor and a surety company acceptable to the department authorized to do business in georgia .
in the event the bond is made by an out of state agent it shall be countersigned by a georgia resident agent in accordance with the laws of georgia .
num execution and approval of contract the contract shall be signed by the successful bidder and returned within num calendar days after the date of the letter transmitting the contract to the bidder .
if the contract is not executed by department within num calendar days following receipt from the bidder of the signed contract unless a longer period is specified in the proposal or the successful bidder agrees in writing to a longer period the bidder shall have the right to withdraw his bid without penalty .
no contract shall be considered as effective until it has been fully executed by all of the parties .
num failure to execute contract failure to execute the contract and file acceptable bonds within num calendar days after the date of the letter transmitting the contract to the bidder shall be just cause for the cancellation of the award and forfeiture of the proposal guaranty which shall become the property of the department not as a penalty but in liquidation of damages sustained .
if the department readvertises the project the department may at its discretion not allow the bidder who refused to execute the contract to submit a proposal on the readvertised project .
section numscope of work num intent of contract the intent of the contract is to provide for the construction and completion in every detail of the work described .
the contractor shall furnish all labor materials equipment tools transportation and supplies required to complete the work in accordance with the plans specifications and terms of the contract .
num special work should any construction or conditions not thoroughly or satisfactorily stipulated and set forth by the standard specifications and supplements thereto be anticipated on any proposed work special provisions for such work will be included in the proposal and the contract as a part thereof .
should any such special provisions contain requirements in conflict with the standard specifications and supplements thereto the special provisions will govern .
section numscope of work num num alteration of plans or character of work a .
authority to make changes the department reserves the right to make at any time during the progress of the work such increases or decreases in quantities and such alterations in the details of construction including alterations in the grade or alignment of the road or structure or both as may be found necessary or desirable .
such increases or decreases and alterations shall not invalidate the contract nor release the surety and the contractor agrees to perform the work as altered the same as if it had been a part of the original contract .
whenever an alteration in character of work involves a substantial change in the nature of the design or in the type of construction or materially increases or decreases the cost of performance a supplemental agreement acceptable to both parties shall be executed before work is started on such alteration except that in the absence of a supplemental agreement acceptable to both parties the engineer may direct that the work be done by force account .
any force account agreement shall be in writing specifying the terms of payment signed by the state construction engineer and agreed to in writing by the contractor .
all work shall be performed as directed and in accordance with the specifications .
b .
no waiver of contract changes made by the engineer will not be considered to waive any of the provisions of the contract nor may the contractor make any claim for loss of anticipated profits because of the changes or by reason of any variation between the approximate quantities and the quantities of work as done .
c. certain items not limited the quantities of all types of excavation embankment when a pay item perforated underdrain pipe ditch paving subgrade treatment materials stabilizers extra depth of concrete including its reinforcement piling guard rail asphaltic concrete leveling erosion control items traffic control items slope paving bridge riprap filter fabric or any other items that can not conveniently be determined accurately until after the work is in progress and any increase or decrease in these quantities whatever the amount will be considered normal overruns or underruns .
the engineer has unlimited authority to increase or decrease these quantities .
d. changes in other quantities the engineer may increase or decrease the quantities of any and all other pay items without changing the unit prices bid provided that the sum total of such changes exclusive of changes in those items covered in subsection num.c does not increase or decrease the original contract amount by more than num percent .
e. changes to original length or cost of project the engineer has the authority to extend or reduce the total length or total cost of the project by as much as num percent .
the provisions of subsection num.c covering overruns or underruns of certain pay items apply also to overruns or underruns in quantities resulting from an extension or reduction in the length of the project .
if the project is extended in length an extension agreement will be executed .
if the extension agreement calls for pay items already in the contract the unit prices for such items will not be changed except as provided in subsections num.a num.b and num.d .
new work for which no unit prices have been bid will be paid for as extra work as defined in subsection num .
f. railroad grade separation structures changes in design or construction features of railroad grade separation structures must be submitted to the engineer of the railroad for approval .
the department will diligently expedite all correspondence with the railroad officials but will not be responsible to the contractor for any delay to the contractors work resulting from delay in securing the necessary approval .
the engineer will give due consideration to such delays in determining the time for completion of the contract .
num extra work the contractor shall perform unforeseen work for which there is no price included in the contract whenever it is necessary or desirable in order to complete fully the work as contemplated .
such work shall be performed in accordance with the specifications and as directed and will be paid for as provided in subsection num .
section numscope of work num num maintenance during construction a .
contractor maintenance the contractor shall maintain the project from the beginning of construction operations until maintenance acceptance or final acceptance of the project except as otherwise provided in subsection num.b .
this maintenance shall constitute continuous and effective work prosecuted day by day with adequate equipment and forces to the end that the roadway or structures are kept in satisfactory condition at all times .
this includes signing pavement markings and traffic control devices as outlined in the manual on uniform traffic control devices section num project plans and special provisions for traffic control .
all existing guard rail signs pavement pavement markings bridge handrail and other safety appurtenances shall also be maintained in a safe and satisfactory condition .
the contractor shall not allow vegetative growth at any time to obstruct signs delineation traffic movements or sight distance .
the contractor shall at intervals not to exceed num months clean up and remove litter and debris remove all weeds from around guard rail barrier poles standards utility facilities and other structures and cut or trim trees bushes or tall grass .
these requirements shall apply to all areas within the project termini and lateral limits .
for projects or segments of projects with staging which requires that traffic be maintained through the project limits during the prosecution of the work the contractor shall assume all responsibility for damage to the work until either maintenance acceptance or final acceptance of the section or project .
on projects constructed with traffic relocated to an alternate roadway or projects constructed on new location the contractor shall be responsible for all damage to the work until the department directs that the project be opened to traffic .
at that time the contractor will no longer be responsible for traffic related damage to the work other than that attributable to the contractors actions or inadequate construction .
the department may direct however that traffic related damage be repaired at existing unit prices or as extra work as provided for in subsection num .
all costs for maintenance of traffic shall be as provided in section num .
all other maintenance costs during construction and before the project is accepted will be included in the contract unit prices and the contractor will not be paid an additional amount .
b .
maintenance of traffic during suspension of work during any suspension of work ordered by the engineer the contractor shall make passable and shall open to traffic such portions of the project and temporary roadways special detours or portions thereof as may be agreed upon between the contractor and the engineer for the temporary accommodation of necessary traffic during the anticipated period of suspension .
thereafter and until issuance of an order for the resumption of construction operations the maintenance of the temporary route or line of travel agreed upon will be by and at the expense of the department .
when work is resumed the contractor shall replace or renew any work or materials lost or damaged because of such temporary use of the project shall remove to the extent directed by the engineer any work or materials used in the temporary maintenance thereof by the department and shall complete the project in every respect as though its prosecution had been continuous and without interferences .
all additional work caused by such suspensions for reasons beyond the control of the contractor will be paid for by the department at contract prices or by force account .
c. maintenance directed by the engineer if the engineer directs special maintenance for the benefit of the traveling public the contractor will be paid on the basis of unit prices or under subsection num .
the engineer will be the sole judge of work to be classed as special maintenance .
d. detours outside rightofway the department will be responsible for the construction and maintenance of detours outside the rightofway except where otherwise provided for in the contract .
e. special detours when the proposal contains bid items which provide for construction maintenance and removal of detour bridges or roads the payment for such items shall cover all cost of constructing and maintaining such detour or detours including the construction of any and all temporary bridges and accessory features and the removal of the same and obliteration of section numscope of work num the detour road except as otherwise provided in subsection num.b .
rightofway for temporary highways or bridges called for under this subsection will be furnished by the department .
f. delays to traffic twoway traffic shall be maintained at all times unless otherwise approved .
the contractor shall not stop traffic without permission of the engineer .
when oneway traffic is approved the contractor shall provide the necessary flagmen to direct such traffic .
when specified in the proposal the contractor shall furnish pilot vehicles .
g. overhead sign lighting maintenance of overhead sign lighting within major construction or reconstruction projects shall be performed by the contractor at no additional cost to the department .
all required repairs shall be made within num hours .
in the event such repairs are not made within the specified time state forces may perform them and the cost thereof deducted from any monies due or which may become due the contractor .
num right in and use of materials found on the project materials that have salvage value as determined by the engineer shall remain the property of the department and shall be utilized as directed by the engineer .
the contractor with the approval of the engineer may use on the project such materials as may be found on the project and will be paid at the bid price for removal of the material .
if the materials after processing are suitable for other items of work the contractor will also be paid for those items in which the material is incorporated except as otherwise provided for in these specifications .
he shall replace at his own expense with other acceptable material all of that portion of the materials so removed and used which was needed for use in the embankments backfills approaches or otherwise including proper allowance for swell when applicable .
when existing materials found on the project such as crushed stone base are to be reused directly in the work the contractor will not be paid the full contract price for the item but will be paid at the contract price minus the equivalent cost of new materials .
the contractor shall not excavate or remove any material without written authorization from the engineer .
the contractor shall not make any claim upon the state for damages or loss of anticipated profits because of the expected use of any materials indicated on the plans as existing and later found to be nonexistent or unfit for use .
the department does not warrant or guarantee the existence quality or quantity of materials indicated as existing on the plans .
if any sales tax is involved in materials found on the rightofway and sold by the contractor the contractor will be responsible for paying same .
unless otherwise provided the material from any existing old structure may be used temporarily by the contractor in the erection of the new structure .
such material shall not be cut or otherwise damaged except with the approval of the engineer .
any material used by the contractor and damaged during use shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
num final cleaning up before final acceptance the highway borrow pits and all ground occupied by the contractor in connection with the work shall be cleaned of all rubbish excess materials temporary structures and equipment .
all weeds and high grass shall be cut and disposed of .
the rightofway shall be mown when directed by the engineer in accordance with subsection num .
all parts of the work shall be left in an acceptable condition .
the disposal adjacent to the rightofway of materials cleaned from the rightofway will not be permitted even with the permission of the property owner .
temporary buildings or other structures built for the contractors use and located within view of the rightofway constituting a hazard or making an unsightly appearance shall be removed and disposed of as directed .
on specialtytype contracts where the entire work consists of such specialty items as resurfacing fencing stripe painting signing highway lighting and the like the contractor will not be required to clean up the rightofway beyond the limits of construction unless such clean up work is included in the contract as a pay item .
however he shall remove all of his own property and leave the remaining rightofway in a condition at least as good as it was before the work was begun .
as to compliance or noncompliance with these provisions as well as the obligations of the contractor in relation thereto the decision of the chief engineer shall be final and conclusive .
section numscope of work num num value engineering proposals a. applicability this section applies to those cost reduction proposals initiated and developed by the contractor for changing the plans specifications or other requirements of the contract .
these provisions do not apply unless the proposal submitted by the contractor is specifically identified as being presented as a value engineering proposal vep and the contract amount is in excess of num .
the costreduction proposals contemplated are those discretionary changes which would require a supplemental agreement modifying the contract and would produce a savings to the department by providing less costly items or methods than those specified in the contract without impairing essential functions and characteristics including but not limited to service life reliability economy of operations ease of maintenance and safety both during and after construction .
proposals must provide a product comparable to the original design at a lower cost or improved quality or both .
no proposals will be accepted that lower the quality of the project .
these provisions are applicable to the prime contract and include all subcontracts .
b .
documentation value engineering proposals vep will be processed in the same manner as prescribed for any other alterations of the contract requiring a supplemental agreement .
as a minimum the following information shall be submitted by the contractor with each value engineering proposal num .
a description of the difference between the existing contract requirement and the proposed change and the comparative advantages and disadvantages of each .
num .
an itemization of the requirements of the contract which must be changed and a recommendation of how to make such change e.g .
a suggested revision .
num .
a detailed estimate of the cost of performing the work under the contract and under the proposed change .
num .
a prediction of any effects the proposed changes would have on other costs to the department including cost of related items and costs of maintenance and operation .
num .
a statement of the time showing the last date by which an agreement for adoption of the proposed changes must be executed in order to obtain the maximum cost reduction during the remainder of the contract noting any effect on the contract completion time or delivery schedule .
num .
the dates of any previous or concurrent submissions of the proposal the contract numbers under which submitted and the outcome or the result of the proposal in previous projects and any previous actions by the department if known .
num .
a lifecycle cost analysis .
section numscope of work num note if a vep is similar to a change in the plans or specifications for the project that is under consideration by the department at the time said vep is submitted or if such vep is based upon or similar to standard specifications special provisions or standard plans adopted by the department after the advertisement of the contract the engineer will not accept such proposal and the department reserves the right to make such changes without compensation to the contractor under the provisions of this section .
proposed changes in the basic design of a pavement type e.g .
rigid to flexible or vice versa or pavement thickness will not be considered as an acceptable vep .
proposed changes to basesubbase courses may be considered as an acceptable vep .
if design alternates are shown in the plans the department will not consider a vep substituting a design alternate on which the contractor could have bid for one on which the contractor has bid .
the department reserves the right to reject any vep submitted requiring additional rightofway .
c. submission value engineering proposals submitted by the contractor will be processed as expeditiously as possible however the department will not be liable for any delay in acting upon proposals submitted .
the contractor may withdraw wholly or in part any vep not accepted by the department within the time specified in subsection num.b.num .
d. acceptance the decision of the engineer as to the acceptance or rejection of a vep shall be final and shall not be subject to the provisions of subsection num claims for adjustments and disputes .
the engineer may accept in whole or in part before work has been completed any vep submitted pursuant to this subsection and not withdrawn by the contractor by giving the contractor written notice thereof reciting acceptance under this subsection .
e. notification the contractor will be notified in writing of the departments decision or rejection of each vep submitted under these provisions .
if a proposal is accepted the necessary contract modifications will be affected by execution of a supplemental agreement .
unless and until a vep is affected by such supplemental agreement the contractor shall remain obligated to perform the work in accordance with the terms of the existing contract .
supplemental agreements made as a result of this subsection will state that they are made pursuant to it .
f. sharing in the event a vep submitted by the contractor under this subsection is accepted the supplemental agreement effecting the necessary modifications will establish the net savings agreed upon and will provide for an adjustment in contract prices that will divide the net savings between the contractor and the department in accordance with the following provisions num .
division of net savings in contract price adjustment num percent of the net savings to the contractor .
num percent of the net savings to the department .
num .
the department reserves the right to include in the agreement any conditions it deems appropriate for consideration approval and implementation of the vep .
the contractors num percent of the net savings shall constitute the full compensation for effecting all changes pursuant to the agreement .
development costs incurred by the contractor and review costs incurred by the department shall not be considered in computing the net savings of the vep .
num .
restrictions and disclosures upon acceptance and implementation of any vep any restrictions imposed by the contractor on its use or disclosure of the information submitted shall be void .
the department shall thereafter have the right to use duplicate and disclose in whole or in any part all data necessary in the utilization of the proposal .
num section numcontrol of work num authority of the engineer the engineer will decide all questions that may arise as to the quality and acceptability of materials furnished work performed and the rate of progress of the work the interpretation of the plans and specifications and all questions as to the acceptable fulfillment of the contract on the part of the contractor .
the engineer will determine the quantities of the several kinds of work performed and materials furnished which are to be paid for under the contract and his determination shall be final .
the engineer will have the authority to suspend the work wholly or in part due to the failure of the contractor to correct conditions unsafe for the workmen or general public for failure to carry out provisions of the contract or for failure to carry out orders for such periods as he may deem necessary due to unsuitable weather for conditions considered unsuitable for the prosecution of the work or for any other condition or reason deemed to be in the public interest .
the contractor may request and will receive written instructions from the engineer upon any important items .
after the contract has been executed and before work begins the engineer may designate a time and place to hold a preconstruction conference with the contractor .
at such time the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a progress schedule as provided in subsection num unless this schedule has been specifically exempted by special provision .
the contractor will also be given a decision on any alternate traffic control plan that he may have previously submitted .
any matters pertaining to order of work interpretation of plans and specifications traffic control utility adjustments or others may be discussed at the preconstruction conference .
num plans and working drawings plans will show details of all structures lines grades typical cross sections of the roadway location and design of all structures and a summary of items appearing in the proposal .
the plans will be supplemented by such working drawings as are necessary to adequately control the work .
working drawings for structures shall be furnished by the contractor and shall consist of such detailed plans as may be required to adequately control the work and which are not included in the plans furnished by the department .
they shall include stress sheets shop drawings erection plans falsework plans cofferdam plans bending diagrams for reinforcing steel or any other supplementary plans or similar data required of the contractor .
all working drawings must be approved by the engineer and such approval shall not operate to relieve the contractor of any responsibility under the contract for the successful completion of the work .
the contract bid prices shall include the cost of furnishing all working drawings .
num conformity with plans and specifications all work performed and all materials furnished shall be in reasonably close conformity with the lines grades cross sections dimensions and material requirements including tolerances shown on the plans or indicated in the specifications .
plan dimensions and contract specification values are to be considered as the target values to be strived for and complied with as the design values from which any deviations are allowed .
it is the intent of the specifications that the materials and workmanship shall be uniform in character and shall conform as nearly as realistically possible to the prescribed target value or to the middle portion of the tolerance range .
the purpose of the tolerance range is to accommodate occasional minor variations from the median zone that are unavoidable for practical reasons .
when either a maximum and minimum value or both are specified the production and processing of the material and the performance of the work shall be so controlled that material or work will not be preponderantly of borderline quality or dimension .
in the event the engineer finds the materials or the finished product in which the materials are used not within reasonably close conformity with the plans and specifications but that reasonably acceptable work has been produced the engineer shall then make a determination if the work shall be accepted and remain in place .
in this event except in cases where the appropriate price adjustments are provided for in the specifications covering the materials andor the finished product a supplemental agreement will be executed documenting the basis of acceptance that will provide for an appropriate price adjustment in the contract price for such work or materials as the engineer deems necessary to conform to his determination based on engineering judgement .
section numcontrol of work num in the event the engineer finds the materials or the finished product in which the materials are used or the work performed are not in reasonably close conformity with the plans and specifications and have resulted in an inferior or unsatisfactory product the work or materials shall be removed and replaced or otherwise corrected by and at the expense of the contractor .
num coordination of plans specifications supplemental specifications and special provisions these standard specifications the supplemental specifications the plans special provisions and all supplementary documents are essential parts of the contract and a requirement occurring in one is as binding as though occurring in all .
they are intended to be complementary and to describe and provide for a complete work .
in cases of discrepancy the governing descending order will be as follows num .
special provisions num .
project plans including special plan details num .
supplemental specifications num .
standard plans including standard construction details num .
standard specifications calculated dimensions will govern over scaled dimensions .
the contractor shall take no advantage of any apparent error or omission in the plans or specifications .
in the event the contractor discovers such an error or omission he shall immediately notify the engineer .
the engineer will then make such corrections and interpretations as may be deemed necessary for fulfilling the intent of the plans and specifications .
a .
specifications of other organizations when work is specified to be done or when materials are to be furnished according to the published specifications of organizations other than the department the latest specifications published by those organizations at the time bids are received shall apply unless otherwise specified .
aashto interim specifications and astm tentative specifications will be considered effective on date of issue .
b .
item numbers the first three digits of any item number in the itemized proposal designates the specification section under which the item shall be constructed .
num cooperation by contractor the contractor will be supplied with a minimum of two sets of approved plans and contract assemblies including special provisions one set of which the contractor shall keep available on the project site at all times .
the contractor shall give the work the constant attention necessary to facilitate the progress thereof and shall cooperate with the engineer inspectors and other contractors in every way possible .
the contractor shall have accessible to the engineer at all times as his agent a competent superintendent capable of reading and thoroughly understanding the plans and specifications and thoroughly experienced in the type of work being performed who shall receive instructions from the engineer or his authorized representatives .
the superintendent shall have full authority to execute orders or directions of the engineer without delay and to promptly supply such materials equipment tools labor and incidentals as may be required .
such superintendence shall be furnished irrespective of the amount of work sublet .
the superintendent shall notify the engineer prior to starting any pay item work .
the prime contractor shall coordinate and be responsible to the engineer for all activities of subcontractors .
num cooperation with utilities the department will notify all utility companies all pipeline owners all railroad companies or other parties affected of award of the contract giving the name and address of the contractor and will assist the contractor in arranging for all section numcontrol of work num necessary adjustments of the public or private utility fixtures pipe lines and other appurtenances within or adjacent to the limits of construction .
water lines gas lines wire lines service connections water and gas meter boxes water and gas valve boxes light standards cableways signals railroad facilities and all other utility appurtenances within the limits of the proposed construction which are to be relocated or adjusted are to be moved by the owners at their expense except as otherwise provided for elsewhere in the contract .
it is understood and agreed that the contractor has considered in his bid all of the permanent and temporary utility appurtenances in their present location or relocated positions and that no additional compensation will be allowed for any delays inconvenience or damage sustained by him due to any interference from said utility appurtenances or the operation of moving them .
delays and interruptions to the controlling item or items of the work are covered in subsection num.g .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to plan with each utility owner a schedule of operations which will clearly set forth at which stage of the contractors operations the utility owner will be required to perform his removal and relocation work .
num cooperation between contractors the department reserves the right at any time to contract for and perform other or additional work on or near the work covered by the contract .
when separate contracts are let within the limits of any one project each contractor shall conduct his work so as not to interfere with or hinder the progress or completion of the work being performed by other contractors .
contractors working on the same project shall cooperate with each other .
each contractor involved shall assume all liability financial or otherwise in connection with his contract and shall protect and save harmless the department from any and all damages or claims that may arise because of inconvenience delay or loss experienced by him because of the presence and operations of other contractors working within the limits of the same project .
the contractor shall arrange his work and shall place and dispose of the materials being used so as not to interfere with the operations of the other contractors within the limits of the same project .
he shall join his work with that of the others in an acceptable manner and shall perform it in proper sequence to that of the others .
at the request of the structure contractor the engineer will designate an area within the rightofway adjacent to each structure to be reserved for use by the structure contractor for storage of equipment and materials necessary to construct the particular structure .
so long as he occupies this area the structure contractor shall be responsible for its maintenance .
the structure contractor must relinquish this area however as it becomes practical to utilize completed portions of the structure .
num construction stakes lines and grades subsection num omitted num authority and duties of the resident engineer the resident engineer regardless of his administrative title is the engineer designated by the department to be the direct representative of the chief engineer .
the resident engineer has immediate charge of the engineering details of each construction project and is responsible for contract administration .
such administration includes the designation of subordinates to represent him and make routine decisions .
the resident engineer has the authority to reject defective material and to suspend any work that is being improperly performed .
num duties of the inspector inspectors employed by the department are authorized to inspect all work done and materials furnished .
such inspection may extend to all or any part of the work and to the preparation fabrication or manufacture of the materials to be used .
the inspector will not be authorized to alter or waive the provisions of the contract .
the inspector will not be authorized to issue instructions contrary to the plans and specifications or to act as foreman for the contractor .
num inspection of the work all materials and each part of the detail of the work shall be subject to inspection by the engineer .
section numcontrol of work num the engineer shall be allowed access to all parts of the work and shall be furnished with such information and assistance by the contractor as is required to make a complete and detailed inspection .
upon the engineers request the contractor at any time before final acceptance of the project shall remove or uncover such portions of the finished work as may be directed .
after examination the contractor shall restore said portions of the work to the standard required by the specifications .
should the work thus exposed or examined prove acceptable the uncovering or removing and the replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed will be paid for as extra work but should the work so exposed or examined prove unacceptable the uncovering or removing and the replacing of the covering or making good of the parts removed will be at the contractors expense .
any work done or materials used without supervision or inspection by an authorized department representative may be ordered removed and replaced at the contractors expense unless the department representative failed to inspect after having been given reasonable notice in writing that the work was to be performed .
when any unit of government or political subdivision or any railroad corporation is to pay a portion of the cost of the work covered by the contract its respective representatives shall have the right to inspect the work .
such inspection shall in no sense make any unit of government or political subdivision or any railroad corporation a party to the contract and shall in no way interfere with the rights of either party hereunder .
num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized work all work that does not conform to the requirements of the contract will be considered unacceptable unless otherwise determined acceptable under the provisions in subsection num .
unacceptable work whether the result of poor workmanship use of defective materials damage through carelessness or any other cause found to exist prior to the final acceptance of the work shall be removed immediately and replaced in an acceptable manner .
except as elsewhere noted no work shall be done without lines and grades having been given by the engineer .
work done contrary to the instructions of the engineer work done beyond the lines shown on the plans or as given except as herein specified or any extra work done without authority will be considered as unauthorized and will not be paid for under the provisions of the contract .
work so done may be ordered removed or replaced at the contractors expense .
upon failure on the part of the contractor to comply forthwith with any order of the engineer made under the provisions of this section the engineer will have authority to cause unacceptable work to be remedied or removed and replaced and to cause unauthorized work to be removed and to deduct the costs from any monies due or to become due the contractor .
num claims for adjustments and disputes whenever the contractor believes that it is or will be entitled to additional compensation whether due to delay extra work breach of contract or other causes the contractor shall follow the procedures set forth in this subsection .
a .
claims for acceleration the department shall have no liability for any constructive acceleration .
if the department gives express written direction for the contractor to accelerate its effort then both parties shall execute a supplemental agreement as provided in subsection num .
b .
claims for delay and all other claims except acceleration num .
the department shall have no liability for damages beyond those items which are specifically payable under this subsection .
num .
the department will be liable only for those delay damages caused by or arising from acts or omissions on the part of the department which violate legal or contractual duties owed to the contractor by the department .
the contractor assumes the risk of damages from all other causes of delay .
section numcontrol of work num num .
the parties recognize that delays caused by or arising from right of way problems defects in plans or design redesign changes in the work by the department the actions of suppliers or other contractors the shopdrawing approval process injunctions court orders and other such events forces or factors are commonly experienced in highway construction work .
such delays shall not constitute breaches of the contract .
however such delays may constitute a basis for a claim for delay damages if found to be in accordance with subsection num.b.num above and other provisions of the contract andor a request for a time extension .
num .
the term delay shall be deemed to mean any event action force or factor which extends the contractors time of performance .
this subsection is intended to cover all such events actions forces or factors whether they be styled delay disruption interference impedance hindrance impact or otherwise .
num .
compliance with the provisions of subsection num will be an essential condition precedent to any recovery of damages by the contractor .
num .
the following items and only the following items may be recoverable by the contractor as damages a .
additional direct hourly rates paid to employees for job site labor including payroll taxes welfare insurance benefits and all other labor burdens .
b. documented additional costs for materials .
c. additional equipment costs as determined in accordance with this subsection .
d. documented costs of extended jobsite overhead .
not applicable for claims other than delay claims .
e. an additional num percent of the total of subsections num.b.num .
a b c and d which sum includes home office overhead and profit .
f. bond costs .
g. subcontractor costs as determined by and limited to those items identified as payable under subsection num.b.num .
a b c d e and f. num .
for purposes of computing additional equipment costs rates used shall be based on the contractors actual experienced cost for each piece of equipment .
these rates shall be supported by equipment cost records furnished by the contractor .
in no case will equipment rates be allowed in excess of num of those determined utilizing the rental rate blue book with the appropriate adjustments noted in subsection num num .
the parties agree that in any claim for damages the department will have no liability for the following items of damages or expense a .
profit in excess of that provided herein .
b .
loss of profit .
c. labor inefficiencies except as allowed under subsection num.b.num.a .
d. home office overhead in excess of that provided herein .
e. consequential damages including but not limited to loss of bonding capacity loss of bidding opportunities and insolvency .
f. indirect costs or expenses of any nature .
g. attorneys fees claims preparation expenses or costs of litigation .
h. interest of any nature .
num .
notice of potential claim in any case in which the contractor believes that it will be entitled to additional compensation the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing of its intent to claim such additional compensation .
such notice shall be given in order that the department can assess the situation make an initial determination as to who is responsible and institute appropriate changes or procedures to resolve the matter .
a .
claims for delay the department shall have no liability for any delay which occurred more than one week prior to the filing of such written notice .
failure of the contractor to give such written notice in a timely fashion will be grounds for denial of the claim .
b .
all other claims except acceleration and delay if the contractor does not file such written notice before beginning the work out of which such claim arises then the contractor hereby agrees that it shall have waived any additional compensation for that work and the contractor shall have no claim thereto .
section numcontrol of work num num .
records after filing a notice of potential claim the contractor shall keep daily records of all labor material and equipment costs incurred for operations affected .
these daily records shall identify each operation affected and the specific locations where work is affected .
the department will also keep records of all labor material and equipment used on operations affected .
at the time and place as designated by the engineer on monday or the first work day of each week following the date of filing a notice of potential claim the contractor shall meet with the departments representative and present the daily records for the preceding week .
if the contractors records indicate costs greater than those kept by the department the department will present its records to the contractor .
the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing within three num work days of any inaccuracies noted in or disagreements with the departments records .
refusal or repeated failure by the contractor to attend these weekly meetings and present its records will constitute a waiver by the contractor of any objections as to the accuracy of the departments records .
when the contractor makes an objection as to the accuracy of the departments records the engineer shall review the matter and correct any inaccuracies he finds in the departments records .
for purposes of computing damages the departments records will control .
in the event the contractor wishes to contest the accuracy of the departments records it may file a petition pursuant to rule num of the official rules and regulations of the department of transportation .
the decision of the engineer or if contested the decision of the agency will be final and binding upon the parties as to any objections to the accuracy of the departments records subject to the contractors right to judicial review under o.c.g.a .
section num .
num .
on a weekly basis after filing a notice of potential claim for delay damages the contractor shall prepare and submit to the engineer written reports providing the following information a .
potential effect to the schedule caused by the delay .
b .
identification of all operations that have been delayed or are to be delayed .
c. explanation of how the departments act or omission delayed each operation and estimation of how much time is required to complete the project .
d. itemization of all extra costs being incurred including num an explanation as to how those extra costs relate to the delay and how they are being calculated and measured .
num identification of all project employees for whom costs are being compiled .
num identification of all manufacturers numbers of all items of equipment for which costs are being compiled .
c. required contents of claims all claims shall be submitted in writing and shall be sufficient in detail to enable the engineer to ascertain the basis and the amount of each claim .
the claim submission shall include six num printed copies and one num digital copy on recordable disk .
all information submitted to the department under this subsection will be used exclusively for analyzing the claim resolving the claim or any litigation which might arise from the claim .
at a minimum the following information shall be provided num .
a description of the operations that were delayed the reasons for the delay how they were delayed including the report of all scheduling experts or other consultants if any .
not applicable for claims other than delay claims num .
an asbuilt chart cpm scheme or other diagram depicting in graphic form how the operations were adversely affected .
not applicable for claims other than delay claims except where an extension of time is sought num .
a detailed factual statement of the claim providing all necessary dates locations and items of work affected by the claim .
num .
the date on which actions resulting in the claim occurred or conditions resulting in the claim became evident .
num .
a copy of the notice of potential claim filed for the specific claim by the contractor .
num .
the name function and activity of each department official or employee involved in or knowledgeable about facts that gave rise to such claim .
num .
the name function and activity of each contractor or subcontractor official or employee involved in or knowledgeable about facts that gave rise to such claim .
num .
the identification of any pertinent documents and the substance of any material oral communication relating to such claim .
num .
a statement as to whether the additional compensation or extension of time sought is based on the provisions of the contract or an alleged breach of contract .
section numcontrol of work num num .
the specific provisions of the contract which support the claim and a statement of the reasons why such provisions support the claim .
num .
the amount of additional compensation sought and a breakdown of that amount into the categories specified as payable under subsection num.b.num above .
num .
if an extension of time is also sought the specific days for which it is sought and the basis for such request .
d. required certification of claims when submitting the claim the contractor shall certify in writing under oath in accordance with the formalities required by georgia law as to the following num .
that the claim is made in good faith .
num .
that supportive data are accurate and complete to the contractors best knowledge and belief that the amount of the claim accurately reflects what the contractor in good faith believes to be the departments liability .
the contractor shall use the certificate of claim form which can be obtained from the department in complying with these requirements .
e. auditing of claims all claims filed against the department shall be subject to audit at any time following the filing of such claim whether or not such claim is part of a suit pending in the courts of this state .
the audit may be performed by employees of the department or by an independent auditor on behalf of the department .
the audit may begin on ten days notice to the contractor subcontractor or supplier .
the contractor subcontractor or supplier shall make a good faith effort to cooperate with the auditors .
failure to cooperate with the auditor shall constitute a waiver by the contractor of the claim in its entirety .
failure of the contractor subcontractor or supplier to maintain and retain sufficient records to allow the departments auditor to verify the claim shall constitute a waiver of that portion of such claim that can not be verified and shall bar recovery thereunder .
if the claim is part of a suit pending in a court of this state or if the claim becomes a part of a suit in a court of this state the questions of whether the contractor has cooperated with the auditor or failed to maintain and retain sufficient records to allow the auditor to verify the claim shall be questions for determination by the judge without the assistance of a jury .
without limiting the generality of the foregoing and as a minimum the auditors shall have available to them the following documents num .
daily time sheets and foremans daily reports .
num .
project payroll register .
num .
profit and loss statements for the project .
num .
payroll tax returns .
num .
material invoices purchase orders and all material and supply acquisition contracts for the project .
num .
material cost distribution worksheet for the project .
num .
equipment records list of company equipment rates etc .
num .
vendor rental agreements and subcontractor invoices .
num .
subcontractor payment certificates .
num .
canceled checks payroll and vendors for the project .
num .
job cost report for the project .
num .
job payroll ledger for the project .
num .
general ledger general journal if used and all subsidiary ledgers and journals together with all supporting documentation pertinent to entries made in these ledgers and journals .
num .
cash disbursements journal for the project .
num .
certified financial statements for all years reflecting the operations on this project .
num .
depreciation records on all company equipment whether such records are maintained by the company involved its accountant or others .
num .
if a source other than depreciation records is used to develop costs for the contractors internal purposes in establishing the actual cost of owning and operating equipment all such other source documents .
num .
all documents which relate to each and every claim together with all documents which support the amount of damages as to each claim .
section numcontrol of work num num .
worksheets used to prepare the claim establishing the cost components for items of the claim including but not limited to labor benefits and insurance materials equipment subcontractors and all documents which establish the time periods individuals involved the hours and the rates for the individuals .
f. mediation after compliance by the contractor with parts b. c. d. and e. of subsection num and if the contractors claim has been disallowed in whole or in part then the contractor may within num calendar days from receipt of the ruling of the engineer make a written request to the engineer that the claim or claims be referred to mediation .
if requested in accordance with this specification mediation shall be granted by the department .
in which case within num days of receipt by the department of the contractors request for mediation the contractor and the department will meet to select a mediator .
the mediator will then schedule the mediation at a place time and earliest date agreeable to the contractor and the department .
the contractor and the department mutually agree that mediation shall be a condition precedent to the filing of any lawsuit concerning claims or alleged breaches of the contract .
the costs and expenses of the mediator selected by mutual agreement of the parties will be divided equally between the department and the contractor .
each party to the mediation shall bear its own costs of preparing for and participating in the mediation .
g. remedies exclusive in the event any legal action is instituted against the department by the contractor on account of any claim for additional compensation whether on account of delay acceleration breach of contract claimed extra work or otherwise the contractor agrees that the departments liability will be limited to those items which are specifically identified as payable in subsection num .
num maintenance during construction the contractor shall maintain the project during construction and until the project is accepted .
this maintenance shall constitute the continuous and effective work prosecuted day by day with adequate equipment and forces to the end that all areas of the project are kept in satisfactory condition at all times .
the contractors area of responsibility for maintenance is confined to the physical construction limits plus any areas affected by the contractors activities .
once maintenance acceptance or final acceptance has been made the contractor is no longer responsible for damage to the work other than that attributable to the contractors actions or inadequate construction .
in case of separate contracts each contractor shall be responsible for any damage to the completed work of others caused by his actions or negligence .
where the work of one contractor has been accepted by the department the contractor performing subsequent work in the area shall be responsible for the maintenance and protection of all work previously completed .
if separate bridge contracts are let within the limits of a roadway project and the bridge contractor completes his contract before the roadway contractor the bridge contract may be accepted and the roadway contractor will be responsible for maintenance of the new bridge until it is opened to traffic .
if the roadway contractor hauls materials across the bridge the roadway contractor shall protect the endposts deck surface deck edges joints and all other vulnerable features of the bridge by use of adequate timber or earth cushions as directed by the engineer .
the roadway contractor shall repair all damage caused by such use including resealing of joints and rerubbing of finish at his own expense .
all cost of maintenance work during construction and before the project is accepted shall be included in the unit prices bid on the various pay items and the contractor will not be paid an additional amount for such work except as provided in subsection num.b .
the contractor shall not allow vegetative growth at any time to obstruct signs delineation traffic movements or sight distance .
the contractor shall at intervals not to exceed six months clean up and remove litter and debris remove weeds from around guardrail barrier poles standards utility facilities and other structures and cut or trim trees bushes or tall grass .
these requirements shall apply to all areas within the project termini and lateral limits .
section numcontrol of work num num failure to maintain roadway or structures if at any time the contractor fails to comply with the provisions of subsection num the engineer will immediately notify the contractor of such noncompliance .
if the contractor fails to remedy the unsatisfactory maintenance within num hours after receipt of such notice the engineer may immediately proceed to maintain the work and the entire cost of this maintenance will be deducted from monies due or to become due the contractor under the contract .
as an alternative to the engineers maintaining the work all the items and quantities of work done but not properly maintained may be deducted from the current progress estimate even if such items have been paid for in a previous estimate .
num final inspection and acceptance upon due written notice from the contractor of substantial completion of the entire project the engineer will determine if the project is ready for a final inspection .
the engineer will have the final decision on when the project is substantially complete and thereby ready for a final inspection .
if the engineer finds the project substantially complete the engineer will schedule the final inspection .
if all construction provided for and contemplated by the contract is found completed to the engineers satisfaction and all documents required in connection with the project have been submitted by the contractor the engineer will make the final acceptance and notify the contractor in writing of this acceptance .
if however the final inspection discloses any work in whole or part as being unsatisfactory the engineer will provide the contractor with a written punchlist that includes the necessary instructions for correction of same .
the punchlist will also include any remaining work to be completed and any final reports and other documentation required to be submitted by the contractor .
the contractor shall immediately comply with and execute such instructions .
when all construction provided for and contemplated by the contract is found completed to the engineers satisfaction including submission of any required documentation the engineer will make the final acceptance and notify the contractor in writing of this acceptance .
when the contractor has finished a major portion of the contract the contractor may request that a semifinal inspection be made .
at the discretion of the engineer who shall be sole judge as to making the inspection if the work is satisfactory as described in the first paragraph of this section that portion of the contract may be accepted opened to traffic if not already carrying traffic and the contractor relieved of the maintenance obligations as described elsewhere in these specifications .
such partial acceptance shall in no way relieve the contractor of responsibility for satisfactory completion of the contract or for failure of any portion of the accepted work prior to final acceptance of the project .
section numcontrol of materials num source of supply and quantity of materials the materials used in the work shall meet all quality requirements of the contract .
materials will not be considered as finally accepted until all tests including any to be taken from the finished work have been completed and evaluated .
to expedite the inspection and testing of materials the contractor shall notify the engineer in writing of his proposed sources of materials at least num weeks before delivery or earlier if blend determinations or mix designs are required .
when required representative preliminary samples of the character and quality prescribed shall be submitted for examination and testing .
the approval of preliminary samples does not obligate the engineer to accept materials from the same source delivered later .
if after trial it is found that sources of supply for previously approved materials do not produce uniform and satisfactory products or if the product from any source proves unacceptable at any time the contractor shall furnish materials from other sources .
the engineer shall have the right to reject the entire output of any source from which he finds it is impractical to secure a continuous flow of uniformly satisfactory material .
upon request by the department the contractor shall furnish formal written invoices from the materials suppliers .
the invoice shall show the date shipped the quantities and the unit prices .
the contractor shall purchase materials from suppliers who are willing for the contractor to furnish the department copies of invoices as noted herein upon request by the department .
materials used and operations performed under section num hot mix asphaltic concrete construction shall be controlled and tested by the contractor .
this shall be done in such a manner as to produce a uniform product that meets specification section numcontrol of materials num requirements .
in the event the contractors quality control procedures do not achieve the desired objective operations shall be suspended until satisfactory results are obtained .
the contractors quality control personnel shall be properly instructed and trained to perform all tests and make calculations and shall be competent to control all processes so that the requirements are met .
num unacceptable material all material not conforming to the requirements of the specifications will be considered as unacceptable .
all unacceptable materials whether in place or not will be rejected and shall be removed immediately from the site of the work unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
in case of failure by the contractor to comply promptly with any order by the engineer to remove rejected materials the engineer shall have authority to have such rejected materials removed by other means and to deduct the expense of such removal from any monies due or to become due to the contractor .
no rejected materials the defects of which have been corrected shall be used until the engineer has given approval .
num samples tests cited specifications all materials will be inspected tested and approved by the engineer before incorporation into the work .
samples will be taken by a qualified representative of the department .
unless otherwise designated tests will be made by and at the expense of the department and in accordance with methods of aashto astm or the published specifications of any other designated organization that are current on the date of advertisements for bids .
copies of all tests will be furnished to the contractors representative at his request .
sampling and testing by the department will be performed in accordance with the sampling testing and inspection manual .
for work performed under section num hot mix asphaltic concrete construction all materials shall be inspected and tested by the contractor before incorporation into the work .
the contractors quality control technician shall sample and test all quality control samples .
the contractors quality control tests may be used as acceptance tests at the discretion of the engineer .
sampling and testing by the contractor shall be performed according to the sampling testing and inspection manual .
copies of all tests performed by the contractor shall be furnished to the engineer and will become a part of the project records .
the department will be responsible only for determining the acceptability of the construction and materials incorporated therein .
the contractor shall be responsible for the quality of the construction and materials incorporated therein .
the department will monitor the contractors quality assurance acceptance program to verify test accuracy .
a .
testing and acceptance plans num .
a lot work will be accepted on a lottolot basis in accordance with the requirements specified in the acceptance plans specified in section num hot mix asphaltic concrete construction .
lot sizes will normally be specified .
in the event however that operational conditions cause work to be interrupted or only partially completed before the lot size specified has been achieved the lot may be redefined by the engineer as being either the amount of work accomplished within the day or he may combine that work with the next lot of work .
a lot is set forth in these specifications as a defined quantity of a specified material from a single source or a measured amount of specified construction assumed to be produced by the same process .
num .
acceptance plans the acceptance plan for a material product or an item of construction or completed work will be as specified hereinafter in section num and section num of these specifications .
however in addition to the following conditions the department reserves the right to test any additional material for work that appears defective and to require correction if necessary prior to final acceptance of the project .
num .
resampling of lots it is the intent of these specifications that lots of materials products items of construction or completed construction will meet specification requirements at the time of submission .
resampling of deficient lots as a basis for check tests may be done by the engineer at his option .
nonconforming lots which can be corrected by reworking will not be resampled before such corrective action is taken .
sampling and testing of reworked areas shall be at the expense of the contractor .
num .
acceptance or rejection nonconforming lots materials products or items of construction that are not adaptable to correction by reworking shall be removed and replaced accepted without payment or accepted at an adjusted price as stated in the specifications or if not stated as directed by the engineer .
section numcontrol of materials num following the application of the acceptance plan the decision of the engineer shall be final as to the acceptance rejection or acceptance at an adjusted price of the lots unless the contractor elects to remove and replace any deficient materials or work at his expense .
num .
adjusted payment a .
single deficiency a single deficiency is defined as a deficiency involving one characteristic of a material within a lot .
in the case of singlecharacteristic deficiency it shall be used directly to determine an adjusted contract price .
b .
multiple deficiency a multiple deficiency is defined as deficiencies involving more than one characteristic of construction within a lot .
in the case of multiple deficiencies the related adjusted percentage of contract price for each characteristic shall be determined and the greatest reduction in price shall be used to determine the contract unit price to be paid .
should the total adjustment for any individual lot be num percent or more the engineer will determine whether the deficient lot should be removed and replaced or allowed to remain in place .
no payment will be made for the original lot or for its removal .
replacement of the lot will be paid for in accordance with the provisions for the item .
num plant inspection at the option of the engineer materials may be sampled and tested at the source of supply .
in the event plant inspection is undertaken the following conditions shall be met a .
the engineer shall have the cooperation and assistance of the contractor as well as the contractors material supplier .
b .
the engineer shall have full entry at all times to such parts of the plant as may concern the manufacture or production of the materials being furnished .
c. if specified in the proposal the contractor shall arrange for an approved building for the use of the inspector such building to be located conveniently near the plant independent of any building used by the material producer and conforming to the requirements of subsection num and section num .
d. adequate safety measures shall be provided and maintained .
this shall include sampling valves on storage tanks for bituminous materials and safety stands for use in sampling from truck beds .
e. it is understood that the department reserves the right to retest all materials which prior to incorporation into the work have been tested and accepted at the source of supply and after the same have been delivered .
the department further reserves the right to reject all materials which when retested do not meet the requirements of the contract specifications .
num materials certification for certain products assemblies and materials in lieu of normal sampling and testing procedures by the contractor and the department the engineer may accept from the contractor the manufacturers certification with respect to the product involved under the conditions set forth in the following paragraphs a .
the certification shall state that the named product conforms to the departments requirements and that representative samples thereof have been sampled and tested as specified .
b .
the certification shall either num .
be accompanied with a certified copy of the test results or num .
certify that such test results are on file with the manufacturer and will be furnished to the engineer upon demand .
c. the certification shall give the name and address of the manufacturer and the testing agency and the date of tests and shall set forth the means of identification which will permit field determination of the product delivered to the project as being the product covered by the certification .
d. the certification shall be in duplicate with one copy to be sent with the shipment of the covered product to the departments project engineer and with one copy sent to office of materials num kennedy drive forest park georgia num .
no certificate will be required for portland cement when furnished from a manufacturer approved by the department .
e. the department will not be responsible for any costs of certification or for any costs of the sampling and testing of products in connection therewith .
section numcontrol of materials num f. the department reserves the right to require samples and to test products for compliance with pertinent requirements irrespective of prior certification of the products by the manufacturer .
any materials that fail to meet specification requirements will be rejected .
num agricultural lime and fertilizer the sale and distribution of fertilizers and agricultural lime are governed by acts of the georgia general assembly and rules and regulations of the state department of agriculture .
therefore either of these materials may be sampled by authorized representatives of the state commissioner of agriculture .
the contractor may use these materials in the work without sampling provided he notifies the engineer num hours in advance of anticipated delivery to the job site .
the engineer reserves the right to request random sampling by a representative of the state department of agriculture .
the contractor will not be expected to withhold application pending completion of tests but will not be relieved of the responsibility for the quality of the material furnished .
in the event a sample fails to meet the requirements of the georgia law as evidenced by a report furnished by the commissioner of agriculture the engineer will deduct from monies due to the contractor a sum equal to the penalty authorized by the above referenced act .
num sample holes all holes dug or drilled for the purpose of taking samples or determining thickness any time before final acceptance of the project shall be repaired by the contractor .
the material replaced shall be compacted and finished to the satisfaction of the engineer .
costs of this work shall be included in the appropriate bid items .
num storage of materials portions of the rightofway approved by the engineer may be used for material storage purposes and for the placing of the contractors plant and equipment .
additional space required must be provided by the contractor at no additional expense to the department .
private property shall not be used for storage purposes without written permission of the owner or lessee and if requested by the engineer copies of such written permission shall be furnished .
materials shall be stored to assure the preservation of their quality and fitness for the work and shall be located so as to facilitate their prompt inspection .
stored materials even though approved before storage may again be inspected before their use in the work .
all storage sites shall be restored to their original condition by the contractor at no additional expense to the department .
no inflammable materials or harmful chemicals shall be stored within num ft num m of a structure nor within num ft num m of a roadway open to traffic .
such materials shall be stored in accordance with directions from the manufacturer .
num handling materials all materials shall be handled in such a manner as to preserve their quality and fitness for the work .
aggregates and mixtures of aggregates with other materials shall be transported from the storage site to the work in tight vehicles so constructed as to prevent loss or segregation of materials after loading and measuring in order that there may be no inconsistency in the qualities of the materials intended for incorporation into the work as loaded and the qualities as actually received at the place of operation .
the actual incorporation of the material in the work shall be such that the quality and fitness of the material is retained and no segregation results .
num local material sources a .
sources shown on the plans possible sources of local materials andor disposal areas may be designated on the plans .
the quality of materials in such deposits will be acceptable in general but the department does not warrant either the quality or the quantity of materials shown on the plans .
the contractor shall determine the amount of equipment and work required to produce a material meeting the specifications .
pit mixing selective excavation and other such operations shall be expected and the section numcontrol of materials num contractor shall determine the extent of these activities .
it shall be understood that it is not feasible to ascertain from samples the limits for an entire deposit and that variations in quality and quantity shall be considered as usual and are to be expected .
num .
when easements to secure local materials andor disposal areas are obtained by the department the plans will show the locations of the pits or areas the amount of royalties and other costs and conditions of acquisition of the material .
in all cases where the department has secured easements for material pits andor disposal areas these easements will be assigned to the contractor who shall make prompt payment to the owners of such pits for all royalty and crop damage costs for materials andor areas and who shall further fulfill all of the terms of the easement .
the department does not warrant the title or any interest of the property owner in such easements .
num .
if the contractor elects to use only a portion of the materials or area estimated to be available in any pit or disposal area or only clears or partially clears the pit or area and does not remove or deposit any material he shall make a minimum payment to the property owner of at least num percent of the estimated value of the pit or areas as shown in the easement plus any crop damage costs called for by the easement .
the contractor shall before receiving final payment from the department submit to the engineer a written statement signed by the owner stating that the owner has been paid in full and that all conditions agreed to have been fulfilled to the satisfaction of the owner .
the department will not take any separate payment to the contractor for these material acquisition costs except that reclamation of the pit or area if required will be paid for in accordance with section num .
should the contractor fail to pay the property owner within num days after ceasing to use the pit or area the department may pay directly to the property owner any amounts due and deduct same from any funds due the contractor .
this provision does not affect the obligation of the contractor under his bond or the rights of the property owner or the department under the bond .
b .
substitution of sources of materials num .
if after the contract is awarded the contractor wishes to substitute other sources for sources designated on the plans he may do so provided the material to be substituted conforms to the specifications .
the contractor shall make all necessary arrangements with the property owners for removal of the material from substituted pits .
payment will be made for clearing and grubbing stripping excavation pit reclamation and ditch excavation only to the extent required for pits shown in the plans .
this does not relieve the contractor from planting a satisfactory cover crop of the type called for on the plans or required by the specifications on all scarred areas created by the removal of materials .
in the event the contractor substitutes a source for soilcement soilbituminous or other material to be stabilized and the engineer determines that the substitute source requires more stabilizing agent than the plan pit no payment will be made for the additional stabilizing agent required .
num .
substitution sources will not be allowed where the resulting scars will present an unsightly appearance from any state or federal highway .
c. material pits furnished by the contractor when sources of any or all local materials are not shown on the plans or when location maps of possible sources of materials are shown on the plans for information but no easements are obtained the contractor shall provide sources of material meeting contract requirements and acceptable to the engineer .
the contractor shall make arrangements with the property owner regarding rights to remove material from the pits but prior to final acceptance of the project by the state the contractor shall furnish the engineer documentary proof of payment to the property owner for all materials as stated in subsection num.a.num above .
under these circumstances no separate payment will be made for clearing and grubbing or reclamation of pits .
material sources shall not be excavated at locations where the resulting scars will present an unsightly appearance from any state or federal highway .
no payment will be made for material obtained in violation of this provision .
the contractor shall provide a survey and sketch for all contractorfurnished material pits and haul road routes in accordance with the following the pit boundaries and haul road routes shall be selected and staked at num ft num m intervals or as required by the engineer .
minimum work shall include measurement of pit boundaries and haul road routes using a chain or stadia and section numcontrol of materials num measurement of angles or bearings using a transit or a brunton compass .
pit boundaries and haul road routes shall be adequately marked and referenced to a centerline station number on the project .
d. haul roads unless specifically provided no separate payment will be made to the contractor for construction or maintenance of any roads constructed for hauling materials .
the cost of constructing maintaining and revegetating if necessary these haul roads shall be included in the prices bid for the pay items pertaining to the part of the work in which the materials are used .
other designated haul roads will be paid for in accordance with section num .
num field laboratory the contractor may be required to provide a field laboratory on or near the project consisting of a suitable building in which to house and use the equipment necessary to perform the required tests .
the building if required will meet the requirements of and be paid for in accordance with section num .
at all permanent plants producing asphaltic concrete portland cement concrete or cement stabilized base course materials a fully equipped plant laboratory shall be furnished at no expense to the department .
num inspection for nondomestic materials a .
materials manufactured outside the united states materials which are manufactured outside the united states shall be delivered to a distribution point in the united states where the materials shall be retained for a sufficient period of time to permit inspection sampling and testing .
the contractor at no cost to the department shall furnish facilities and arrange for all testing as required by the engineer to ensure that the materials comply with the specifications .
all such tests shall be made in the presence of the engineer or his representative and if the tests are performed outside of the boundaries of the state of georgia and its contiguous area the contractor shall reimburse the department for the expenses actually incurred by the engineer or his representative in attending the tests .
b .
certified mill test reports certified mill test reports shall be furnished for all materials obtained from foreign manufacturers .
such reports shall be printed in english and shall be clearly identifiable to the lot of material tested .
c. materials from foreign manufacturers materials shall be furnished only from those foreign manufacturers who have previously established to the satisfaction of the engineer the sufficiency of their inplant quality control which will give satisfactory assurance of the manufacturers ability to furnish material uniformly and consistently in compliance with the specifications .
such sufficiency shall be established by detailed written evidence to the engineers satisfaction or if deemed necessary through inplant inspection by the engineer or his representative the cost of such inspection to be reimbursed by the contractor .
d. structural steel fabricated outside the state of georgia in the event the contractor elects to have items of structural steel fabricated outside the boundaries of the state of georgia and its contiguous area the contractor shall reimburse the department for the actual cost of the shop inspection of such fabrication in excess of the average inspection cost for shop inspection of fabrication within the state of georgia and its contiguous area .
such actual costs of shop inspection may include the actual expenses incurred by the engineer or his representative in making an inplant inspection arranging for an approved inspection agency to make the shop inspection and the cost of the shop inspection by the approved inspection agency .
e. department reimbursement in the event the contractor fails to reimburse the department promptly for any of the costs established by this provision the contractor agrees that the amount of such costs may be deducted from amounts of money owing to the contractor on monthly estimates or final estimate .
f. definitions the following definitions shall apply to subsection num .
section numcontrol of materials num united states the geographical area of the united states of america excluding its territories and possessions .
state of georgia and contiguous area the geographical area within the state of georgia and those states which share a common border with the state of georgia .
average inspection cost the average of the actual expenses incurred in making an inspection within the area designated as determined by the engineer .
foreign manufacturer a manufacturer of materials where the materials are manufactured outside the geographical area of the united states .
num out of state materials payment materials payments to contractors who elect to have materials fabricated and stored outside the boundaries of the state of georgia shall be made under the following guidelines .
the contractor shall submit a written request to the engineer for an inspection of outofstate materials .
this request shall state that the contractor agrees to reimburse the department for the actual cost of travel subsistence and extra expense incurred by the department in the execution of this inspection and any subsequent inspection that may be necessary .
this request shall be signed by a person legally responsible to bind the company and shall be notarized .
in the event the contractor fails to reimburse the department promptly for any of the costs established by this provision the contractor agrees that the amount of such costs may be deducted from amounts of money owing to the contractor on monthly estimates or final estimate .
the above requirements are not applicable to the fabrication and materials payment for structural steel prestress beams precast bridge units and piling for bridge construction within the states which share a common border with the state of georgia .
section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public num laws to be observed the contractor shall keep fully informed of all federal and state laws all local laws ordinances codes and regulations and all orders and decrees of bodies or tribunals having any jurisdiction or authority which in any manner affect those engaged or employed on the work or which in any way affect the conduct of the work .
the contractor shall at all times observe and comply with all such laws ordinances codes regulations orders decrees and permits and shall protect and indemnify the department and its representatives against any claim or liability arising from or based on the violation of any such law ordinance code regulation order decrees and permits whether by himself his employees subcontractors or agents .
num permits and licenses the contractor shall procure all permits and licenses pay all charges taxes and fees and give all notices necessary and incidental to the due and lawful prosecution of the work .
num patented devices if the contractor employs any design device material or process covered by letters of patent or copyright he shall provide for such use by suitable legal agreement with the patentee or owner .
the contractor and the surety shall indemnify and save harmless the department from any and all claims for infringement by reason of the use of any such patented design device material or process or any trademark or copyright and shall indemnify the department for any costs expenses and damages which it may be obliged to pay by reason of any infringement at any time during the prosecution or after the completion of the work .
section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public num num restoration of surfaces opened by permit the right to construct or reconstruct any utility service in the highway or street and to grant permits for the same at any time is expressly reserved by the department for the proper authorities of the municipality or county in which the work is done and the contractor shall not be entitled to any damages either for the digging up of the street or highway or for any delay occasioned thereby .
any individual firm or corporation wishing to make an opening in the street or highway must secure a permit from the department .
the contractor shall allow parties bearing such permits and only those parties to make openings in the street or highway .
when ordered by the engineer the contractor shall make in an acceptable manner all necessary repairs due to such openings and such necessary work will be paid for as extra work or as provided in the specifications and will be subject to the same conditions as original work performed .
num federalaid provisions when the united states government pays all or any part of the cost of a project the federal laws and the rules and regulations made pursuant to such laws must be observed by the contractor and the work shall be subject to the inspection of the appropriate federal agency .
such inspection shall in no sense make the federal government a party to this contract and will in no way interfere with the rights of either party hereunder .
num sanitary provisions the contractor shall provide and maintain in a neat sanitary condition such accommodations for the use of his employees as may be necessary to comply with the requirements of the state department of health and other authorities having jurisdiction and shall permit no public nuisance .
num public convenience and safety the contractor shall at all times so conduct the work as to assure the least possible obstruction of traffic .
the safety and convenience of the general public and the residents along the highway and the protection of persons and property shall be provided for by the contractor as specified under subsection num subsection num section num the project plans and special provisions .
traffic whose origin and destination is within the limits of the project shall be provided ingress and egress at all times unless otherwise specified in the plans or special provisions .
the ingress and egress includes entrance and exit via driveways at the various properties and access to the intersecting roads and streets .
the contractor shall maintain sufficient personnel and equipment on the project at all times particularly during inclement weather to ensure that ingress and egress are provided when and where needed .
twoway traffic shall be maintained at all times unless otherwise specified or approved .
the contractor shall not stop traffic without permission granted by the engineer .
all equipment used on the work shall come equipped with factoryinstalled mufflers or manufacturers recommended equivalent in good condition .
these mufflers shall be maintained in good condition throughout the construction period .
num railroadhighway provisions all work to be performed by the contractor on a railroad companys rightofway or property shall be done in a manner satisfactory to the chief engineer of the railroad company or his authorized representative and shall be performed at such times and in such manner as not to unnecessarily interfere with the movement of trains or traffic upon the track of the railroad company .
the contractor shall use all reasonable care and precaution in order to avoid accidents damage or unnecessary delay or interference with the railroad companys trains or other property or property of tenants of railroad company .
the contractor shall notify the railroad company and obtain its approval before commencing work on the railroad companys rightofway or property .
the contractor shall determine what measures are required by the railroad company to protect its operations and rightofway or property during construction .
such protection may include the use of a flagger or flaggers provided by the railroad company .
the contractor shall be responsible for ensuring that the required protection is provided and shall pay the railroad section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public num company directly for any and all such services which may be required to accomplish the construction unless otherwise specified .
any temporary grade crossings or other means needed during construction by the contractor for transporting materials of any nature andor equipment across the railroad tracks will be the responsibility of the contractor to handle directly with the railroad company and bear all costs incidental to such crossings including flagging services provided by the railroad company .
a special provisions for the protection of railroad interests may be included in the proposal to stipulate insurance and other requirements of the railroad company .
num barricades and danger warning and detour signs the contractor shall furnish install and maintain all necessary and required barricades signs and other traffic control devices in accordance with these specifications project plans special provisions and the mutcd and take all necessary precautions for the protection of the work and safety of the public .
unless otherwise specified all traffic control devices furnished by the contractor shall remain the property of the contractor .
num forest protection in carrying out work within or adjacent to state or national forests or any other forests parks or other public or private lands the contractor shall obtain necessary permits and comply with all of the regulations of the appropriate authorities having jurisdiction over such forest park or lands .
the contractor shall keep the areas in an orderly condition dispose of all refuse obtain permits for the construction and maintenance of all construction camps stores warehouses residences latrines cesspools septic tanks and other structures in accordance with the requirements of the appropriate authority .
the contractor shall take all reasonable precautions to prevent and suppress forest fires and shall require his employees and subcontractors both independently and at the request of forest officials to do all reasonably within their power to prevent and suppress and to assist in preventing and suppressing forest fires to notify a forest official at the earliest possible moment of the location and extent of any fire seen by them and to extinguish or aid in extinguishing nearby fires .
num construction over or adjacent to navigable waters a. navigation to be protected since navigable waterways are under the jurisdiction of the united states coast guard andor the united states army corps of engineers all work done in over on or adjacent to such waters shall comply with their requirements .
free navigation shall not be impeded and navigable depths shall be maintained .
the contractor shall comply with permits issued by the united states coast guard andor the united states army corps of engineers and the contractor shall obtain and comply with other permits in accordance with the requirements of subsection num special provisions for environmental protection may be included in the proposal to stipulate environmental commitments and other requirements .
b. obstructions to be removed when the construction has progressed enough to permit removal all falsework piling and other obstructions shall be removed to the satisfaction of the federal agency having jurisdiction .
in all cases such clearing must be done thoroughly before the work will be accepted by the department .
num use of explosives when the use of explosives is necessary for the prosecution of the work the contractor shall exercise the utmost care not to endanger life or property and shall obey all state federal and other governmental regulations applying to transportation storage use and control of such explosives .
the contractor shall be completely responsible for any and all damage resulting from the transportation storage use and control of explosives in the prosecution of the work by the contractor the section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public num contractors agents or employees and shall hold the department harmless from all claims of damages resulting in any manner therefrom .
the contractor shall notify each public utility owner having structures or other installations above or below ground near the site of the work of his intention to use explosives .
such notice shall be given sufficiently in advance to enable the utility owners to take such steps as they may deem necessary to protect their property from injury .
such notice shall not relieve the contractor of responsibility for all damages resulting from his blasting operations .
all explosives shall be stored securely in compliance with all laws and ordinances and all such storage places shall be clearly marked dangerous explosives .
explosives and detonators shall be stored in separate storage facilities in separate areas .
where no laws or ordinances apply locked storage shall be provided satisfactory to the engineer never closer than num ft num m from any travelroad building or camping area .
in all cases where the transport storage or use of explosives is undertaken such activities shall be controlled and directed by fully qualified representatives of the contractor .
whenever electric detonators are used all radio transmitters shall be turned off within a radius of num ft num m. no blasting supplies shall be transported in vehicles with twoway radio unless the transmitter is turned off or extra shielding precautions are taken .
appropriate signs shall be placed so as to give ample warning to anyone driving a vehicle equipped with twoway radio .
electrical detonators will not be used within num ft num m of a railroad .
submit a blasting plan to the engineer a minimum of five working days prior to use of explosives that provides details of the proposed blasting plan including but not limited to the type and amount of explosives the shot sequence the description of and distance to the closest inhabitable structure and other information as requested by the engineer .
do not begin blasting until the blasting plan has been reviewed and approved in writing by the engineer .
such approval does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for the adequate and safe performance of the blasting .
num protection and restoration of property and landscape a .
general provisions the contractor shall be responsible for the preservation of all public and private property crops fish ponds trees monuments highway signs and markers fences grassed and sodded areas etc .
along and adjacent to the highway and shall use every precaution necessary to prevent damage or injury thereto unless the removal alteration or destruction of such property is provided for under the contract .
the contractor shall use suitable precaution to prevent damage to all underground structures whether shown on the plans or not and shall protect carefully from disturbance or damage all land monuments and property marks until the engineer has witnessed or otherwise referenced their location and shall not move them until directed .
the contractor shall not willfully or maliciously injure or destroy trees or shrubs and he shall not remove or cut them without proper authority .
the contractor shall be responsible for all sheet piling shoring underpinning etc .
as may be required for the protection of abutting property nearby buildings streets and the like .
the contractor shall be responsible for all damage or injury to property of any character during the prosecution of the work resulting from any act omission neglect or misconduct in his manner or method of executing the work or at any time due to defective work or materials and said responsibility will not be released until the project shall have been completed and accepted .
when the contractors excavating operations encounter remains of prehistoric peoples dwelling sites or artifacts of historical or archeological significance the operations shall be temporarily discontinued .
the engineer will contact archeological authorities and the office of environment and location to determine the disposition thereof .
when directed by the engineer the contractor shall excavate the site in such a manner as to preserve the artifacts encountered and shall remove them for delivery to the custody of the proper authorities .
such excavation will be considered and paid for as extra work .
when the contractors normal operations are delayed by such stoppage or extra work an appropriate time extension will be granted .
the contractor shall plan coordinate and prosecute the work so that disruption to personal property and business is held to a practical minimum .
section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public num no resident or business shall be denied vehicular access to their property for any length of time other than as determined by the engineer is absolutely necessary .
where two or more existing driveways are present for a business only one existing driveway shall be closed at any time .
all construction areas abutting lawns and yards of residential or commercial property shall be restored promptly .
backfilling of each drainage structure or section of curb and gutter sidewalk or driveway shall be accomplished as soon as adequate strength is obtained .
finishing dressing and grassing shall be accomplished immediately thereafter as a continuous operation within each area being constructed with emphasis placed on completing each individual yard or business frontage .
care shall be taken to provide positive drainage to avoid ponding or concentration of runoff .
handwork including raking and smoothing shall be required to ensure that roots sticks rocks and other debris are removed in order to provide a neat and pleasing appearance .
grassing when in season shall immediately follow in order to establish permanent cover at the earliest date .
if grassing is not in season proper erosion control shall be installed and maintained .
the work described above shall be in addition to that required by subsection num final cleaning up and subsection num final inspection and acceptance .
b .
erosion and siltation control the contractor shall take all necessary measures throughout the life of the project to control erosion and silting of rivers streams and impoundments lakes reservoirs etc .. construction of drainage facilities as well as performance of other contract work which will contribute to the control of erosion and siltation shall be carried out in conjunction with clearing and grubbing and earthwork operations as stipulated in section num .
c. pollution the contractor shall exercise every reasonable precaution throughout the life of the contract to prevent pollution of rivers streams or impoundments .
pollutants such as chemicals fuels lubricants bitumens raw sewage and other harmful waste shall not be discharged into or alongside rivers streams and impoundments or into natural or manmade channels leading thereto .
the contractor shall also comply with the applicable regulations of other state and federal departments and to all governmental statues relating to the prevention and abatement of pollution .
d. insect control regulations the plant pest control division of the u.s. department of agriculture and the georgia state department of agriculture restrict the movement of certain items from areas infested with japanese beetles or imported fire ants so as to prevent the spread of these pests to noninfested areas .
where insect infested areas are shown on the plans contractors will control their operations in such a manner as to comply fully with the requirements of section num .
e. reclamation of material pits and waste disposal areas whenever or wherever the contractor obtains material from a source or wastes material on an area other than within the rightofway regardless of the fashion manner or circumstances for which the source or area is obtained it shall be reclaimed in accordance with the requirements of section num .
f. mailboxes the property owner shall have the responsibility for removing and relocating the mailbox to an area outside construction limits .
the engineer will mark a point for the relocation of the box .
the stake should be set so that the location of the box will be convenient to both the mail carrier and the patron yet not interfering with the proposed work .
it may be necessary for the engineer to confer with the post office serving the area .
the contractor shall notify each affected owner in writing that their mailbox is in conflict with the proposed construction that they have ten days to relocate the box and that after the expiration of the num days notice if the owner has not relocated the box it shall be removed by the contractor and laid upon the owners property clear of the rightof way .
any cost to the contractor for removing the mailboxes as stated above shall be included in the price bid for other items .
section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public num g. failure to comply failure of the contractor to comply with any of the above provisions or to install erosion prevention items included in the contract at the time specified will be evidence of omission and neglect and the contractor will be liable for damages as outlined in subsection num.h below .
furthermore the engineer shall withhold payment on all contract items until such time as the contractor complies in full with all of the aforesaid provisions .
h. payment for damages when or where any direct or indirect damage or injury is done to public or private property by or on account of any act omission neglect or misconduct in the execution of the work or in consequence of the nonexecution thereof by the contractor the contractor shall restore at his own expense such property to a condition similar or equal to that existing before such damage or injury was done by repairing rebuilding or otherwise restoring as may be directed or shall make good such damage or injury in an acceptable manner .
i .
compensation all costs pertaining to any requirement contained herein shall be included in the overall bid submitted unless such requirement is designated as a separate pay item in the proposal .
num load restrictions it is hereby agreed between the department and the contractor that in the performance of the work under the contract the following load restrictions and stipulations shall be in full force and effect during the life of the contract a .
parties affected the load restrictions and stipulations contained herein shall be applicable to the equipment of the contractor each agent or subcontractor employed by the contractor and each person or persons firm partnership corporation or any combination thereof hauling materials supplies or equipment to or on the project by or for the contractor .
b .
within project limits no hauling equipment which is loaded beyond those limits provided by state law shall be permitted on any portion of the new or existing pavement structure except that such loads will be permitted on nonstabilized bases and subbases prior to placing roadway paving subject to the provisions of subsection num .
axle loads and gross weight limits will be evaluated in accordance with current georgia law .
all damage caused by any equipment to any permanent installation or portion of the work shall be promptly repaired by the contractor at his expense .
when it becomes necessary to cross existing pavement with excessive loads the contractor shall provide and remove at his own expense proper cushioning by means of earth blanket or otherwise as directed .
c. outside project limits all equipment users included in subsection num.a above operating equipment on roads outside the project limits shall be governed by the following regulations num .
no vehicle shall carry any load in excess of that specified by georgia law .
num .
on county system roads the maximum total gross weight shall not exceed num lbs num kg unless a vehicle is making a pickup or delivery on such roads .
num .
for a specific individual trip the above weight limitations may be exceeded provided a special permit is obtained from the department for each such movement .
a special permit will not relieve the contractor of liability for damage that may result from such a movement .
num .
authorized personnel of the office of permits and enforcement of the department shall be permitted to weigh each truck hauling material to the project whenever the department so desires .
the owner of each truck shall instruct his operators to cooperate with and assist the truck weighers in every way possible .
section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public num num .
a certified public weigher operating under the provisions of standard operating procedure num shall not dispatch any vehicle loaded with material to be incorporated into the project when the gross vehicle weight exceeds the limit established by law .
num .
ready mix concrete trucks shall comply with load restrictions as specified in laboratory standard operating procedure num quality assurance for readymixed concrete plants in georgia .
d. responsibilities it will be the responsibility of the contractor to advise his personnel and all equipment users included in subsection num.a as to the load restrictions and stipulations contained herein .
e. excess loads and violations any load that exceeds the legal limits specified by law may be accepted at the engineers discretion for use in the work however weight exceeding the legal limits will be deducted from the total weight and the contractor will not receive payment for the deducted portion of materials .
for items not measured for payment by weight the excess weight will be correlated to the appropriate pay quantity and this amount will be deducted from the payment .
the loads of haulers who refuse to have their vehicles weighed will be rejected .
if multiple violations assignable to a given certified public weigher are occurring that certified public weigher may be suspended from weighing materials dispatched to department of transportation projects .
num responsibility for damage claims the contractor shall indemnify and save harmless the department its officers and employees from all suits actions orclaims of any character brought because of any injuries or damage received or sustained by any person persons or property on account of the operations of the said contractor or on account of or in consequence of any neglect in safeguarding the work or through use of unacceptable materials in constructing the work or because of any act of omission neglect or misconduct of said contractor or because of any claims or amounts recovered from any infringements of patent trademark or copyright or from any claims or amounts arising or recovered under the workmens compensation act or any other law ordinance order or decree and so much of the money due the said contractor under and by virtue of his contract as may be considered necessary by the department for such purpose may be withheld for the use of the state or in case no money is due his surety may be held until such suit or suits action or actions claim or claims for injuries or damages as aforesaid shall have been settled and suitable evidence to that effect furnished to the department except that money due the contractor will not be withheld when the contractor produces satisfactory evidence that he is adequately protected by public liability and property damage insurance .
num opening sections of project to traffic whenever any bridge or section of roadway is in acceptable condition for travel the engineer may direct that it be opened to traffic whether or not the opening was originally provided for and such opening shall not be held to be in any way an acceptance of the bridge or roadway or any part thereof or as a waiver of any of the provisions of the contract .
necessary repairs or renewals made on any section of the roadway or bridge thus opened to traffic under instructions from the engineer due to defective material or work or to any cause other than ordinary wear and tear pending completion and acceptance of the roadway bridge or other work shall be done by the contractor without additional compensation .
also the contractor shall not receive additional compensation for completing the work except as specified in subsection num .
if the contractor is dilatory in completing shoulders drainage structures or other features of work the engineer may so notify him in writing and establish therein a reasonable period of time in which the work should be completed .
if the contractor is dilatory or fails to make a reasonable effort toward completion in this period of time the engineer may then order all or a portion of the project opened to traffic .
on such sections which are so ordered to be opened the contractor shall conduct the remainder of his construction operations so as to cause the least obstruction to traffic and shall not receive any added compensation due to the added cost of the work by reason of opening such section to traffic .
on any section opened to traffic under any of the above conditions whether stated in the special provisions or opened by necessity of contractors operations or unforeseen necessity any damage to the highway not attributable to traffic which might occur on such section except slides shall be repaired by the contractor at his expense .
the removal of slides shall be done by the contractor on a basis agreed to prior to the removal of such slides .
section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public num num contractors responsibility for the work from the first day the contractor begins work or from the date contract time commences whichever occurs first until written final acceptance of the project by the engineer the contractor shall have the charge and care thereof and shall take every precaution against injury or damage to any part thereof by the action of the elements or from any other cause whether arising from the execution or from the nonexecution of the work .
the contractor shall rebuild repair restore and make good all injuries or damages to any portion of the work occasioned by any of the above causes before final acceptance and shall bear the expense thereof except that the department may in its discretion reimburse the contractor for the repair of damage to the work due to unforeseeable causes beyond the control of and without the fault or negligence of the contractor including but not restricted to acts of god of the public enemy or of governmental authorities .
the contractors responsibility for damages and injuries is defined in subsection num.a .
in case of suspension of work from any cause whatsoever the contractor shall be responsible for the project and shall take such precautions as may be necessary to prevent damage to the project provide for normal drainage and shall erect any necessary temporary structures signs or other facilities at his expense .
num acquisition of rightofway rights of way for the project will be obtained by the department in coordination with local governments and others .
however the contractors access to the portions of the rightofway may be restricted .
where such restrictions are known in advance to the department they will be listed in the bid proposal .
delays to the progress of the work may be encountered because of restricted access to portions of the rightofway .
when such delays occur whether caused by restrictions listed in the bid proposal or restrictions that develop after the contract is signed the parties agree in executing the contract that such delays do not constitute breach of the contract .
delays in availability of rightofway beyond those listed in the bid proposal or that develop after the contract has been signed that impact the controlling item or items of the work will not be charged against the contract time .
additional compensation for such delays shall not be paid except as provided in subsection num claims for adjustments and disputes or subsection num termination clause .
in the event the department is unable to acquire rightofway needed for the project resulting in delay to or termination of the project such situation will also be controlled by this section and will not constitute a breach of the contract by the department .
num personal liability of public officials in carrying out any of the provisions of the contract or in exercising any power or authority granted to the board commissioner chief engineer their agents and employees by the contract there shall be no liability either personally or as officials or representatives of the department it being understood that in all such matters they act solely as agents and representatives of the department .
num no waiver of legal rights upon completion of the work the department will expeditiously make final inspection and notify the contractor of acceptance .
such final acceptance however shall not preclude or estop the department from correcting any measurement estimate or certificate made before or after completion of the work nor shall the department be precluded or estopped from recovering from the contractor or his surety or both such overpayment as it may sustain or by failure on the part of the contractor to fulfill his obligations under the contract .
a waiver on the part of the department of any breach of any part of the contract shall not be held to be a waiver of any other or subsequent breach .
the contractor without prejudice to the terms of the contract shall be liable to the department for latent defects fraud or such gross mistakes as may amount to fraud or as regards the departments rights under any warranty or guaranty .
num contractors responsibility for utility property and services a .
overhead or underground utility facilities at points where the contractors operations are adjacent to or conflict with overhead or underground utility facilities or are adjacent to other property damage to which might result in considerable expense loss or inconvenience work shall not be commenced until all arrangements necessary for the protection thereof have been made .
section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public num b .
utility facility owners the names of known utility owners and the location of known utility facilities will be shown on the plans or in the special provisions and the contractor shall give numhour notice to such utility owners before commencing work adjacent to said utility facilities which may result in damage thereto .
contractor shall further notify utility owners of any changes in his work schedules affecting required action by the utility owners to protect or adjust their facilities .
notice to the utility companies by the department of the award of contract under subsection num shall not be deemed to satisfy the notice required by this paragraph .
c. cooperation with facility owners the contractor shall cooperate with the owners of any underground or overhead utility facilities in their removal and rearrangement operations in order that these operations may progress in a reasonable manner that duplication of rearrangement work may be reduced to a minimum and that services rendered by those parties will not be unnecessarily interrupted .
d. interruption of services in the event of interruption to water or other utility services as a result of accidental breakage or as a result of being exposed or unsupported the contractor shall promptly notify the proper authority and shall cooperate with the said authority in the restoration of service .
if utility service is interrupted repair work shall be continuous until the service is restored .
no work shall be undertaken around fire hydrants until provisions for continued service have been approved by the local fire authority .
e. facilities supported on bridges if the utility facilities are to be supported on bridges the following provisions shall apply num .
the plans will show the location of the facility and the auxiliary items necessary to support the facility .
num .
the contractor who constructs the bridge shall install anchor bolts thimbles inserts or other auxiliary items that are attached to the bridge as a part of the support for the utility facility .
the utility owner at his or her expense shall furnish these auxiliary items unless the contract indicates that these items are to be furnished by the contractor as a part of the bridge .
num .
the agency constructing the utility facility shall install hanger rods pipe rolls and other attachments necessary for the support of the utility facility as indicated on the plans .
the utility owner at his expense shall furnish these attachments unless otherwise specified .
this work shall also include a. caulking the openings around the utility where it passes through endwalls to prevent the passage of undesirable materials .
b. painting the exposed portions of utility supports unless such supports are corrosion resistant .
painting shall be done in accordance with the applicable portions of section num unless otherwise specified .
num .
the sequence of bridge construction work may be set forth in the plans andor the special provisions and will show at what stage of the work a utility owner will be allowed to make the utility installation .
further all or any portion of the work under subsection num.e.num may be included in the bridge contract by the plans andor the special provisions .
num .
any damage to the bridge structure caused by the utility installation shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the engineer at the expense of the agency installing the utility facility .
f. clearances the plans provide for at least minimum clearance of utilities as required by the national electrical safety code u.s. department of commerce national bureau of standards .
any additional clearance the contractor may desire or require in performing the work shall be arranged by the contractor with the utility owner .
the department will pay no extra compensation for such additional clearances .
g. delays delays and interruptions to the controlling item or items of the work caused by the adjustment or repair of water gas or other utility appurtenances and property will be considered for an extention of contract time as provided in subsection num unless such delays are due to the negligence of the contractor .
section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public num h. compensation there will be no direct compensation for complying with the above .
any additional cost to the contractor for the above services interruptions or special procedures shall be included in the overall bid submitted .
num hazardous andor toxic waste when the contractors operations encounter or expose any abnormal condition which may indicate the presence of a hazardous andor toxic waste such operations shall be discontinued in the vicinity of the abnormal condition and the engineer shall be notified immediately .
the presence of barrels discolored earth metal wood or visible fumes abnormal odors excessively hot earth smoke or anything else which appears abnormal may be indicators of hazardous andor toxic wastes and shall be treated with extraordinary caution as they are evidence of abnormal conditions .
the contractors operations shall not resume until so directed by the engineer .
disposition of the hazardous andor toxic waste will be made in accordance with the requirements and regulations of the department of human resources and the department of natural resources .
where the contractor performs work necessary to dispose of hazardous andor toxic waste payment will be made at the unit prices for pay items included in the contract which are applicable to such work or where the contract does not include such pay items payment will be as provided in subsection num extra work .
num environmental considerations a .
construction erosion control measures shall be installed to the greatest practical extent prior to clearing and grubbing .
particular care shall be exercised along stream buffers wetlands open waters and other sensitive areas to ensure that these areas are not adversely affected .
construction equipment shall not cross streams rivers or other waterways except at temporary stream crossing structures shown on the plans or as allowed by permit .
construction activities within wetland areas are prohibited except for those within the construction limits as shown on the plans and as specified in subsection num.e .
all sediment control devices except sediment basins installed on a project shall as a minimum be cleaned of sediment when one half the capacity by height depth or volume has been reached .
sediment basins shall be cleaned of sediment when onethird the capacity by volume has been reached .
b. bridge construction over waterways construction waste or debris from bridge construction or demolition shall be prevented from being allowed to fall or be placed into wetlands streams rivers or lakes .
excavation dewatering and cleaning of cofferdams shall be performed in such a manner as to prevent siltation .
pumping from cofferdams to a settling basin or a containment unit will be required if deemed necessary by the engineer .
operations required within rivers or streams i.e .
jetting or spudding shall be performed within silt containment areas cofferdams silt fence sediment barriers or other devices to minimize migration of silt off the project .
c. borrow and excess material pits specific written environmental clearance from the engineer will be required for any sites not included in the plans as excess material or borrow areas .
no work other than testing shall be started at any potential excess material or borrow site not shown on the plans prior to receiving said environmental clearance from the engineer .
the engineer will require a written notice from the contractor requesting environmental clearance studies and written permission from the property owner at least six weeks prior to intended use of the site .
the department will not begin studies on such sites before a notice to proceed is issued .
section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public num the engineer will inform the contractor in writing as to the granting or denial of environmental clearance .
if denied the contractor may at no expense to the department seek to obtain permits or pursue other remedies that might otherwise render the sites acceptable .
sites included in the plans have environmental clearance and shall be used only for the purposes specified in the plans or other contract documents .
should the contractor wish to expand or utilize said sites for any purpose other than that provided for in the plans or other contract documents specific written environmental clearance as noted above shall be obtained .
d. control of pollutants pollutants or potentially hazardous materials such as fuels lubricants lead paint chemicals or batteries shall be transported stored and used in a manner to prevent leakage or spillage into the environment .
the contractor shall also be responsible for proper and legal disposal of all such materials .
equipment especially concrete or asphalt trucks shall not be washed or cleanedout on the project except in areas where unused product contaminants can be prevented from entering waterways .
e. temporary work in wetlands outside of the construction limits within the rightofway and easement areas temporary work in wetlands that are not delineated with orange barrier fence will be subject to the following requirements num .
temporary work in wetlands shall be accomplished by using temporary structures timber concrete soil with geotextile fabric or other suitable matting .
the area shall not be grubbed .
num .
soil matting shall be protected from erosion in accordance with the specifications .
num .
whenever temporary work is required in saltwater marsh wetlands all temporary structures andor matting shall be removed in their entirety prior to final acceptance of the project .
matted and compressed soils shall be backfilled to their original ground elevation with material meeting the requirements of section num granular embankment .
num .
whenever temporary work is required in freshwater wetlands all temporary structures andor matting exclusive of soil matting to be retained in the final roadway section shall be removed in their entirety prior to final acceptance of the project .
once the temporary materials have been removed the area shall be covered by excelsior or straw blankets according to section num of the specifications .
the grassing and ground preparation referenced in subsection num preparation will not be applicable to this work .
num .
the engineer shall be notified so that a field inspection may be conducted to certify that the temporary materials were properly removed and that the area was properly restored .
the contractor shall be responsible for any corrective action required to complete this work .
num .
there will be no separate measurement or payment for this work .
the cost associated with this work shall be included in the overall bid submitted .
f. environmentally sensitive areas some archaeological sites historic sites wetlands streams stream and pond buffers open waters and protected animal and plant species habitat within the existingrequired rightofway and easement areas may be designated as environmentally sensitive areas esas .
these areas are shown on the applicable plan sheets and labeled esa e.g .
esa historical boundary esa wetland boundary .
the department may require that some esas or portions thereof be delineated with orange barrier fence .
the contractor shall install maintain and replace as necessary orange barrier fence at esas as delineated in the plan sheets .
section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public num the contractor shall not enter disturb or perform any construction related activities other than those shown on the approved plan sheets within areas designated as esas including esas or portions thereof not delineated with orange barrier fence .
this includes but is not limited to the following construction activities clearing and grubbing borrowing wasting grading filling stagingstockpiling vehicular use and parking sediment basin placement trailer placement and equipment cleaning and storage .
also all archaeological sites historic sites wetlands streams stream and pond buffers open waters and protected animal and plant species habitat that extend beyond the limits of existingrequired rightof way and easement areas shall be considered esas and the contractor shall not perform any construction related activities such as those listed above within these areas or make agreements with property owners to occupy these areas for construction related activities such as those listed above .
the contractor shall make all construction employees aware of the locations of each esa and the requirement to not enter or otherwise disturb these areas .
if the contractor is found to have entered an esa either within or outside the project area for any purpose not specifically shown on the approved plan sheets the department may at its discretion issue a stop work order for all activities on the project except erosion control and traffic control until such time as all equipment and other items are removed and the esa is restored to its original condition .
however should damage to an esa occur as a result of the contractors action in violation of this section and notwithstanding any subsequent correction by the contractor the contractor shall be liable for any cost arising from such action including but not limited to the cost of repair remediation of any fines or mitigation fees assessed against the department by another government entity .
num closing of roadways without onsite detours when existing roadways are to be closed to through traffic and onsite detours are not provided the contractor shall submit a written notice to the engineer for approval num days prior to the closure of the existing roadways .
after receiving approval from the engineer for the closure the contractor shall install signs at each closure site in accordance with the mutcd to inform the traveling public of the proposed closure including the date of closure .
the sign shall be placed num days prior to the closure at the direction of the engineer .
prior to the closure the area engineer will inform local government officials and agencies local news media and the dot public information office of the proposed closure of the roadways .
num disruption to residential and commercial property the contractor shall plan coordinate and prosecute the work such that disruption to personal property and business is held to a practical minimum .
all construction areas abutting lawns and yards of residential or commercial property shall be restored promptly .
backfilling of each drainage structure or section of curb and gutter sidewalk or driveway shall be accomplished as soon as adequate strength is obtained .
finishing dressing and grassing shall be accomplished immediately thereafter as a continuous operation within each area being constructed with emphasis placed on completing each individual yard or business frontage .
care shall be taken to provide positive drainage to avoid ponding or concentration of runoff .
handwork including raking and smoothing shall be required to ensure that roots sticks rocks and other debris is removed in order to provide a neat and pleasing appearance .
grassing when in season shall immediately follow in order to establish permanent cover at the earliest date .
if grassing is not in season proper erosion control shall be installed and maintained .
the work described herein shall be in addition to that required by subsection num final cleaning up and subsection num final inspection and acceptance .
num section numprosecution and progress num subletting of contract the contractor shall not sublet sell transfer assign or otherwise dispose of the contract or contracts or any portion thereof or of hisher right title or interest therein without written consent of the engineer .
for subcontracts consent of the engineer will not be considered until after award of the contract .
in case such consent is given the contractor will be permitted to sublet a portion thereof but shall perform with hisher own organization work amounting to not less than thirty percent num of the total contract cost including materials equipment and labor .
as further exception any items designated as specialty items may be performed by subcontract and the cost of any such specialty items so performed by subcontract may be deducted from the total cost before computing the amount of work required to be performed by the contractor with hisher own organization .
purchase of materials by the prime contractor for use by a subcontractor will not be allowed when computing the num requirement .
no subcontracts or transfer of contract shall in any case release the prime contractor of hisher liability under the contract and bonds .
no subcontractor shall commence work in advance of the written approval of the subcontract by the department .
except for certain items exempted by the state transportation board each subcontractor shall be prequalified or registered with the department .
each subcontract for a registered subcontractor shall not exceed num and subcontracts for prequalified contractors shall not exceed their current capacity .
prequalified or registered subcontractors shall be qualified or registered with the department in accordance with chapter num of the rules and regulations governing the prequalification of prospective bidders adopted by the state transportation board .
in the event any portion of a subcontract is further sublet all of the provisions governing subletting including registration and written approval by the engineer shall apply .
this subsection shall not apply to contracts between the department and counties municipalities or other state agencies .
all subcontract agreements between the prime contractor and subcontractor shall be in writing and shall contain all of the federalaid requirements and pertinent provisions of the prime contract .
the prime contractor shall upon request by the engineer furnish copies of any subcontract agreement to the department within ten num days of such request .
this provision applies to all subcontracts including second or multitier subcontracts .
according to the provisions stated above the following items are designated specialty items for general transportation system construction and building construction whenever they appear in the contract general transportation system contracts grassing items fencing items highway lighting items sign items guardrail items except bridge handrail utility items comfort and convenience items in rest areas landscaping items pressure grouting slab removal and replacement permanent traffic markings signal systems railroad track work above subballast drilled caisson foundations section numprocecution and progress num construction layout asphaltic concrete leveling and asphalt concrete patching when used on surface treatment and slurry seal resurfacing contracts building contracts structural steel plumbing heating ventilation and air conditioning hvac electrical telephone service masonry glass work drywall ceiling installation roofing carpentry floor covering raised flooring landscaping security system fire protection gutters painting insulation doors elevators construction layout the contractors cost for construction layout shall be fully documented prior to deduction from the original contract amount num notice to proceed the delivery to the contractor of a notice stating that construction is authorized constitutes notice to proceed .
the contractor shall do no work under the contract until receipt of the notice to proceed and the department will not be obligated to pay for work done prior to receipt of the notice to proceed .
within num calendar days after the notice to proceed has been issued the contractor shall begin the work .
contract time charges for available day and calendar day projects will begin on the date the contractor starts to work or num days after the notice to proceed whichever occurs first .
for completion date projects contract time charges shall begin on the day after the notice to proceed .
where the contractors access to part of the rightofway is restricted either the special provisions in the contract or the conditional notice to proceed will indicate such restrictions .
the department may at its option issue a conditional notice to proceed if in the opinion of the engineer a sufficient portion of the rightofway is available to the contractor to allow construction to proceed .
section numprocecution and progress num num prosecution and progress the contractor shall provide sufficient materials equipment and labor to guarantee the completion of the project in accordance with the plans and specifications within the time set forth in the proposal .
unless otherwise required by the engineer each operation shall begin as soon after the contract is awarded as conditions will permit .
each class of work will be expected to continue from the date it is begun until it is completed .
the contractor shall furnish the engineer for approval a progress schedule immediately following the receipt of the notice to proceed .
unless otherwise specified the schedule shall be prepared on forms furnished by the department or an acceptable critical path schedule will be used as the basis for establishing the controlling items of work and as a check on the progress of the work .
this schedule will not be required on resurfacing projects .
approval of the progress schedule shall not be construed to imply approval of any particular method or sequence of construction or to relieve the contractor of providing sufficient materials equipment and labor to guarantee the completion of the project in accordance with the plans specifications and special provisions within the time set forth in the proposal .
contract time as shown in the proposal is the allowable time .
the contractors proposed progress schedule may indicate a completion date in advance of the contract specified completion date however the department will not be liable in any way for the contractors failure to complete the project prior to the contract specified completion date .
at least num hours before commencing the work the contractor shall notify the engineer of his intention to begin so that proper inspection may be provided .
should the prosecution of the work be discontinued for any reason the contractor shall notify the engineer at least num hours in advance of resuming operations .
if the contractors operations are materially affected by changes in the plans or in the amount of work or if he has failed to comply with the approved schedule the contractor shall submit a revised progress schedule if requested by the engineer which schedule shall show how he proposes to prosecute the balance of the work .
the contractor shall submit the revised progress schedule within num days after the date of the request .
the contractor shall incorporate into every progress schedule submitted any contract requirements regarding the order of performance of portions of the work .
no payments will be made to the contractor while he is delinquent in the submission of a progress schedule or a revised progress schedule .
num limitation of operations the contractor shall conduct the work at all times in such a manner and in such sequence as will assure the least interference with traffic and shall provide for smooth and safe traffic flow .
it shall be the decision of the engineer as to what will assure the least interference with traffic and smooth safe traffic flow .
also the engineer may require the contractor to finish a section on which work is in progress before work is started on any additional sections if the opening of such section is essential to public convenience .
num character of workers methods and equipment the contractor shall at all times employ sufficient labor and equipment for prosecuting the several classes of work to full completion in the manner and time required by these specifications .
all workers shall have sufficient skill and experience to perform properly the work assigned to them .
workers engaged in special or skilled work shall have sufficient experience in such work and in the operation of the equipment required to perform all work properly and satisfactorily .
any person employed by the contractor or by any subcontractor who the engineer determines does not perform work in a proper and skilled manner or is intemperate or disorderly shall at the written request of the engineer be removed forthwith by the contractor or subcontractor employing such person and shall not be employed again in any portion of the work without the approval of the engineer .
should the contractor fail to remove such person or persons as required above or fail to furnish suitable and sufficient personnel for the proper prosecution of the work the engineer may suspend the work by written notice until such orders are complied with .
section numprocecution and progress num all equipment that is proposed to be used on the work shall be of sufficient size and in such mechanical condition as to meet the requirements of the work and to produce a satisfactory quality of work .
equipment used on any portion of the project shall be such that no injury to the roadway adjacent property or other highways will result from its use .
when the methods and equipment to be used by the contractor in accomplishing the construction are not prescribed in the contract the contractor is free to use any methods or equipment that he demonstrates to the satisfaction of the engineer will accomplish the work in conformity with the requirements of the contract .
when the contract specifies that the construction be performed by the use of certain methods and equipment such methods and equipment shall be used unless others are authorized by the engineer .
if the contractor desires to use a method or type of equipment other than those specified in the contract he may request authority from the engineer to do so .
the request shall be in writing and shall include a full description of the methods and equipment proposed to be used and an explanation of the reasons for desiring to make the change .
if approval is given it will be on the condition that the contractor will be fully responsible for producing construction work in conformity with contract requirements .
if after trial use of the substituted methods or equipment the engineer determines that the work produced does not meet contract requirements the contractor shall discontinue the use of the substitute method or equipment and shall complete the remaining construction with the specified methods and equipment .
the contractor shall remove the deficient work and replace it with work of specified quality or take such other corrective action as the engineer may direct .
no change will be made in basis of payment for the construction items involved nor in contract time as a result of authorizing a change in methods or equipment under these provisions .
num temporary suspension of work the engineer has the authority to suspend the work wholly or in part for as long as he may deem necessary because of unsuitable weather or other conditions considered unfavorable for continuing the work or for as long as he may deem necessary by reason of failure of the contractor to carry out orders given or to comply with any provisions of the contract .
no additional compensation will be paid the contractor because of suspension .
if it becomes necessary to stop the work for an indefinite period the contractor shall store all materials in such a way that they will not impede the traveling public unnecessarily or become damaged in any way and he shall take every precaution to prevent damage or deterioration of the work done provide suitable drainage of the roadway and erect temporary structures where necessary .
the work shall be resumed when conditions are favorable or when corrective measures satisfactory to the engineer have been applied when and as ordered by the engineer in writing .
the contractor shall not stop the work without authority .
if the work is stopped by any temporary or permanent injunction court restraining order process or judgment of any kind directed to either of the parties hereto then such period or delay will not be charged against the contract time nor shall the department be liable to the contractor on account of such delay or termination of work num determination of contract time the definition of contract time and when contract time officially begins is stated in subsection num .
after the contract has been signed by all parties contract time becomes the specified period of time agreed upon by the contractor the surety and the department during which all items and quantities of work set forth in the proposal and included in the original contract will be completed .
a .
available day contracts an available day is defined in subsection num .
the engineer will furnish the contractor a written monthly statement showing the total number of available days charged through the preceding month .
the contractor will be allowed one week in which to file a written protest setting forth in what respect said statement is incorrect otherwise the statement shall be deemed to have been accepted by the contractor as correct .
b .
calendar day contracts when the contract time is on a calendar day basis it shall consist of the number of calendar days stated in the contract counting from the date contract time starts as defined in subsection num including all sundays holidays and non work days .
c. completion day contracts section numprocecution and progress num when the contract completion time is a fixed date it shall be the date on which all work on the project shall be completed .
d. settlement periods settlement periods shall be computed in calendar days unless otherwise stated in the contract documents .
e. extension of contract time if satisfactory fulfillment of the contract requires performance of work in greater quantities than those set forth in the proposal the contract time allowed for performance shall be extended on a basis commensurate with the amount and difficulty of the added work as determined by the engineer whose decision shall be final and conclusive .
if the estimated time for the consolidation of embankments at bridge ends is extended the contract time will be extended as provided in subsection num.b.num .
if the normal progress of the work is delayed for reasons beyond his control the contractor shall within num days after the start of such delay file a written request to the engineer for an extension of time setting forth therein the reasons and providing complete documentation for the delay which he believes will justify the granting of his request .
the contractors plea that insufficient time was specified is not a valid reason for extension of time .
if the engineer finds that the work was delayed because of conditions beyond the control and without the fault of the contractor he may extend the time for completion in such amount as the conditions justify .
any authorized extension of the contract time will be in full force and effect the same as though it was the original contract time .
f. suspension of time charges if the engineer suspends the work by reason of failure of the contractor to carry out written orders given or to comply with any provision of the contract time charges will continue through the period of such suspension .
if the contractor is declared in default time charges will continue .
except on completion date contracts time charges will not be made against the contract when the only remaining controlling items of work are shut down by the engineer because of seasonal limitations or temperature controls .
g. when time charges cease time charges will cease when all work on contract items have been completed to the satisfaction of the engineer .
the only exception to this requirement is that a satisfactory growth of vegetative cover and applications of nitrogen will not be required when time charges are stopped provided all filling of washes and repairs to planted areas have been accomplished .
maintenance of planted areas in order to produce a satisfactory growth after time charges have stopped will be performed without assessment of liquidated damages provided this work is diligently prosecuted .
if during this waiting period maintenance of any part of the project is inadequate the engineer may resume time charges num days after written notification to the contractor and will continue time charges until the unsatisfactory conditions are corrected .
num failure or delay in completing work on time time is an essential element of the contract and any delay in the prosecution of the work may inconvenience the public obstruct traffic or interfere with business .
in addition to the aforementioned inconveniences any delay in completion of the work will always increase the cost of engineering .
for this reason it is important that the work be pressed vigorously to completion .
should the contractor or in case of default the surety fail to complete the work within the time stipulated in the contract or within such extra time that may be allowed charges shall be assessed against any money due or that may become due the contractor in accordance with the following schedule section numprocecution and progress num schedule of deductions for each day of overrun in contract time original contract amount daily charges from more than to and including available day calendar day or completion date num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num when the contract time is on either the calendar day or completion date basis the schedule for calendar days shall be used .
when the contract time is based on an available day basis the schedule for available days shall be used .
for each calendar day or available day as specified that any work shall remain uncompleted after the contract time specified for the completion of the work required by the contract the sum specified in the contract will be deducted from any money due the contractor not as a penalty but as liquidated damages provided however that due account shall be taken of any adjustment of the contract time for completion of the work granted under the provisions of subsection num.e .
the department may waive such portions of the liquidated damages as may accrue after the work is in condition for safe and convenient use by the traveling public .
a .
liquidated damages the amount of such charges is hereby agreed upon as fixed liquidated damages due the department after the expiration of the time for completion specified in the contract .
the contractor and his surety shall be liable for liquidated damages in excess of the amount due the contractor on the final payment .
these fixed liquidated damages are not established as a penalty but are calculated and agreed upon in advance by the department and the contractor due the uncertainty and impossibility of making a determination as to the actual and consequential damages which are incurred by the department the state and the general public as a result of the failure on the part of the contractor to complete the work on time .
num .
deduction from partial payments liquidated damages as they accrue will be deducted from periodic partial payments .
num .
deduction from final payment the full amount of liquidated damages will be deducted from final payment to the contractor andor his surety .
num .
no liquidated damages charged for delay by the department in case of default of the contract and the subsequent completion of the work by the department as hereinafter provided the contractor and his surety shall be liable for the liquidated damages under the contract but no liquidated damages shall be chargeable for any delay in the final completion of the work by the department due to any unreasonable action negligence omission or delay of the department .
in any suit for the collection of or involving the assessment of liquidated damages the reasonableness of the amount shall be presumed .
the liquidated damages referred to herein are intended to be and are cumulative and shall be in addition to every other remedy now or hereafter enforceable at law in equity by statute or under the contract .
section numprocecution and progress num b .
no waiver of departments rights permitting the contractor to continue and finish the work or any part of it after the expiration of the time allowed for completion or after any extension of time shall not operate as a waiver of the rights of the department under the contract .
num default of contract if the contractor fails to begin the work within the time specified or fails to perform the work with sufficient workers equipment or materials to ensure its prompt completion or performs the work unsuitably or neglects or refuses to remove materials or perform anew such work as shall be rejected as defective and unsuitable or discontinues the prosecution of the work or from any other cause whatsoever does not carry on the work in an acceptable manner or becomes insolvent or is adjudicated a bankrupt or commits any act of bankruptcy or insolvency or allows any final judgement to stand against him unsatisfied for a period of num days or makes an assignment for the benefit of creditors or fails to comply with the contract requirements regarding wage payments or eeo requirements or fails to sign the standard release form as stipulated in subsection num final payment the engineer may give notice in writing by registered or certified mail to the contractor and the surety stating the nature of the deficiencies and directing that the work including its progress be remedied and made satisfactory .
if within num days after such notice the contractor or his surety does not proceed in satisfactory way to remedy the faults specified in said notice the engineer will notify the contractor and his surety by registered or certified mail that the contractor is in default and by the same message direct the surety to take over the work including all of the obligations pertaining to the contract .
if the surety takes over the work in a satisfactory way within num days after such notice of default the department will thenceforth pay to the surety the amounts due and to become due under the contract less all deductions provided herein including liquidated damages .
the department shall not be liable for any sums not due under the contract and shall not be made a party to any dispute between the contractor and the surety .
if the contractor is declared in default and the work and other contract obligations are taken over by the surety as required by its bond and when all parts of the work have been completed and found to be satisfactory by the engineer as provided for in subsection num final inspection and acceptance the said surety is hereby constituted the attorney in fact of the contractor for the purpose of executing such final releases as may be required by the department or to do any other act or thing including the execution of any documents necessary to the completion of the contract and a final settlement of same including but not limited to those documents required by the provisions regarding final payment and release as set forth in subsection num .
for all purposes as herein set out and defined including the execution of documents necessary to the final completion and settlement of the contract the surety under such circumstances is hereby authorized and directed by the contractor to perform such acts and execute such documents as fully and completely as though the same were performed or executed by such contractor and to be lawfully binding upon such contractor as though such acts had been performed or such documents executed by him in person .
if the surety does not take over the work in a satisfactory way within num days after the notice of default or does not proceed to finish the work according to the contract the department shall have full power and authority without impairing the obligation of the contract or the contract bond to take over the completion of the work to appropriate or use any or all material and equipment on the ground that may be suitable to enter into agreements with others for the completion of the contract according to the terms and provisions thereof or to use such other methods as may be required for the completion of the contract .
in so assuming the obligations of the contractor the department does so as the agent of the contractor .
assumption of these duties and obligations by the department will not act as a release of the contractor or his surety from any of the provisions of this contract .
the contractor and his surety shall be liable for all costs incurred by the department in completing the work and also for all liquidated damages in conformity with the terms of the contract .
if the sum of such liquidated damages and the expense so incurred by the department is less than the sum which would have been payable under this contract if it had been completed by the contractor or his surety the contractor or his surety shall be entitled to receive the difference and if the sum of such expense and such liquidated damages exceeds the sum that would have been payable under the contract the contractor and his surety shall be liable and shall pay to the department the amount of such excess .
notice to the contractor shall be deemed to have been served when delivered to the person in charge of any office used by the contractor his representative at or near the work or by registered or certified mail addressed to the contractor at the last known place of business .
section numprocecution and progress num time charges shall continue through a period of a default in compliance with the provisions of subsection num.f .
num termination of contractors responsibility except as specified in the contract bond and in subsection num the contractors responsibility for the work shall terminate upon final acceptance of the work by the department .
section nummeasurement and payment num measurement and quantities the method of measurement and computations to be used in determination of quantities of material furnished and of work performed under the contract will be those methods generally recognized as conforming to good engineering practice .
unless otherwise specified longitudinal measurements for area computations will be made along the surface and no deductions will be made for individual fixtures having an area of num ft² num m² or less .
unless otherwise specified transverse measurements for area computations will be the neat dimensions shown on the plans or ordered in writing by the engineer .
where payment is to be made by the square yard square meter for a specified thickness the length will be measured on the surface along the centerline and the pay width shall be that width specified on the plans for the final surface of the completed section .
intermediate courses shall be placed at a width sufficient to support successive courses with no detriment to the stability of the successive courses .
the width of material required beyond the pay width will not be eligible for payment and shall be considered incidental to the work .
structures will be measured according to neat lines shown on the plans or as altered to fit field conditions .
all items which are measured by the linear foot linear meter such as pipe culverts guard rail underdrains etc .
will be measured parallel to the base or foundation upon which such structures are placed unless otherwise shown on the plans .
in computing volumes of excavation the average end area method or other acceptable methods will be used .
the term gage when used in connection with the measurement of steel plates will mean the u.s. standard gage .
when the term gage refers to the measurement of electrical wire it will mean the wire gage specified in the national electrical code .
the term ton will mean the short ton consisting of num pounds avoirdupois .
the term megagram will mean one metric ton equivalent to num kg .
any commodity paid for by weight shall be weighed on scales that have been approved as specified below and which are furnished at the expense of the contractor or supplier .
weighing and measuring systems including remote controls shall be subject to typeapproval by the department of transportation .
the manufacture installation performance and operation of such devices located in georgia shall conform to and be governed by the official code of georgia annotated section num of the georgia weights and measures act the georgia weights and measures regulations as amended and adopted the current edition of the national bureau of standards handbook num and these specifications .
weighing and measuring systems located outside georgia which are utilized for weighing materials to be used in department work shall be manufactured installed approved and operated in accordance with applicable laws and regulations for the state in which the scales are located .
all weighing measuring and metering devices used to measure quantities for payment shall be suitable for the purpose intended and will be considered to be commercial devices .
commodity scales located in georgia shall be certified before use for accuracy condition etc .
by the weights and measures division of the georgia department of agriculture or its authorized representative .
scales located outside georgia shall be certified in accordance with applicable laws and regulations for the state in which the scales are located .
this certification shall have been made within a period of not more than one year prior to date of use for weighing commodity .
all equipment and all mechanisms and devices attached thereto or used in connection therewith shall be constructed assembled and installed for use so that they do not facilitate the perpetration of fraud .
any scale component or mechanism which if manipulated would alter true scale values including manual zero setting mechanisms shall not be accessible to the scale operator .
such components and mechanisms that would otherwise be accessible to the scale operator shall be enclosed .
section nummeasurement and payment num provisions shall be made for security seals where appropriate on equipment and accessories .
a security seal shall be affixed to any adjustment mechanism designed to be sealed .
scale or accessory devices shall not be used if security seals have been broken or removed .
any certified scale or scale component which has been repaired dismantled or moved to another location shall again be tested and certified before it is eligible for weighing .
whenever materials that are paid for based on weight are from a source within the state the scales shall be operated by and the weights attested to by signature and seal of a duly authorized certified public weigher in accordance with standard operating procedure num and the official code of georgia annotated section num of the georgia weights and measures act as amended and adopted .
when such materials originate from another state that has a certified or licensed weigher program the scales shall be operated by a weigher who is certified by that state in accordance with applicable laws and weight ticket recordation shall be in accordance with standard operating procedure num .
when materials are paid for based on weight and originate from another state which has no program for certifying or licensing weighers the materials shall be weighed on scales located in the state of georgia by a certified public weigher in accordance with standard operating procedure num and the official code of georgia annotated section num of the georgia weights and measures act as amended and adopted .
no scale shall be used to measure weights greater than the scale manufacturers rated capacity .
a digital recorder shall be installed as part of any commodity scale .
the recorder shall produce a printed digital record on a ticket with the gross tare and net weights of the delivery trucks along with the date and time printed for each ticket .
provisions shall be made so that the scales or recorders may not be manually manipulated during the printing process .
the system shall be so interlocked as to allow printing only when the scale has come to rest .
either the gross or net weight shall be a direct scale reading .
printing and recording systems that are capable of accepting keyboard entries shall clearly and automatically differentiate a direct scale weight value from any other weight values printed on the load ticket .
all scales used to determine pay quantities shall be provided to attain a zero balance indication with no load on the load receiving element by the use of semiautomatic zero pushbutton zero or automatic zero maintenance .
vehicle scales shall have a platform of sufficient size to accommodate the entire length of any vehicle weighed and shall have sufficient capacity to weigh the largest load .
adequate drainage shall be provided to prevent saturation of the ground under the scale foundation .
the engineer at his discretion may require the platform scales to be checked for accuracy .
for this purpose the contractor shall load a truck with material of his choosing weigh the loaded truck on his scales and then weigh it on another set of certified vehicle scales .
when the difference exceeds num percent of load the scales shall be corrected and certified by a registered scale serviceman registered in the appropriate class as outlined in the georgia weights and measures regulations or in accordance with applicable requirements of the state in which the scales are located .
a test report shall be submitted to the appropriate representative of the department of agriculture .
materials to be measured by volume in the hauling vehicle shall be hauled in approved vehicles and measured therein at the point of delivery .
vehicles for this purpose may be of any size or type acceptable to the engineer provided that the body is of such shape that the actual contents may be readily and accurately determined .
all vehicles shall be loaded to their water level capacity as determined by the engineer provided that the body is of such shape that the actual contents may be readily and accurately determined .
cement and lime will be measured by the ton megagram .
whenever cement or lime is delivered to the project in tank trucks a certified weight shall be made at the shipping point by an authorized certified public weigher who is not an employee of the department .
whenever cement and lime are from a source within the state the scales shall be operated by the weights attested to by signature and seal of a duly authorized certified public weigher in accordance with standard operating procedure num and the official code of georgia annotated section num of the georgia weights and measures act as amended and adopted .
when such materials originate from another state that has a certified or licensed weigher program the scales shall be operated by a weigher who is certified by that state in accordance with applicable laws and the weight ticket recordation shall be in accordance with standard operating procedure num .
when cement and lime originate from another state that has no program for certifying or licensing weighers the materials shall be weighed on scales located in the state of georgia by a certified public weigher in accordance with standard operating procedure num and the official code of georgia annotated section num of the georgia weights and measures act as amended and adopted .
section nummeasurement and payment num the shipping invoice shall contain the certified weights and the signature and seal of the certified public weigher .
a security seal shall also be affixed to the discharge pipe cap on the tank truck before leaving the shipping point .
the number on the security seal shall also be recorded on the shipping invoice .
the shipping invoice for quicklime shall also contain a certified lime purity percentage .
unsealed tank trucks will require reweighing by a certified public weigher .
timber will be measured by the thousand feet board measure mfbm cubic meter actually incorporated in the structure .
measurements will be based on nominal widths and thickness and the actual length in place .
no additional measurement will be made for splices except as noted for overlaps as shown on the plans .
the term lump sum when used as an item of payment will mean complete payment for the work described in the contract .
when a complete structure or structural unit in effect lump sum work is specified as the unit of the measurement the unit will be construed to include all necessary fittings and accessories .
rental of equipment will be measured as defined in subsection num.b.num .
when standard manufactured items are specified as fence wire plates rolled shapes pipe conduits etc .
and these items are identified by gage unit weight section dimensions etc .
such identification will be considered to be nominal weights or dimensions .
unless more stringently controlled by tolerance in cited specifications manufacturing tolerances established by the industries involved will be accepted .
num measurement of bituminous materials a .
by weighing the material the department prefers this method whenever it is practicable .
this method will be considered acceptable under the following conditions num .
weighed on project if the weights of the bituminous materials delivered by tank trucks are to be determined on the project weights shall be determined on scales that have been previously checked by the department with standard weights for accuracy .
the scale platform shall be large enough to accommodate the entire vehicle at one time .
under no conditions will truck scales be used to measure weights greater than their rated capacity .
all weights not determined in the presence of an authorized representative of the department shall be made by a certified public weigher who is not an employee of the department of transportation and who is in good standing with the georgia department of agriculture .
the weight tickets shall carry both the signature and seal of the certified public weigher .
num .
weighed at shipping point a certified weight made at the shipping point by an authorized certified public weigher who is not an employee of the department of transportation and who is registered with the georgia department of agriculture will be acceptable provided all openings in the tank have been sealed by the producer and when upon inspection on the project there is no evidence of any leakage .
the shipping ticket in this case must carry the signature and seal of the certified public weigher .
if the tank is not completely emptied the amount of material remaining in the tank truck will be measured by either weight or volume and the amount so determined as verified by the engineer will be deducted from the certified weight .
num .
by extraction analysis the weight of bituminous material used will be determined by extraction tests made by the field laboratory .
the average asphalt content for each lot will be used to compute the weight of the asphalt cement to be paid for in accordance with the following formula english p ac x t where p pay tons of asphalt cement ac lot average of asphalt cement by weight of total mix as determined by extraction t actual accepted tons of mixture as weighed metric p ac x t where section nummeasurement and payment num p pay megagrams of asphalt cement ac lot average of asphalt cement by weight of total mix as determined by extraction t actual accepted megagrams of mixture as weighed num .
by digital recording device the amount of bituminous material as shown on the printed tickets will be the pay quantity .
b .
by volume the volume will be measured and corrected for the difference between actual temperature and num f num c. containers shall be level when measured and one of the following methods shall be used whichever is best suited to the circumstances num .
tank car measurement if the material is shipped to the project in railroad tank cars the contractor shall furnish the engineer a certified chart showing the dimensions and volume for each inch num mm of depth for each tank .
the engineer will make outage and temperature measurements before unloading is begun and after it is finished .
the measurements will be taken when the bituminous material is at a uniform temperature and free from air bubbles .
the contractor shall not remove any bituminous material from any tank until necessary measurements have been made nor shall he release the car until final outage has been measured .
the total number of gallons liters allowed for any tank car shall not be more than the u.s. interstate commerce commission rating for that car converted to gallons at num f num c. num .
truck measurement if bituminous materials are delivered to the project in tank trucks distributor tanks or drums the contractor shall not remove any bituminous material from the transporting vehicle or container until necessary measurements have been made nor shall the transporting vehicle or container be released until final outage has been measured .
if weighing is not convenient the contractor shall furnish the engineer with a certified chart showing the dimensions and volume of each container together with a gauge or calibrated measuring rod which will permit the volume of the material to be determined by vertical measurement .
num .
metering the volume may be determined by metering in which case the metering device used and the method of using it shall be subject to the approval of the engineer .
num .
time of deliveries the arrival and departure of vehicles delivering bituminous materials to the project site shall be so scheduled that the engineer is afforded proper time for the measurements of delivered volume and final outage .
the engineer will make the necessary measurements only during the contractors normal daily working hours .
c. production for multiple projects when a contractor is producing asphaltic concrete from one plant which is being placed on two or more jobs public or private the amount of bituminous material used may be determined by extraction tests in accordance with subsection num.a.num or digital recording device in accordance with subsection num.a.num .
d. tack coat when the same storage facility is utilized for bituminous materials to be used in hot mix asphaltic concrete bituminous tack coat andor surface treatment the quantity used for tack coat shall be converted to tons megagrams and deducted from the quantities for the bituminous material used in the hot mix asphaltic concrete and surface treatment .
e. corrections when the volume and temperature have been determined as defined above the volume will be corrected by the use of the following formula venglish vnum vmetric vnum k tnum num k tnum num where v volume of bituminous material at num f num c vnum volume of hot bituminous material t temperature of hot bituminous material in degrees fahrenheit celsius k coefficient of expansion of bituminous material correction factor the correction factors k for various materials are given below section nummeasurement and payment num num num per f c for petroleum oils having a specific gravity of num fnum f num cnum c above num num num per f c for petroleum oils having a specific gravity of num fnum f num cnum c between num num num per f c for tar num num per f c for emulsified asphalt num num per f c for creosote oil num scope of payment the contractor shall receive and accept the compensation provided for in the contract as full payment for furnishing all materials labor tools equipment superintendence and incidentals and for performing all work contemplated and embraced under the contract in a complete and acceptable manner for any infringement of patent trademark or copyright for all loss or damage arising from the nature of the work or from the action of the elements for all expenses incurred by or in consequence of the suspension or discontinuance of the work or from any unforeseen difficulties which may be encountered during the prosecution of the work and for all risks of every description connected with the prosecution of the work until its final acceptance by the engineer except as provided in subsection num .
the payment of any partial estimate prior to final acceptance of the project as provided in subsection num shall in no way affect the obligation of the contractor to repair or renew any defective parts of the construction or to be responsible for all damages due to such defects .
num payment and compensation for altered quantities when alteration in plans or quantities of work not requiring supplemental agreements as herein before provided for are ordered and performed the contractor shall accept payment in full at the contract unit bid prices for the actual quantities of work done and no allowance will be made for increased expense loss of expected reimbursement or loss of anticipated profits suffered or claimed by the contractor resulting either directly from such alterations or indirectly from unbalanced allocation among the contract items of overhead expense on the part of the bidder and subsequent loss of expected reimbursement therefore or from any other cause .
compensation for alterations in plans or quantities of work requiring supplemental agreements shall be as stipulated in such agreement except that when the contractor proceeds with the work without change of price being agreed upon he shall be paid for such increased or decreased quantities at the contract unit prices bid in the proposal for the items of the work .
num extra work extra work as defined in subsection num when ordered in accordance with subsection num will be authorized in writing by the engineer .
the authorization will be in the form of a supplemental agreement or a force account .
a .
supplemental agreement in the case of a supplemental agreement the work to be done will be stipulated and agreed upon by both parties prior to any extra work being performed .
payment based on supplemental agreements shall constitute full payment and settlement of all additional costs and expenses including delay and impact damages caused by arising from or associated with the work performed .
b .
force account when no agreement is reached for extra work to be done at lump sum or unit prices such work may be authorized by the department to be done on a force account basis .
a force account estimate that identifies all anticipated costs shall be prepared by the contractor on forms provided by the engineer .
work shall not begin until the force account is approved .
payment for force account work will be in accordance with the following num .
labor for all labor equipment operators and supervisors excluding superintendents in direct charge of the specific operations the contractor shall receive the rate of wage agreed upon in writing before beginning work for each and every hour that said labor equipment operators and supervisors are actually engaged in such work .
section nummeasurement and payment num the contractor shall receive the actual costs paid to or in behalf of workers by reason of subsistence and travel allowances health and welfare benefits pension fund benefits or other benefits when such amounts are required by collective bargaining agreement or other employment contract generally applicable to the classes of labor employed on the work .
an amount equal to num of the sum of the above items will also be paid the contractor .
num .
bond insurance and tax for property damage liability and workers compensation insurance premiums unemployment insurance contributions and social security taxes on the force account work the contractor shall receive the actual cost to which cost no percentage will be added .
the contractor shall furnish satisfactory evidence of the rate or rates paid for such bond insurance and tax .
num .
materials for materials accepted by the engineer and used the contractor shall receive the actual cost of such material incorporated into the work including contractor paid transportation charges exclusive of machinery rentals as hereinafter set forth to which cost num will be added .
num .
equipment for any machinery or special equipment other than small tools including fuel and lubricant plus transportation costs the use of which has been authorized by the engineer the contractor shall receive the rental rates indicated below for the actual time that such equipment is in operation on the work or the time as indicated below the equipment is directed to stand by .
equipment rates shall be based on the latest edition of the rental rate blue book for construction equipment or rental rate blue book for older construction equipment whichever applies as published by equipmentwatch using all instructions and adjustments contained therein and as modified below .
allowable equipment rates shall be established as defined below allowable hourly equipment rate monthly ratenum x adjustment factors .
allowable hourly operating cost hourly operating cost .
allowable rate per hour allowable hourly equipment rate allowable hourly operating cost .
standby rate allowable hourly equipment rate x num note the monthly rate is the basic machine plus any attachments .
standby rates shall apply when equipment is not in operation and is directed by the engineer to standby for later use .
in general standby rates shall apply when equipment is not in use but will be needed again to complete the work and the cost of moving the equipment will exceed the accumulated standby cost .
payment for standby time will not be made on any day the equipment operates for num or more hours .
for equipment accumulating less than num hours operating time on any normal workday standby payment will be limited to only that number of hours which when added to the operating time for that day equals num hours .
standby payment will not be made on days that are not normally considered workdays .
the department will not approve any rates in excess of the rates as outlined above unless such excess rates are supported by an acceptable breakdown of cost .
payable time periods will not include time elapsed while equipment is broken down time spent in repairing equipment or time elapsed after the engineer has advised the contractor the equipment is no longer needed if a piece of equipment is needed which is not included in the above blue book rental rates reasonable rates shall be agreed upon in writing before the equipment is used .
all equipment charges by persons or firms other than the contractor shall be supported by invoices .
transportation charges for each piece of equipment to and from the site of the work will be paid provided the equipment is obtained from the nearest approved source the return charges do not exceed the delivery charges haul rates do not exceed the established rates of licensed haulers and such charges are restricted to those units of equipment not already available and not on or near the project section nummeasurement and payment num no additional compensation will be made for equipment repair .
num .
miscellaneous no additional allowance will be made for general superintendence the use of small tools or other costs for which no specific allowance is herein provided .
num .
compensation the contractors representative and the engineer shall compare records and agree on the cost of work done as ordered on a force account basis at the end of each day on forms provided by the department .
num .
subcontract force account work for work performed by an approved subcontractor or secondtier subcontractor all provisions of this section num that apply to the prime contractor in respect to labor materials and equipment shall govern .
the prime contractor shall coordinate the work of his subcontractor .
the prime contractor will be allowed an amount to cover administrative cost equal to num of the subcontractors amount earned but not to exceed num per subcontractor .
markup for secondtier subcontract work will not be allowed .
should it become necessary for the contractor or subcontractor to hire a firm to perform a specialized type of work or service which the prime contractor or subcontractor is not qualified to perform payment will be made at reasonable invoice cost .
to each invoice cost a markup to cover administrative cost equal to num of the total invoice but not to exceed num will be allowed the contractor or subcontractor but not both .
num .
statements no payment will be made for work performed on a force account basis until the contractor has furnished the engineer with duplicate itemized statements of the cost of such force account work detailed as follows a .
name classification date daily hours total hours rate and extension for each laborer equipment operator and supervisor excluding superintendents .
b .
designation dates daily hours total hours rental rate and extension for each unit of machinery and equipment .
c. quantities of materials prices and extensions .
d. transportation of materials .
e. cost of property damage liability and workers compensation insurance premiums unemployment insurance contributions and social security tax .
statements shall be accompanied and supported by invoices for all materials used and transportation charges .
however if materials used on the force account work are not purchased specifically for such work but are taken from the contractors stock then in lieu of the invoices the contractor shall furnish an affidavit certifying that such materials were taken from his stock that the quantity claimed was actually used and that the price and transportation claimed represent the actual cost to the contractor .
payment based on force account records shall constitute full payment and settlement of all additional costs and expenses including delay and impact damages caused by arising from or associated with the work performed .
num eliminated items should any items contained in the proposal be found unnecessary for the proper completion of the work the engineer may upon written order to the contractor eliminate such items from the contract and such action shall in no way invalidate the contract .
when a contractor is notified of the elimination of items he will be reimbursed for actual work done and all costs incurred including mobilization of materials prior to said notifications .
num partial payments a .
general at the end of each calendar month the total value of items complete in place will be estimated by the engineer and certified for payment .
such estimate is approximate only and may not necessarily be based on detailed measurements .
value will be computed on the basis of contract item unit prices or on percentage of completion of lump sum items .
when so requested by the contractor and approved by the engineer gross earnings of num or more for work completed within the first num days of any month will be certified for payment on a semimonthly basis subject to the conditions and provisions of subsection num.a subsection num.b.num subsection num.c subsection num.d subsection num.e and subsection num.f .
section nummeasurement and payment num b .
materials allowance payments will be made on delivered costs or percentage of bid price if otherwise noted with copies of paid invoices provided to the department for the materials listed below which are to be incorporated into the project provided the materials conform to all specification requirements .
are stored on the project rightofway or upon written request by the contractor and written approval of the engineer they may be stored off the rightofway but local to the project provided such storage is necessary due to lack of storage area on the rightofway need for security or need for protection from weather .
as a further exception to onproject storage upon written request by the contractor the engineer may approve offthe project storage items uniquely fabricated or precast for a specific project such as structural steel and precast concrete which will be properly marked with the project number and stored at the fabrication or precast facility .
the engineer may approve outofstate storage for structural steel and prestressed concrete beams uniquely fabricated for a specific project stored at the fabrication facility .
num .
paid invoices should accompany the materials allowance request but in no case be submitted to the project engineer later than num calendar days following the date of the progress payment report on which the materials allowance was paid .
in case such paid invoices are not furnished within the established time the materials allowance payment will be removed from the next progress statement and no further materials allowance will be made for that item on that project .
num .
materials allowances will be paid for those items which are not readily available and which can be easily identified and secured for a specific project and for which lengthy stockpiling periods would not be detrimental .
some exclusions are as follows a .
no payments will be made on living or perishable plant materials until planted .
b .
no payments will be made on portland cement liquid asphalt or grassing materials .
c. no payment will be made for aggregate stockpiled in a quarry .
payment for stockpiled aggregate will be made only if the aggregate is stockpiled on or in the immediate vicinity of the project and is held for the exclusive use on that project .
the aggregate must be properly secured .
if the aggregate stockpiled is to be paid for per ton megagram it must be reweighed on approved scales at the time it is incorporated into the project .
d. no payments will be made on minor material items hardware etc .
num .
no materials allowance will be made for materials when it is anticipated that those materials will be incorporated into the work within num calendar days .
num .
no materials allowance will be made for a material when the requested allowance for such material is less than num .
num .
where a storage area is used for more than one project material for each project shall be segregated from material for other projects identified and secured .
adequate access for auditing shall be provided .
all units shall be stored in a manner so that they are clearly visible for counting andor inspection of the individual units .
num .
the commissioner may at his discretion grant waiver to the requirements of this section when in his opinion such waiver would be in the public interest .
subsequently in the event the material is not onhand and in the quantities for which the materials allowance was granted the materials allowance payment will be removed from the next progress statement and no further materials allowance will be made for those items on that project .
if sufficient earnings are not available on the next progress statement the contractor agrees to allow the department to recover the monies from any other contract he may have with the department or to otherwise reimburse the department .
payments for materials on hand shall not exceed the invoice price or num percent of the bid prices for the pay items into which the materials are to be incorporated whichever is less .
c. minimum payment no partial payment will be made unless the amount of payment is at least num .
section nummeasurement and payment num d. liquidated damages accrued liquidated damages will be deducted in accordance with subsection num .
e. other deductions in addition to the deductions provided for above the department has the right to withhold any payments due the contractor for items unpaid by the contractor for which the department is directly responsible including but not limited to royalties see section num .
f. amount of payment the balance remaining after all deductions provided for herein have been made will be paid to the contractor .
partial estimates are approximate and are subject to correction on subsequent progress statements .
if sufficient earnings are not available on the subsequent progress statement the contractor agrees to allow the department to recover the monies from any other contract he may have with the department or to otherwise reimburse the department .
the engineer is responsible for computing the amounts of all deductions herein specified for determining the progress of the work and for the items and amounts due to the contractor during the progress of the work and for the final statement when all work has been completed .
g. interest under no circumstances will any interest accrue or be payable on any sums withheld or deducted by the department as authorized by subsection num.a subsection num.b.num subsection num.c subsection num.d subsection num.e and subsection num.f .
h. insert the following in each subcontract the contractor shall insert the following in each subcontract entered into for work under this contract the contractor shall not withhold any retainage on subcontractors .
the contractor shall pay the subcontractor num percent of the gross value of the completed work by the subcontractor as indicated by the current estimate certified by the engineer for payment .
neither the inclusion of this specification in the contract between the department and the prime contractor nor the inclusion of the provisions of this specification in any contract between the prime contractor and any of his subcontractors nor any other specification or provision in the contract between the department and the prime contractor shall create or be deemed to create any relationship contractual or otherwise between the department and any subcontractor .
num final payment when final inspection and final acceptance have been made by the engineer as provided in subsection num the engineer will prepare the final statement of the quantities of the various classes of work performed .
all prior partial estimates and payments shall be subject to correction in the final statement .
the district engineer will transmit a copy of the statement to the contractor by registered or certified mail .
the contractor will be afforded num days in which to review the final statement in the district office before it is certified for payment by the engineer .
any adjustments will be resolved by the district engineer or in case of a dispute referred to the chief engineer whose decision shall be final and conclusive .
after approval of the final statement by the contractor or after the expiration of the num days or after a final ruling on disputed items by the chief engineer the final statement shall be certified to the treasurer by the chief engineer stating the project has been accepted and that the quantities and amounts of money shown thereon are correct due and payable .
the treasurer upon receipt of the engineers certification shall in turn furnish the contractor with the departments standard release form to be executed in duplicate .
the aforesaid release form showing the total amount of money due the contractor shall be sent to the contractor by registered or certified mail to be delivered to such contractor upon the signing of a return receipt card to be returned to the department in accordance with the provision of federal law in respect to such matters and such return receipt card shall be conclusive evidence of a tender of said sum of money to the contractor .
upon receipt of the properly executed standard release form the treasurer shall make final payment jointly to the contractor and his surety .
the aforesaid certification executed release form and final payment shall be evidence that the section nummeasurement and payment num commissioner the engineer and the department have fulfilled the terms of the contract and that the contractor has fulfilled the terms of the contract except as set forth in his contract bond .
the standard release form is to be executed by the contractor within num days after delivery thereof as evidenced by the registered or certified mail return receipt .
should the contractor fail to execute the standard release form because he disputes the final payment as offered or because he believes he has a claim for damages or additional compensation under the contract the contractor shall within num days after delivery to the contractor of the standard release form as evidenced by the registered or certified mail return receipt enter suit in the proper court for adjudication of his claim .
should the contractor fail to enter suit within the aforesaid num days then by agreement hereby stipulated he is forever barred and stopped from any recovery or claim whatsoever under the terms of this contract .
should the contractor fail to execute the standard release form or file suit within num days after delivery thereof then the surety on the contractors bond is hereby constituted the attorneyinfact of the contractor for the purpose of executing such final releases as may be required by the department including but not limited to the standard release form and for the purpose of receiving the final payment under this contract .
the department reserves the right as defined in subsection num should an error be discovered in any estimates to claim and recover from the contractor or his surety or both such sums as may be sufficient to correct any error of overpayment .
such overpayment may be recovered from payments due on current active projects or from any future state work done by the contractor .
the foregoing provisions of this section shall be applicable both to the contractor and the surety on his bond and in this respect the surety shall be bound by the provisions of subsection num of these specifications in the same way and manner as the contractor .
a .
interest in the event the contractor fails to execute the standard release form as prepared by the treasurer because he disputes the amount of the final payment as stated therein the amount due the contractor shall be deemed by the contractor and the department to be an unliquidated sum and no interest shall accrue or be payable on the sum finally determined to be due to the contractor for any period prior to final determination of such sum whether such determination be by agreement of the contractor and the department or by final judgement of the proper court in the event of litigation between the department and the contractor .
the contractor specifically waives and renounces any and all rights it may have under section num of the official code of georgia and agrees that in the event suit is brought by the contractor against the department for any sum claimed by the contractor under the contract for delay damages resulting from a breach of contract for any breach of contract or for any extra or additional work no interest shall be awarded on any sum found to be due from the department to the contractor in the final judgement entered in such suit .
all final judgements shall draw interest at the legal rate as specified by law .
also the contractor agrees that notwithstanding any provision or provisions of chapter num of title num of the official code of georgia that the provisions of this contract control as to when and how the contractor shall be paid for the work .
further the contractor waives and renounces any and all rights it may have under chapter num of title num of the official code of georgia .
b .
termination of departments liability final payment will be in the amount determined by the statement as due and unpaid .
the acceptance of the final payment or execution of the standard release form or failure of the contractor to act within num days as provided herein after tender of payment or final payment to the contractors surety in accordance with the provisions stipulated herein shall operate as and be a release to the department the commissioner and the engineer from all claims of liability under this contract and for any act or neglect of the department the commissioner or the engineer .
num termination clause a .
general the department may by written notice terminate the contract or a portion thereof for the departments convenience when the department determines that the termination is in the states best interest or when the contractor is prevented from proceeding with the contract as a direct result of one of the following conditions section nummeasurement and payment num num .
an executive order of the president of the united states with respect to the prosecution of war or in the interest of national defense .
num .
the engineer and contractor each make a determination that due to a shortage of critical materials required to complete the work which is caused by allocation of these materials to work of a higher priority by the federal government or any agency thereof it will be impossible to obtain these materials within a practical time limit and that it would be in the public interest to discontinue construction .
num .
an injunction is imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction which stops the contractor from proceeding with the work and causes a delay of such duration that it is in the public interest to terminate the contract and the contractor was not at fault in creating the condition which led to the courts injunction .
the decision of the engineer as to what is in the public interest and as to the contractors fault for the purpose of termination shall be final .
num .
orders from duly constituted authority relating to energy conservation .
b .
implementation when under any of the conditions set out in subsection a of this section the contract or any portion thereof is terminated before completion of all items of work in the contract the contractor shall be eligible to receive some or all of the following items of payment num .
for the actual number of units of items of work completed payment will be made at the contract unit price .
num .
reimbursement for organization of the work and moving equipment to and from the job will be considered where the volume of work completed is too small to compensate the contractor for these expenses under the contract unit prices .
however the engineers decision as whether or not to reimburse for organization of the work and moving equipment to and from the job and in what amount shall be final .
num .
acceptable materials obtained by the contractor for the work that have been inspected tested and accepted by the engineer and that are not incorporated in the work will at the request of the contractor be purchased from the contractor at actual cost as shown by receipted bills and actual cost records at such points of delivery as may be designated by the engineer .
this will include any materials that have been delivered to the project site or that have been specifically fabricated for the project and are not readily usable on other projects .
it will not include materials that may have been ordered but not delivered to the project site and that are readily usable on other projects e.g .
guard rail stone lumber etc .. num .
for items of work partially completed payment adjustments including payments to afford the contractor a reasonable profit on work performed may be made as determined by the engineer based upon a consideration of costs actually incurred by the contractor in attempting to perform the contract .
num .
no payment will be made and the department will have no liability for lost profits on work not performed .
in particular the department will not be liable to the contractor for all profits the contractor expected to realize had the project been completed nor for any loss of business opportunities nor for any other consequential damages .
num .
in order that the department may make a determination of what sums are payable hereunder the contractor agrees that upon termination of the contract it will make all of its books and records available for inspection and auditing by the department .
to be eligible for payment costs must have been actually incurred and must have been recorded and accounted for according to generally accepted accounting principles and must be items properly payable under department policies .
where actual equipment costs can not be established by the auditors payment for unreimbursed equipment costs will be made in the same manner as is provided in subsection num for force account work .
idle time for equipment shall be reimbursed at standby rates .
in no case will the contractor be reimbursed for idle equipment after the engineer has advised the contractor the equipment is no longer needed on the job .
refusal of the contractor to allow the department to inspect and audit all of the contractors books and records shall conclusively establish that the department has no liability to the contractor for any payment under this provision and shall constitute a waiver by the contractor of any claim for damages allegedly caused by breach or termination of the contract .
the amount payable under this provision if any is to be determined by the engineer whose determination will be final and binding .
num .
the sums payable under this subsection shall be the contractors sole and exclusive remedy for termination of the contract .
section nummeasurement and payment num c. termination of a contract termination of a contract or a portion thereof shall not relieve the contractor of his responsibilities for any completed portion of the work nor shall it relieve his surety of its obligation for and concerning any just claims arising out of the work performed .
num interest in the event any lawsuit is filed against the department alleging the contractor is due additional money because of claims or for any breach of contract the contractor hereby waives and renounces any right it may have under o.c.g.a .
section num to prejudgment interest .
also the contractor agrees that notwithstanding any provision or provisions of chapter num of title num of the official code of georgia that the provisions of this contract control as to when and how the contractor shall be paid for the work .
further the contractor waives and renounces any and all rights it may have under chapter num of title num of the official code of georgia .
section numpilot vehicles num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numconstruction layout num general description perform construction layout to guide and control performance of items of the work according to this specification .
this work includes placing replacing if necessary and maintaining construction layout points .
preparing construction layout drawings sketches and computations .
recording data in field books such as alignment slope stake blue top drainage layout bridge and other books used for layout for this project .
num definitions general provisions num through num num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num b. referenced documents general provisions num through num num submittals submit the following documentation to the department section numconstruction layout num a .
project construction records these records detail information that the department uses to determine the template line for the asbuilt cross sections which defines the computation line for unclassified excavation .
these records include survey records bound field notebooks computer printouts that record the projects construction prepare the records as directed by the engineer .
b .
survey documents furnish the engineer with a copy of survey documents that relate to construction layout .
provide these documents when the engineer requests or as they are completed .
the engineer may check the documents for accuracy and may require revisions where necessary .
the documents become department property and will be included in the permanent project records .
c. drainage structure sketches profile both inlet and outlet ends of proposed drainage structures for at least num ft num m in the existing ditch line or stream bed .
adjust flowline elevations if necessary to enhance the hydraulics and to reduce silting scouring or backwater .
calculate the length of each structure and provide sketches of the structure to the engineer for review and approval at least num hours before beginning the work .
d. bridge layout sketch furnish a layout sketch before staking on bridges .
after staking submit a revised sketch for the engineers review and approval before beginning construction .
include in the layout sketch relevant stations angles dimensions and redundant checks including exterior beam dimensions in each span .
also include all horizontal and vertical clearances with calculations that verify the clearances shown .
submit for the engineers review and approval survey data and calculations with the layout sketch and information required for bent construction .
verify the plan elevations for all bridge bearing seats on the substructure .
e. wall layout sketches submit sketches and other data verifying either that the wall will fit the final field conditions or indicate where revisions are necessary .
submit these sketches well before the wall construction begins so the engineer can make any necessary structural design changes .
num materials general provisions num through num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num num construction requirements general provisions num through num num personnel furnish personnel capable of establishing line and grade points necessary to complete the work .
establish these points within the generally accepted surveying tolerances and ensure that they are acceptable for the work being performed .
section numconstruction layout num num equipment furnish surveying equipment stakes and all materials necessary to perform the work subject to the engineers approval .
num preparation a .
general preconstruction before beginning construction num .
ensure that plan dimensions alignment and elevations are compatible with existing field conditions .
make adjustments where necessary .
num .
ensure alignment tieins by coordinating construction layout with that of other contractors whose work abuts any portion of the work .
all adjustments are subject to the engineers approval .
b .
widening and reconstruction before beginning construction where existing pavement is to be retained either for widening or for reconstruction num .
take threepoint levels of the pavement throughout the length to be retained .
normally the threepoint levels will be required at num ft num m intervals .
however the engineer may adjust these intervals according to existing field conditions .
threepoint levels are not required on asphalt shoulder widening projects and earth shoulder reconstruction projects .
num .
from the threepoint levels prepare a graphic grade plot that best fits the existing pavement to minimize the leveling requirements if any of the existing roadway .
cross slopes may be varied within the ranges shown on the plans or adjusted by the engineer to produce the best fit .
num .
on passing lane or widening projects where existing pavement is not to be overlaid a .
profile and plot the outside edge of the existing pavement to obtain a smooth profile grade .
b .
transfer this grade to the new edge of paving using the proper cross slope .
num .
furnish data to the engineer for approval before beginning widening and reconstruction .
num .
on widening reconstruction or passing lane projects obtain the engineers approval of the best fit profile .
ensure that grade stakes are set to control the construction of any required widening based upon the best fit profile and cross slope .
construct proposed widening flush with the existing edge of paving .
provide positive drainage in all cases .
c. existing bridge widening or modification to widen or modify existing bridges do the following before ordering materials or beginning construction num .
verify existing elevations and dimensions as well as confirm or determine required new cap elevations .
num .
profile the removal line and cross section the existing deck .
num .
use this profile information to determine a best fit finished grade for the widened portion .
num .
compute the new cap elevations based on this best fit information .
num .
furnish survey data layout sketch and calculations to the engineer for approval .
d. retaining wall construction layout set stakes take necessary cross sections and perform necessary calculations at each wall before beginning wall construction to ensure that the geometric design of the retaining wall conforms to actual conditions .
num fabrication general provisions num through num section numconstruction layout num num construction a. verify plan elevations verify plan elevations for all bridge bearing seats on the substructure .
b. verify bent layout after bent construction has begun verify bent layout at each major phase of the construction to ensure that the bent is properly positioned in relation to adjacent bents .
c. establish the centerline establish the centerline as follows num .
establish or reestablish the centerline from the monuments andor reference points the department will provide .
num .
on widening or reconstruction projects establish the horizontal and vertical alignment of the existing roadway and bridges .
num .
modify the plan horizontal and vertical alignment to conform to the existing alignment as necessary .
d. verify the accuracy of the bench marks the department will furnish at least one bench mark that the contractor shall preserve and if necessary relocate as follows a. verify the accuracy of the bench marks and report discrepancies to the engineer .
b .
establish additional benchmarks needed for construction .
c. maintain the bench marks for necessary department checks .
e. flag inplace survey control monuments flag and protect inplace survey control monuments and reference points including rightofwayproperty line intersections as follows num .
pay for and replace destroyed or disturbed stakes or monuments .
num .
when included as pay items stake rightofway markers .
f. line grades and stakes set other line and grade stakes needed to construct the job including stakes needed to relocate utilities .
stake the right ofway and maintain throughout the life of the project .
restake flattened slopes minor grade or alignment changes and other incidentals .
g. stake centerline control alignments stake centerline control alignments shown on the plans or adjusted as described above when the department needs accurate measurement of quantities for payment .
stake these control alignments as follows num .
stake the alignments to an accuracy of num .
num .
stake the alignments just before the department takes aerial photography or field cross sections for both original and final cross sections .
num .
provide the department with elevations of positions staked for the departments quantity measurements .
ensure that these elevations are of third order accuracy or better .
determine them using the differential leveling method .
num .
take intermediate cross sections required because of stage construction detours or other reasons .
section numconstruction layout num h. provide graphic sketches prepare and use graphic sketches of superelevation runout on curves on multilane roadways and of tieins of ramps to mainline on freeways and expressways to help provide positive drainage adequate superelevation and a pleasing appearance .
prepare and use similar sketches for street or roadway intersections .
i .
maintain the stakes after construction has begun in any segment of the project maintain the stakes that identify construction station numbers and locations as follows num .
ensure that stakes are placed at intervals not to exceed num ft num m and use even num ft num m stations .
on asphalt shoulder widening and earth shoulder reconstruction projects use mile post numbers when stations are not used .
mark and flag stakes so that they are visible to dot project personnel in that segment of the project until construction is complete .
projects utilizing gps controlled fine grading equipment place stakes at intervals not to exceed num ft num m on english projects and num m num ft on metric projects .
use even num ft num m or num m num ft stations .
num .
during grading activities in fills or cuts over num ft num m extend slope stakes up or down the slopes in intervals of num ft num m or less to achieve an accurate cross section .
num .
denote the offset distance to the construction centerline on the station number stakes when the station number is maintained in a location other than on the construction centerline .
on asphalt shoulder widening and earth shoulder reconstruction projects use the offset to the edge of pavement on the stakes .
j .
traffic markings when traffic markings are to be placed by either the contractor or others furnish the layout and clean and preline the surface to allow the placement of permanent pavement markings on the project .
when traffic markings are not included in the project plans the department will provide striping plans andor standard drawings for the contractors use .
k. provide bridge construction layout provide alignment control grade control and calculations to set these controls for bridge construction .
for new bridges the department will furnish the necessary input data forms for the departments bridge geometry computer program upon the contractors request .
the department will process the data to help the contractor obtain finished deck elevations .
data processing is available only as an alternate service to determine elevations .
if this service is elected for use prepare the input data and the department will furnish the output data .
the following limitations apply the department will not assume liability for the accuracy of either input or output data .
the department will limit this service to two programs per bridge .
this service is not available for existing bridges that are to be widened .
finished deck elevations for bridges that are to be widened will not be furnished .
num quality acceptance the engineers acceptance of all or any part of the contractors layout shall not relieve the contractor of responsibility to secure proper dimensions for the completed work .
correct at the contractors expense work incorrectly located due to layout error .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num num measurement this item is not measured for payment .
section numconstruction layout num num limits general provisions num through num num payment this work is not paid for separately .
the costs for performing layout work as described in this specification are included in the bid for the items of work to which the layout is incidental .
any unnecessary work overruns costs etc .
resulting from inaccurate data submitted by the contractor will be deducted from contractor payments .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numtraffic control num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section nummobilization num general description mobilization when listed as a pay item in the proposal includes preparatory work and operations including but not limited to moving personnel equipment supplies and incidentals to the project site .
mobilization also includes all other work and operations that shall be performed or costs incurred before beginning work on the various items on the project site .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section nummobilization num num construction requirements general provisions num through num .
num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction general provisions num through num .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this item of work is not measured separately for payment .
num limits the total sum of payments shall not exceed the original contract amount bid for this item .
num payment the department will make partial payments as follows num .
the first regular payment is num percent of the amount bid for mobilization or num percent of the original contract amount whichever is less .
num .
when num percent of the original contract amount is earned the next progress payment is num percent of the amount bid for mobilization or num percent of the total original contract amount whichever is less minus any previous payments .
num .
any amount bid for mobilization in excess of num percent of the original contract amount is paid when work on the project is complete .
num .
the total sum of the payments shall not exceed the original contract amount bid for this item .
payment includes all costs for mobilization demobilization and remobilization as required to complete the work .
payments will be made under item no .
num mobilization per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numfield laboratory building num general description this work includes furnishing and maintaining field laboratory buildings if required by the contract .
the building is reserved for the engineers exclusive use as long as the engineer deems necessary .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction section numhot mix recycled asphaltic concrete b. referenced documents aashto tpnum aashto tnum aashto tnum aashto tnum gdt num method of test for determining asphalt content by ignition nfpanuma num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements general provisions num through num .
num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numfield laboratory building num num construction a .
field laboratory physical requirements provide a laboratory using a structure approved by the engineer such as a building trailer fixed building erected on the site vacated house at an approved location each field laboratory shall house the required testing equipment and meet the minimum requirements for dimensions space and facilities .
each building or trailer shall be at least num ft num m wide and num ft num m high inside and contain not less than num ft² num m² of floor space .
each unit shall be floored roofed and weather tight and contain the following at least one hinged or sliding window on each side with each window having at least num ft² num m² of openings an entrance door that can be securely locked builtin work table with at least two drawers one lockable lighting and ventilation heating with necessary fuel potable running water electric current sheds and platforms required for special testing equipment sanitary facilitiesinclude in each field laboratory sanitary facilities that meet the requirements of the local or state health departments .
fire extinguisherequip each building with at least one approved fire extinguisher that meets the following requirements num multipurpose dry chemical type extinguisher num underwriters laboratory rating of numanumbc mount the extinguishers in a convenient and conspicuous place that is easily accessible from any part of the building .
maintain the extinguishers in working condition according to the requirements of nfpanuma .
b .
plant laboratory physical requirements provide laboratory buildings at asphalt concrete or base plants .
place the buildings so that the plant is in full view from one of the windows .
c. number of laboratories required the number of laboratories shown in the proposal is based on estimated job requirements .
actual conditions may require more or fewer .
provide the quantity as required by the engineer at the unit price bid for the facility .
d. asphaltic concrete plant laboratory requirements num .
laboratory building .
provide a laboratory building that meets the minimum requirements for a field laboratory as described in subsection num.a .
num .
ventilation system .
equip the laboratory so that when the windows and doors are closed and the ventilation system is functioning as required the temperature can be maintained between num f and num f num c and num c. num .
enclosures .
provide enclosures in laboratories for procedures where extracting solvent vapors are emitted .
after the asphalt is extracted dry samples under an enclosure or inside an oven that is vented outside the lab .
provide enclosures as follows section numfield laboratory building num equip each enclosure with the following a hood glass or other doors capable of enclosing the extracting solvent vapors from the ambient air in the lab an exhaust fan located in the rear or top of the hood for each work compartment replacement air provided through an open window or other opening to achieve the specified exchange of air ventilation system capable of exchanging air at the rate of num ft³ft²min num m³m²min over the entire open door area of each enclosure locate the laboratory ventilation heating and cooling systems so that the exhausted extracting solvent vapors do not reenter the laboratory through either the heating or cooling systems .
ensure that the extracting solvent is supplied to the laboratory through a closedsystem opening only under the enclosures .
mount the storage containers for the extracting solvent outside the laboratory and run a feed line from the container to a cutoff valve located in the enclosures .
ensure that all parts of the enclosures hoods and other related equipment are functional during testing .
num .
platform .
provide a safe platform to the proper height for the inspector to use to obtain asphalt mix or base samples and to inspect mixes in the truck beds .
num .
testing equipment .
furnish and maintain in good condition at the field laboratory the following testing equipment .
all testing equipment is subject to the engineers approval .
a .
one eachoven mechanical convection range to num f num c. comparable to blue m model ovnumanum .
note vent the oven exhaust outside the laboratory .
b .
one eachsieve shaker rotap design or approved equal .
designed for standard num in num mm diameter sieve .
c. one each computer ibm or ibm compatible num megabyte hard disk drive minimum num ½ inch num mm high density floppy disk drive cdrom drive numx minimum mouse modem num baud minimum num parallel and num serial ports num megabyte random access memory expandable to at least num megabytes vga monitor num microprocessor operating at num megahertz minimum d. one eachprinter desk jet hp letter quality printer e. one eachelectronic balance with weighing capacity of at least num lb .
num grams with digital display and sensitivity to meet requirements of aashto tnum and aashto tnum .
the weighing device shall have a suspension apparatus which meets requirements of aashto tnum .
f. one eachsuperpave gyratory compactor sgc equipmenta superpave gyratory compactor and appurtenances including a calibration kit which meets equipment requirements and testing protocol of a nationally recognized superpave center and aashto tp num .
the sgc shall be equipped with a printer to provide a realtime printout of the date and time of compaction number of gyrations and specimen height for each gyration during the compaction cycle .
at least two mold assemblies section numfield laboratory building num a specimen extruder g. one eachvacuum pump flasks or bowls fittings and other accessories as required by aashto tnum .
a corelok device with related accessories may be substituted if approved by the department .
h. one eachasphalt ignition oven which meets requirements of gdt num and aashto tnum .
required only for interstate projects involving mainline traveled way that include pay items under section num or section num .
e. portland cement concrete plant laboratory requirements for portland cement concrete plants provide a plant laboratory building and testing and curing equipment meeting the following minimum requirements .
num .
laboratory building .
provide a laboratory building that contains combined officeworkspace measuring num ft² num m² heating and air conditioning equipment capable of maintaining an interior temperature of num f num c separate office space with enough space for a desk and at least two chairs a work table at least num ft num mm wide num ft num mm long and num ft num mm high to prepare concrete cylinders for testing an outside work area of at least num ft by num ft num m by num m consisting of a concrete slab constructed level and true with a light broom finish num .
testing and curing equipment .
provide the following testing and curing equipment concrete cylinder capping equipment including molds melting pot with ventilation and accessories and a sufficient supply of capping compound all meeting applicable astm specifications .
concrete cylinder compression testing machine with a minimum capacity of num lbs num kn that meets applicable astm specifications .
concrete cylinder curing tanks capable of maintaining num cylinders at num f num f num c num c for a numday curing period .
concrete cylinder warm water curing tank capable of maintaining num cylinders at num f num f num c num c for a numhour curing period .
maintain the equipment in good condition and to the engineers approval .
num quality acceptance the dimensions specified above are minimum requirements .
minor dimensional and detail deviations are not cause for rejection if the engineer approves of the deviation .
num contractor warranty and maintenance maintain each building appurtenance and sanitary facility as required by this specification .
furnish electricity water and heating as required by this specification .
ownership of the buildings remains with the contractor .
maintaining and furnishing the buildingss after the date of final acceptance of the project is not required .
num measurement the actual number of field laboratories furnished according to this specification is measured separately for each laboratory .
there will be no measurement or payment for laboratories furnished at base asphaltic concrete or portland cement concrete central mix plants .
num limits general provisions num through num .
section numfield laboratory building num num payment each field laboratory measured for payment as described in subsection num is paid at the contract unit price bid for each laboratory .
payment is full compensation for the cost of all foundations buildings sheds platforms utilities maintenance sanitary facilities removal razing heat electricity water and site preparation and cleanup according to this specification .
payment for each field laboratory is made in two installments sixtyfive percent of the contract price is paid when the laboratory is ready for occupancy .
thirtyfive percent of the contract price is paid when the department finishes using the laboratory .
payment will be made under item no .
num field laboratory per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numfield engineers office num general description this work includes providing furnishing and maintaining field office buildings when the contract requires before beginning construction and according to this specification .
the contractor shall possess the building while the department uses it .
see subsection num contractor warranty and maintenance .
the engineering personnel will use the building exclusively for as long as they consider necessary but no longer than the date of final acceptance of the project .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numhighways signs section numfence section numsign fabrication section numsign posts section numsign blanks and panels section numreflectorizing materials b. referenced documents nfpanuma num submittals before installing project office signs submit a signage plan for this work to the engineer for approval .
num materials ensure that all materials are of commercial grade .
sampling and testing is not required .
section numfield engineers office num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication install a sign at the department of transportation project office in the format shown in figure num .
this sign shall be plainly visible from the project roadway .
fabricate and install the sign according to section num section num section num section num and section num .
figure num if the project office is not located adjacent to the project roadway install a second sign on the project according to these specifications and as directed by the engineer and enough guide signs to direct the traveling public to the project office .
guide signs shall be num in num mm high by num in num mm wide with num in num mm high lettering and shall include a directional arrow .
the guide sign shall have a white legend with a blue background .
refer to figures num and num .
before installing the signs submit a signage plan to the engineer for this work .
section numfield engineers office num figure num figure num num construction a .
field engineers office location field office buildings are designated as type numor type num .
num .
office building type num place this office within or near the project limits as directed by the engineer .
as the work progresses the offices may be moved to other locations at the engineers direction .
num .
office building type num place this office either within the project limits or near the project at the engineers direction .
when electric current is required place the building within num ft num m of a power line if possible .
if power lines are farther than num ft num m away payment is made according to subsection num .
if the office buildings can not be placed within the project limits acquire sites outside the project limits .
b .
building requirements the field engineers office may be a building house mobile office or trailer if it is approved and conforms closely to this specification .
ensure that the office building meets the following minimum requirements num .
dimensions all measurements shown are clear inside dimensions .
constructed on project commercially produced in linear feet meters in linear feet meters building width length headroom width length headroom type num num num num num num num num ft num in num num ft num in num num num type num num num num num num num num ft num in num num ft num in num num num num .
doors and windows ensure that each building has at least one standard height solid entrance door with a lock and a selfclosing screen door .
type num buildings shall have at least two doors and screens .
each wall unless predominately occupied by a door shall have at least one hinged jalousied or sliding window that is glazed screened and fitted with venetian blinds .
each window shall measure at least num ft² num m² except the window in the toilet area which may be num ft² num mnum .
the window requirements for each office building type include at least num windows for type num buildings .
at least num windows for type num buildings .
num .
walls and roof if the building is constructed on the project construct the walls and roofs of all building types with studs and rafters measuring num in by num in num mm by num mm .
include in the walls and ceilings insulating material that is at least num num in num mm thick and made of rock wool fiberglass or other nonflammable material .
ensure that this material is in all inner wall and ceiling cavities .
section numfield engineers office num a .
walls cover both sides of the walls with num in num mm plywood exterior grade on the outside .
no open cracks or knotholes are permitted .
standard wall construction is accepted if the walls are commercially produced .
b .
roof ensure that the roof is watertight and has a minimum slope of num in one direction away from the door .
ensure that the roofs eaves are at least num in num mm .
if the building is commercially produced an arched roof without eaves is acceptable .
num .
ceiling cover the ceiling on all building types on the inside of the roof rafters with num in num mm plywood if constructed on the project .
a standard ceiling will be accepted if the building is commercially produced .
num .
floor ensure that the floor is a minimum of num in num mm above the ground on num in by num in num mm by num mm joists .
the floor may be timber .
no open cracks or knotholes are permitted .
num .
heater provide an oil fired gas or electric heater .
but ensure that the heater can maintain an inside minimum temperature of num f num c. properly vent oil and gas units to the outside provide adequate outside fuel storage and connect with suitable feed lines .
gas units may be connected to a commercial gas main if available .
num .
worktable provide a minimum of three num standard dimension desks .
they shall be provided with a minimum of num num nummm wood grain laminated tops with num nummm deep files and heavyduty steel ball bearing drawers and locking center drawer .
provide one num num x num nummmxnummm adjustable from num to num degree and num nummm high drafting table .
num .
stools provide one num posture stool with supportive backrest waterfall edge seat and instant height lever num to num nummm to nummm .
provide a minimum of five num fully braced stackable full num nummm thick numxnum nummmxnummm seats with armrests and chrome frames .
provide a minimum of four num swivel chairs with arms and a numxnum nummmxnummm foam cushion and upholstered seat adjustable from num ½ to num nummm to nummm high .
num .
miscellaneous storage shelves provide num linear ft num linear mm of storage shelves for books etc .
if two num ft num mm shelves are furnished place them at least num ft num mm apart vertically .
provide type num buildings with num ft num linear mm of shelves in each end .
num .
toilet facilities for type num buildings provide indoor toilet facilities that meet local sanitary codes .
type num buildings do not have toilet facilities .
num .
utilities connect all utilities including water sewage gas electricity and telephone service to their service source ready for use before the engineers occupancy .
type num buildings do not have utilities .
process and pay the monthly bills for all utility services .
num .
electric service provide num volt electric service that meets code .
num .
air conditioner for type num buildings provide an air conditioning unit capable of cooling the building to maintain an inside temperature at least num f num c cooler than the outside temperature .
type num buildings do not have air conditioners .
num .
fire extinguisher equip each building with at least one approved fire extinguisher that meets the following requirements multipurpose dry chemical type extinguisher underwriters laboratory rating numanumbc mount the extinguishers in a convenient and conspicuous location that is easily accessible from any part of the building .
maintain the extinguishers according to the requirements of nfpanuma .
num .
telephone provide in each type num building three telephone lines .
provide two voice lines with rollover capabilities connected to two handsets located on either end of the office .
provide separate telephone line for the computer as directed by the engineer .
install and maintain these lines for the life of the project .
provide telephone access to the local area telephone service lats only for outgoing credit card collect and toll free calls .
ensure that the telephones can receive incoming noncollect long distance calls .
section numfield engineers office num provide with the telephone an automatic answering system that can give a greeting message record incoming messages and activate remotely .
c. type num offices in addition to the requirements in section b furnish type num offices with the following num .
project signcomplete as shown in subsection num fabrication .
install at the department of transportation project office at a location plainly visible from the project roadway .
num .
locking file cabinetprovide three num fourdrawer letter size steel fireproof lockable and must have at least two keys .
num .
plan rackscapable of holding two complete sets of project plans not more than num sheets per hanger .
num .
one enclosed closetat least num ft by num ft num mm by num mm with a lockable door and at least two keys .
num .
potable water and water coolermay be bottled water .
num .
outside electrical receptacleprovide a weatherproof exterior numvolt electrical receptacle attached to a power source .
num .
chain link fenceprovide a minimum of num feet numm of num ft. num m high chain link fence with an extension arm and barbed wire as specified in section num .
equip the fence with matching gates and meeting the requirements of section num and consisting of a double num ft. numm by num ft. num m and a single num ft.num m by num ft. num m gate .
include a positivetype locking devices padlock and a minimum of two keys for each gate .
ensure the fence encompasses the entire compound .
num .
security lightprovide two numwatt highpressure sodium security lights with photoelectric controls .
place as directed by the engineer .
num .
copying machinefurnish the field office with one copying machine installed and maintained for the life of the project .
furnish copying machine having the capability of making lettersize copies num ½ x num legalsize copies num ½x num twosided copies at least thirty copies per minute and possess an autofeed feature .
furnish all consumable and nonconsumable supplies for the life of the project .
num .
place and spread num tons num mg of aggregate surface course on the office grounds where indicated by the engineer to facilitate parking .
remove aggregate and grass the area upon completion of the project .
num .
ensure that the office is supported with concrete blocks with mortar joints and anchored with ten stormtiedown anchors .
enclose the area between the ground and the bottom of the office with a vinyl skirting that matches the offices siding .
num .
install an alarm system that includes the following items and maintain in good operating condition srnnum enforced bisonic with napco magnum alert num control box or honeywell vistanump master control panel with honeywell numrf keypad or equivalent .
all doors and windows with wired contacts .
outside sirens with wired contacts .
tamperproof box with wired contacts .
inside sirens with wired contacts .
two smoke and heat detectors .
tie all of the above equipment to a num hour control monitoring system brk numth or equivalent .
use a wired keyboard system .
do not use a remote system .
process and pay the monthly bills for the alarm system and monitoring .
num .
provide one desktop computer and accessories meeting the following minimum requirements a .
hardware processor intel core inum numghz or greater memory num gb ram or larger hard drive num gb or larger optical drive numx rw section numfield engineers office num video num mb video memory or greater vga display port and dviport monitor num lcd monitor input signal vga analog dvid and display port mouse usb optical scroll mouse keyboard usb standard keyboard b .
software operating system windows num professional edition num bit productivity suite office num professonal plus num bit c. printers hp officejet pro num allinone printer fax scanner copier or dell numw allinone wireless printer or approved equal connected so that all functions including fax capability are active .
furnish all consumable and nonconsumable supplies for the life of the project .
d. uninterruptible power supply american power conversion corporation backups es num or newpoint num va battery backup or equal minimum num receptacles e. dsl or cable broadband internet service provide dsl internet service with static ip address or provide cable broadband internet service as directed by the engineer .
if cable broadband internet service is used the third telephone line shall be used for the fax mode of the printer .
num .
concrete cylinder curing boxfurnish a concrete curing box for any project that requires the placement of concrete .
the curing box and its components shall be constructed of noncorroding materials and shall be capable of storing a minimum of num test cylinders num inch x num inch num mm x num mm stored vertically with the lid closed .
additional capacity may be required on large projects at the direction of the engineer .
the curing box shall be equipped with heatingcooling capabilities automatic temperature control and a maximumminimum highlow temperature readout .
the curing box shall be capable of meeting the moisture and temperature requirements of aashto t num .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance whether the building is owned leased or rented the contractor who provides the building retains possession of each office building .
the engineer will control the use location relocation and removal of the building .
when the building is no longer needed remove each building from the project at the engineers direction .
retain possession of all items that are required as part of the field office when the engineer determines that these items are no longer needed .
num measurement field engineers offices types numand num as required by the engineer will be paid for per each provided each was moved to or constructed on the project according to the specifications .
num limits the offices are measured for payment on each project one time only regardless of the number of times they are moved at the engineers direction .
section numfield engineers office num num payment the use of each office building types numand num eligible for payment is paid for at the contract unit price bid .
payment is full compensation for the cost of the location materials design construction furnishings maintenance fuel water sewage disposal electricity telephone service when required movements within the project and movement to and from the project .
when electric current is required the cost of necessary transformers is included in the price bid for type num office buildings .
any cost incurred for carrying electric current over num ft num m from a power line is paid for by force account .
payment for each field engineers office is made in two installments num percent of the contract price is paid when the office is ready for occupancy .
num percent is paid when the department has finished using the office .
payment will be made under item no .
num field engineers office type num per each item no .
num field engineers office type num per each section numconstruction vibration monitoring num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numinsect control num general description the plant pest control division of the u.s. department of agriculture and the georgia state department of agriculture restricts the movement of certain items see subsection num.a do not move material from an infested area from areas infested with japanese beetles or imported fire ants to prevent the spread of these pests to noninfested areas .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
section numinsect control num num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements general provisions num through num .
num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction the project is in an infested area unless noted otherwise .
a .
do not move material from an infested area do not move the following materials from an infested area into a noninfested area without the approval of the department of agriculture inspector in charge soil mulch or sod plants with soil attached stump wood or timber with soil attached if the plans show limits within which infested materials may be placed do not haul materials beyond these limits without the inspectors approval .
b .
clean earthmoving equipment clean soil deposits from earthmoving equipment including crawlertype tractors before moving them from an infested area into a noninfested area .
when cleaning equipment furnish the scraping tools brooms water when required and the labor .
water generally will be required to clean crawlertype tractors .
have the earthmoving equipment inspected by the department of agriculture inspector in charge before moving it from the infested area .
c. notify the department of agriculture inspector in charge notify the department of agriculture inspector in charge in advance concerning the movement of infested articles or equipment in order to plan the work and prevent operation delays .
obtain the name address and telephone number of the department of agriculture inspectors in charge of the project from georgia state dept .
of agriculture division of entomology and pesticides section numinsect control num agriculture building state capitol atlanta ga phone num num usdaaphis plant protection and quarantine num klondike road suite num conyers ga num phone num num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this item of work is not measured separately for payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work is not paid for separately .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numsurvey aids num general description this work includes constructing maintaining and removing when specified by the engineer survey aids required at the locations shown on the plans or modified plans or at locations designated by the engineer .
survey aids may be required when line and distance control for excavation embankment andor bridges require triangulation .
this work also includes disposing of survey aids unless the engineer directs to leave the aids in place .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents ttenum section numsurvey aids num ttnuma num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials comply with the following survey aid requirements a .
general the materials used to construct these expendable items do not require preinspection or sampling and testing .
replace repair or strengthen defective worn deteriorated corroded or unsatisfactory materials according to subsection num contractor warranty and maintenance .
b .
timber and piles timber and piles may be untreated however all piles shall be peeled .
timber may be of any commercial grade and species .
for triangulation stations ensure that the center pile for the instrument mounting has a minimum diameter of num ft num mm at a distance of num ft num m from the butt .
the minimum diameter of other piles in the station shall be num in num mm .
use piles for survey targets that conform to the requirements of the specifications .
the butt diameter for timber walkway piles shall be at least num in num mm .
use piles that will maintain safe walkways for the duration of the project .
c. plywood use marinetype plywood for survey targets that is num in num mm thick .
paint the plywood with coats that meet the requirements of the federal specification noted apply an undercoat to all surfaces and edges ttenum second and third coatsapply to all surfaces and edges tte numa color number num fourth and fifth coatsapply to colored areas ttnuma color number num .
d. sheet metal caps use galvanized sheet metal caps for pile heads galvanized largeheaded roofing nails to attach the caps and galvanized cable to wrap the pile clusters .
e. other hardware for connections use bolts nuts washers etc .
of any commercial grade .
they do not need to be galvanized .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements general provisions num through num .
num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
section numsurvey aids num num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
location of base lines triangulation stations and survey targets possible locations of base lines triangulation stations and survey targets are shown on the plans .
timber walkways are included as a bid item but their locations may not be shown on the plans .
actual and final locations of survey aids are based upon contractors own procedures and equipment methods .
the contractor and the engineer must agree on the most effective means to control the line and distance during construction .
at the preconstruction conference discuss with the subcontractors the plan of operation for reaching this consensus .
after the conference the plans will be modified to show the locations of base lines and the number and locations of triangulation stations and survey targets .
timber walkway locations may not be shown on the modified plans .
after receiving the modified plans make survey aids construction the first operation including the installation of timber walkways if needed to provide access .
b .
location of survey points after the contractor constructs survey aids the engineer places instrument mountings and performs field checks and office calculations necessary to provide the location of the survey points .
even though electronic data methods are used to calculate the point locations the engineer may not be able to designate survey point locations immediately .
time charges will not be suspended during this period .
c. clearing and grubbing the engineer must be satisfied with the method and the location of all clearing and grubbing necessary for survey aid construction as a part of this work .
dispose of removed materials as directed by the engineer .
d. framing perform all framing and construct survey aids according to the plan details unless the engineer permits alternate details .
e. triangulation stations drive pile clusters into the underlying firm material to provide instrument mountings .
ensure that these mountings are steady enough to use during wind and wave conditions .
f. survey targets drive the piling into the firm material to provide and maintain accuracy of the targets under weather and construction conditions specific to the project area .
g. timber walkways drive piling deep enough to provide stability under weather and construction conditions specific to the project area .
walkways may be required to provide access to triangulation stations to provide access to boats located at the edge of marsh or swamp areas at low water or low tide periods or for other purposes as designated on the plans or by the engineer .
alternate designs will be considered if they have equal strength width and safety .
section numsurvey aids num h. height control regardless of elevations stated or implied on the plans or in the contract the engineer can determine how high to construct the survey aids .
construct items above the extreme hightide mark .
the engineer may require triangulation stations used initially for roadway item control to be built higher .
these higher stations may be used in bridge control that may be in the initial or subsequent contracts .
constructing railing ladders and other vertical means of access are considered incidental to constructing survey aids .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance maintain the survey aids as follows a .
promptly replace repair or strengthen defective unduly worn corroded deteriorated or otherwise unsatisfactory material at the engineers request .
such maintenance is incidental to survey aid construction .
b .
maintain survey aids to the engineers satisfaction to ensure that they are safe have longevity and perform accurately .
c. if a survey aid will be used to control the work under another contract num .
do not remove that aid .
num .
before moving off the project or before relinquishing maintenance to another contractor perform the maintenance required to leave the aid in serviceable use for the future work .
the engineer must approve of the maintenance .
the additional maintenance is considered incidental to survey aid construction .
the subsequent contractors maintenance period will conclude when the survey aids no longer are needed for the duration of the contract .
the subsequent contractor shall maintain the survey aids to the engineers satisfaction needed for work as provided in subsection num cooperation by contractor as incidental to the work .
when the aids no longer are needed the engineer will advise the responsible contractor .
the contractor who used the aids last shall remove and dispose of the material to the engineers satisfaction .
removal and disposal is incidental to the work .
num measurement this work is measured for payment in the units shown in subsection num payment for accepted triangulation stations survey targets and timber walkways .
walkway measurements are horizontal and along center lines .
no separate measurements for payment are made to maintain remove or dispose of survey aids or to provide material labor or equipment required of a subsequent contractor who does not originally construct the aids .
all costs incidental to the work shall be included in other contract items .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work is paid for at the contract price per unit of measurement complete in place and when maintained and removed as directed .
these payments are full compensation for costs direct and indirect of complying with the requirements of this specification .
payment will be made under item no .
num triangulation station per each item no .
num survey target per each item no .
num timber walkway per linear foot meter section numsurvey aids num num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numtraining program num general description the contractors equal employment opportunity affirmative action program includes onthejob training aimed at fully qualifying trainees in the trade or job classification involved .
the proposal specifies the number of trainees to be trained under this specification .
this training specification is in implementation of num usc numa .
as a part of the contractors equal employment opportunity affirmative action program provide training as specified in this specification .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b .
reference documents georgia onthejob training program manual num submittals submit an acceptable training program to the department for review and approval within num days after the notice to proceed is issued .
failure to submit an acceptable training program as determined by the engineer will result in the withholding of all contractor progress payments specify the starting time for training in each of the classifications .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel a .
number of trainees if the contract work is subcontracted determine how many trainees if any the subcontractor shall train .
however retain the primary responsibility for meeting the training requirements of this specification .
ensure that this specification applies to the subcontract .
where feasible have num percent of the apprentices or trainees in each occupation be in their first year of apprenticeship or training .
distribute the number of trainees among the work classifications based on needs and the availability of trainees in each classification within a reasonable area of recruitment .
section numtraining program num b .
types of trainees in attendance num .
construction crafts .
provide training in the construction crafts .
training may also be provided for lowerlevel management positions if training is oriented toward construction applications such as office engineers estimators timekeepers etc .
num .
laborers .
training may be provided in the laborer classification if the training is meaningful and if significance is proven and approved by the division office .
num .
clerks and secretaries .
do not provide training for clerktypists or secretarialtype positions .
num .
minorities and women .
conduct systematic and direct recruitment through public and private sources likely to yield minority and women trainees .
recruit minorities and women within a reasonable area of recruitment .
demonstrate the steps taken to recruit minorities and women for training to comply with this specification .
this training commitment is not intended to nor will it be used to discriminate against any applicant for training whether or not the applicant is a member of a minority group .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation give each trainee a copy of the program that is followed during training .
provide each trainee with certification showing the type and length of training satisfactorily completed .
the state will approve of or accept the training program before beginning work on the classification covered by the training program .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction an employee who completes a training course or is employed as a journeyman can not receive training in that area of expertise .
satisfy this requirement by including questions in the employee application or by using other means to disclose the trainees status .
keep records of the findings of each case .
some offsite training is permissible provided the training is an integral part of an approved training program and does not comprise a significant part of the overall training .
num quality acceptance the selected training program approved by the department and the federal highway administration establishes the minimum length and type of training for each classification .
the department and the federal highway administration will approve a program if it is calculated to meet equal employment opportunity obligations and qualify the average trainee for journeyman status in a classification by the end of the training period .
acceptable apprenticeship programs include programs registered with u.s. department of labor programs registered with the bureau of apprenticeship and training programs registered with a state apprenticeship agency recognized by the bureau training programs approved but not necessarily sponsored by the u.s. department of labor manpower administration bureau of apprenticeship and training if administered in a manner consistent with the equal employment obligations of federalaid highway construction contracts num contractor warranty and maintenance maintain and furnish periodic records form fhwa num that document performance under this specification .
section numtraining program num num measurement except as otherwise noted in subsection num limits the contractor will be reimbursed num cents for every hour an employee is trained in an approved training program on this contract .
if the number of trainees exceeds the number specified in this training specification reimbursement will be at the engineers approval .
the contractor will receive the reimbursement even though additional training program funds are received from other sources only if the other sources do not specifically prohibit the contractor from receiving other reimbursement .
the contractor will be not receive any progress payment under any one of these conditions failure to provide an acceptable training program to the department within num days after the notice to proceed is issued the contractor fails to provide the required training the trainee fails to be hired as a journeyman at the fault of the contractor the contractor fails to show good faith to meet the requirements of this training specification num limits the contractor is credited for each trainee that is employed on the contract work and that is currently enrolled or becomes enrolled in an approved program .
reimbursement for such trainees is as follows num .
the contractor receives reimbursement for offsite training only if trainees are concurrently employed on a federal aid project and the contractor does one or more of the following contributes to the cost of the training provides instruction to the trainee or pays the trainees wages during the offsite training num .
the contractor provides acceptable training to the number of trainees specified on the contract .
num .
a trainee begins training on the project as soon as feasible after the work that uses the trained skill has begun .
num .
the trainee remains on the project as long as training opportunities exist in the work classification or until the trainee has completed the training program .
trainees do not need to be employed for the entire length of the contract .
num .
trainees are paid at least num percent of the appropriate minimum journeymans rate specified on the contract for the first half of the training period num percent for the third quarter of the training period and num percent for the last quarter of the training period .
if apprentices or trainees in an approved existing program are enrolled as trainees in the same classification on this project the appropriate rates approved by the departments of labor or transportation for the existing program shall apply to the trainees .
num payment payment will be made under item no .
num training hours num per hour num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numreclamation of material pits and waste areas num general description this work includes reclaiming material pits and waste areas by vegetative planting and applies to areas outside of the rightof way .
the vegetative requirements of this section apply when the contractor obtains material from a source or wastes material on an area other than within the right of way .
these requirements apply regardless of how the source or area is obtained .
exceptions to the vegetative requirements of this section include a material source where the engineer determines not to drain water that accumulates after the material is removed .
only the slopes above water will be planted .
an area composed of rock or other materials that the engineer determines are not satisfactory for permanent vegetative cover .
an area that has been exempted in writing by the georgia surface mined land use board .
an area where the owner or contractor whichever is designated as the operator secures a license from the surface mined land use board for surface mining .
the operator will be responsible only to the surface mined land use board for reclamation of the affected area .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numgrassing section numvine shrub and tree planting section numseed and sod b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals the engineer must approve the planting type if the contractor furnishes a material pit or waste area that requires vegetation under the provisions of this specification .
approve all modified mixtures before planting begins .
the property owner may change the plant material types specified in the plans to a type not shown in the planting table in subsection num planting table below .
if a change is made the mixture shall cost approximately the same and shall produce an equal amount of protective covering as the mixture contained in this specification .
num materials materials shall conform to the requirements of sections num and num as applicable .
if the plans or the proposal do not specify the vegetation type to be planted on stateoptioned areas the engineer will select the type to be used on each area from the planting table .
the state is divided into planting zones as shown on the planting zones map in sections num .
consult the planting table when planting and follow these points do not use giant bermuda seed cynodon species including nknum .
section numreclamation of material pits and waste areas num do not use italian rye grass seedperennial or annual .
apply the entire combination of seeds specified for each group in the amounts specified .
if the property owner does not make a specific choice use planting groups a b c g h or nnum .
increase all seed quantities num percent on slopes that are too steep for soil preparation and can not be dug at least num in num mm deep .
air dry sericea lespedeza seed hay and ensure that it contains mature seed .
planting table planting groups species rates per acrehectare planting zones lbs .
kg except as noted zone num zone num zone num zone num spring planting a weeping love grass num num num num num num num num num interstate lespedeza hs num num num num num num num num num anum interstate lespedeza hs num num num num num num num num num b tall fescue num num num num interstate lespedeza hs num num num num c hulled common bermuda num num num num num num num pensacola bahia num num num num num num num d hulled common bermuda num num korean lespedeza num num num num num num num num dnum hulled common bermuda num num unhulled common bermuda num num num num num num num num korean lespedeza num num e tall fescue num num white dutch clover num num num num num num korean lespedeza num num f tall fescue num num korean lespedeza num num num num num num fnum tall fescue num num korean lespedeza num num num num num fnum tall fescue num num num num num summer planting g hulled common bermuda num num num num num num pensacola bahia num num section numreclamation of material pits and waste areas num planting groups species rates per acrehectare planting zones lbs .
kg except as noted zone num zone num zone num zone num h weeping love grass num num num num num num interstate lespedeza hs num i hulled common ber muda num num num num num num pensacola bahia num num korean lespedeza num num reseeding crimson clover num num j weeping love grass num num num num num num korean lespedeza num num reseeding crimson clover num num k hulled common bermuda num num num num num num pensacola bahia num num reseeding crimson clover num num l tall fescue num num num num num num pensacola bahia num num korean lespedeza num num reseeding crimson clover num num m weeping love grass num num num num num num tall fescue num num korean lespedeza num reseeding crimson clover num num fall planting n tall fescue num num interstate lespedeza hs num num num num num nnum tall fescue num num interstate lespedeza unscarified num num num num num num num num o tall fescue num num num num num num onum tall fescue num num num num num num num num p tall fescue num num pensacola bahia num num num num num num num num num pnum tall fescue num num pensacola bahia num num num num num num num num section numreclamation of material pits and waste areas num planting groups species rates per acrehectare planting zones lbs .
kg except as noted zone num zone num zone num zone num num q tall fescue num num korean lespedeza num num num num num num num num num qnum tall fescue num num korean lespedeza num num num num num num num num qnum reseeding crimson clover num num num num num num num num num num special planting r unhulled common bermuda num num sericea lespedeza seed hay num tons num mg num num num s pine seedlings native to georgia num x num num m x num m spacing num num seedlings num num num num num num num t costal bermuda sprigs omit over seeding num num num num hs hulled and scarified note sericea lespedeza or serala lespedeza may be substituted for interstate lespedeza num delivery storage and handling if the sprigs are stockpiled cover the sprigs and keep them moist .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment equipment shall conform to the requirements of section num and section num as applicable .
num preparation seed or sprig areas that are subject to erosion .
if the engineer feels the borrow pit or waste area will be subject to erosion grass and mulch areas that require pine seedlings before planting the seedlings .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numreclamation of material pits and waste areas num num construction comply with the construction methods in section num for this work with the following exceptions a .
prepare the ground num .
complete the excavation .
num .
have the engineer examine the slopes to ensure that planting is not done on areas composed of rock or other materials that the engineer determines unsatisfactory for permanent vegetation .
num .
plow areas that are to be planted to a depth of num in num mm unless the areas are exempted in this specification or in section num .
b .
apply lime and fertilizer num .
spread agricultural lime uniformly at the rate shown on the plans or determined by the engineer .
num .
apply fertilizer grade num num or num uniformly at approximately num lbsacre num kgha .
num .
mix the lime and fertilizer into the top num in num mm of soil including the areas to be planted with pine seedlings .
num .
hydroseed slopes steeper than num to num as defined in subsection num.f hydroseeding .
the mixing may be eliminated .
c. seed sow seeds at the rates specified in the subsection num planting table .
d. mulch num .
use any mulch type listed in subsection num.g mulching .
num .
mulch all seeded and sprigged areas .
e. plant pine seedlings num .
use a dibble or other approved planter to dig holes for the pine seedlings after seeding or sprigging and mulching .
num .
set the plants slightly deeper than they were planted in the nursery .
when hand planting compact the bottom of the hole before setting the plants .
f. apply nitrogen num .
apply nitrogen according to subsection num.i application of nitrogen .
num .
do not apply nitrogen directly over the seedlings .
g. harvest sprigs num .
observe sprigging seasonal limitations .
see subsection num planting table .
num .
inspect harvesting sites .
ensure inspection is according to subsection num.c acceptance .
num .
harvest sprigs as follows a .
harvest the sprigs using a sod cutter turning plow or other approved equipment so that at least num in num mm of the root system is lifted intact .
b .
immediately load the harvested sprigs and cover them with wet burlap or canvas to prevent weather damage .
c. transport the sprigs to where they will be immediately planted or stockpiled .
d. plant sprigs within num hours after they are harvested .
never allow sprigs to dry out or freeze .
h. apply sprigs apply sprigs using either the broadcast or row method .
however do not perform broadcast sprigging on steep slopes or narrow areas where results will not be satisfactory .
during sprigging ensure that the soil moisture content is at least the optimum for soil sprigging .
section numreclamation of material pits and waste areas num num .
broadcast sprigging perform broadcast sprigging as follows a .
apply the sprigs mechanically or by hand in a uniform layer over the prepared surface placing at least num viable sprigs to each square foot num viable sprigs to each square meter .
b .
place the sprigs num to num in num to num mm deep by disc harrowing or by other satisfactory means .
num .
row sprigging perform row sprigging as follows a .
open furrows spaced at least num ft num mm apart to at least num in num mm deep .
b .
immediately place the sprigs in the furrows by hand or by planting machines and overlap them in the furrows .
c. do not expose sprigs more than num minutes before filling in the furrows .
i .
restore line and grade and roll after the sprigging is done do the following num .
return the impaired sections back to the line and grade as established by the engineer .
num .
roll the area at right angles to the direction of the slope incline .
j. mulch sprigged areas mulch sprigged areas within the construction limits according to subsection num.g mulching .
num .
mulch with binder when applying mulch with binder apply immediately after the overseeding and rolling are complete .
num .
mixedinplace mulch when applying mixedinplace mulch apply immediately after sprigging .
num quality acceptance before final acceptance each planted area shall meet the requirements for satisfactory growth and development as defined in subsection num.a plant establishment .
except as otherwise specified in this specification all seeding shall conform to section num and pine seedling planting shall conform to section num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the following will be measured in acres hectares horizontal measurement area reclamationseeding or sprigging area reclamationpine seedlings including fertilizer and mulch reclamation items that are completed accepted and eligible for measurement and payment are subject to the following conditions each work item shall be done for the department according to the specifications and terms of the contract .
areas where the work is done shall be shown on the plans as possible sources of materials or waste areas .
if the contractor furnishes a substitute area measurement of reclamation terms eligible for payment shall not exceed plan quantities .
num limits some reclamation items are not eligible for measurement and payment by the department .
these include but are not limited to items performed for or paid for by another agency section numreclamation of material pits and waste areas num items performed on areas other than substitute areas secured by the contractor but not shown on the plans items performed on any area excluded under subsection num general description .
num payment items of area reclamation will be paid for if complete in place and accepted .
the following will be paid for at the contract unit price per acre hectare area reclamationseeding or sprigging area reclamationpine seedlings measured for payment payment shall be full compensation for preparing the ground seeding or planting applying fertilizer including nitrogen watering mulching providing other work and incidentals necessary to complete the item except lime which will be measured and paid for according to section num .
the contractor will be allowed full measurement and payment on his regular monthly estimates for all reclamation items at the time they are first completed provided the work has been done in strict compliance with the specifications .
payment will be made under item no .
num area reclamation seeding per acre hectare item no .
num area reclamation sprigging per acre hectare item no .
num area reclamation pine seedlings per acre hectare item no .
num agricultural lime per ton megagram num adjustments a .
plant establishment perform plant establishment according to subsection num.a plant establishment except that mowing is not required .
b. pine tree seedlings the area covered with pine tree seedlings will not be considered satisfactory until num percent or more of the growth has survived num days after planting with no fail spots exceeding num acre num ha .
if the survival rate is less than num percent but greater than num percent and fail spots do not exceed num acre num ha the affected area will be measured for payment at half the contract price unless the contractor replants the deficient area to meet the requirements for full growth and coverage .
areas that do not meet the minimum num percent requirement shall be replanted in full at the contractors expense .
all replanting shall be done within the allowable planting season for pine seedlings as shown in subsection num planting table .
num section numcontrol of soil erosion and sedimentation num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numerosion control check dams num general description this work includes furnishing constructing and maintaining erosion control check dams .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numroadway materials b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials a .
erosion control materials use these materials as needed to control erosion on check dams num .
where required use any commercial type of woven wire minimum num ½ gauge .
num .
obtain other materials such as logs brush stakes etc .
from the rightofway where available .
num .
place number num stone where required at the location and depth indicated on the plans .
num .
ensure that material in the earth dams meets the requirements of subsection num.a.num classes for class ii soils .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
section numerosion control check dams num num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
check dam construction construct check dams as follows num .
construct check dams before roadway clearing grubbing or grading is done in the affected drainage area .
construct according to the plans .
num .
remove the trees logs brush etc .
within the rightofway and the affected area that may be used to construct the check dams .
do not disturb other natural ground cover .
note use only rubbertired equipment to work in the affected drainage area until after the check dam is in place and completed .
num .
obtain the embankment material for the earth dams from outside the area draining into the protected pond or stream .
num .
immediately after completing the earthwork on the earth dams place a layer of number num stone on the downstream side of the dam .
immediately grass the remaining portions top and upstream slopes of the earth dams .
num .
immediately after grading grass or stabilize with straw mulch roadway cut and fill slopes that drain toward the check dam drainage area .
num .
leave check dams in place after construction is complete unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance repair the check dams as needed during the life of the contract .
the estimated number of check dams required is shown on the plans .
additional check dams may be necessary and shall be constructed when directed by the engineer .
num measurement the number of erosion control check dams measured for the payment is the actual number completed and accepted .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment erosion control check dams as measured in subsection num measurement are paid for at the contract unit price .
payment is full compensation for earth dam construction and compaction required grassing mulching and number num stone log dams and dissipaters removal if ordered by the engineer payment for this item is made as follows num percent of the contract price is paid when each erosion control check dam is complete in place .
num percent is paid when the engineer instructs the contractor that the check dam is no longer required but will remain in place or be removed whichever applies .
section numerosion control check dams num note temporary devices will be left in place at the engineers discretion without a change in cost .
payment will be made under item no .
num erosion control check damtype__ per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section nummiscellaneous erosion control items num general description this work includes constructing and removing silt control gates temporary erosion control slope drains shown on the plans or as directed sediment basins baled straw sediment barrier and check dams rock filter dams stone filter berms stone filter rings other temporary erosion control structures shown on the plans or directed by the engineer this work also includes applying mulch straw or hay erosion control compost and temporary grass .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numcontrol of soil erosion and sedimentation section numtemporary silt fence section numconcrete structures section numrip rap section numgrassing section numbituminous treated roving section num triangular silt barrier section numcoarse aggregate section numfabrics section numemulsified asphalt section numlumber and timber section numpreservative treatment of timber products section numseed and sod section nummiscellaneous planting materials section nummiscellaneos erosion control items num b. referenced documents aashto mnum aashto mnum num submittals provide written documentation to the engineer as to the average weight of the bales of mulch .
num materials provide materials shown on the plans such as pipe spillways wood baffles and other accessories including an antiseep collar when necessary .
the materials shall remain the contractors property after removal unless otherwise shown on the plans .
materials may be new or used however the engineer shall approve previously used materials before use .
materials shall meet the requirements of the following specifications material section mulch num temporary silt fence num concrete aprons and footings shall be class a num rip rap num temporary grass num bituminous treated roving num triangular silt barrier num lumber and timber num preservative treatment of timber products num corrugated polyethylene temporary slope drain pipe aashto mnum or mnum num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. silt control gates if silt control gates are required or are directed by the engineer follow these guidelines to construct them section nummiscellaneos erosion control items num num .
clear and grade only that portion of the roadway within the affected drainage area where the drainage structure will be constructed .
num .
construct or install the drainage structure and backfill as required for stability .
num .
install the silt control gate at the inlet of the structure .
use the type indicated on the plans .
num .
vary the height of the gate as required or as shown on the plans .
num .
finish grading the roadway in the affected drainage area .
grass and mulch slopes and ditches that will not be paved .
construct the ditch paving required in the affected area .
num .
keep the gate in place until the work in the affected drainage area is complete and the erodible area is stabilized .
num .
remove the type num silt gate assembly by sawing off the wood posts flush with the concrete apron .
leave the concrete apron between the gate and the structure inlet in place .
the gate shall remain the property of the contractor .
b .
temporary slope drains if temporary slope drains are required conduct the roadway grading operation according to section num and follow these guidelines num .
place temporary pipe slope drains with inlets and velocity dissipaters straw bales silt fence or aprons according to the plans .
num .
securely anchor the inlet into the slope to provide a watertight connection to the earth berm .
ensure that all connections in the pipe are leak proof .
num .
place temporary slope drains at a spacing of num ft num m maximum on a num to num grade and at a spacing of num ft numm maximum on steeper grades or more frequently as directed by the engineer .
keep the slope drains in place until the permanent grass has grown enough to control erosion .
num .
remove the slope drains and grass the disturbed area with permanent grass .
however the temporary slope drains may remain in place to help establish permanent grass if approved by the engineer .
c. sediment basins construct sediment basins according to the plans at the required location or as modified by the engineer .
num .
construct the unit complete as shown including grading drainage rip rap spillways antiseep collar temporary mulching and grassing on internal and external slopes accessories to complete the basin num .
when the sediment basin is no longer needed remove and dispose of the remaining sediment .
num .
remove the sediment basin .
grade to drain and restore the area to blend with the adjacent landscape .
num .
mulch and permanently grass the disturbed areas according to section num .
d. sediment barrier baled straw construct sediment barrier baled straw according to the plan details .
use rectangular standard size baled straw in mechanically produced bales .
the following items may be substituted for sediment barrier baled straw num .
type b silt fence .
num .
triangular silt barrier .
section nummiscellaneos erosion control items num num .
synthetic fiber use synthetic fiber bales of circular cross section at least num in num mm in diameter .
use synthetic bales of num ft or num ft num m or num m in length that are capable of being linked together to form a continuous roll of the desired total length .
use bales that are enclosed in a geotextile fabric and that contain a premade stake hole for anchoring .
num .
coir use coir fiber bales of circular cross section at least num nummm in diameter .
use coir bales of num ft num ft or num ft num m num m or num m in length .
use coir baled with coir twine netting with num in x num in num mm x num mm openings .
use coir bales with a dry density of at least num lbftnum num kgmnum .
anchor in place with num in x num in num mm x num mm wooden wedges with a num in num mm nail at the top .
place wedges no more than num in num mm apart .
num .
excelsior use curled aspen excelsior fiber with barbed edges in circular bales of at least num in num mm in diameter and nominally num ft num m in length .
use excelsior baled with polyester netting with num in x num in num mm by num mm triangular openings .
use excelsior bales with a dry density of at least num lbftnum num kgmnum .
anchor in place with num in num mm diameter wooden stakes driven through the netting at intervals of no more than num ft num mm .
num .
compost filter sock use general use compost see subsection num.a.num.b in circular bales at least num in diameter .
use compost baled with photodegradable plastic mesh num mils thick with a maximum num in x num in num mm x num mm openings .
anchor in place with num in num mm diameter wooden stakes driven through the netting at intervals of no more than num ft num mm .
the sock shall be dispersed on site when no longer required as determined by the engineer .
do not use compost filter socks in areas where the use of fertilizer is restricted .
num .
compost filter berm use erosion control compost see subsection num to construct an uncompacted num ft to num ft num mm to num mm high trapezoidal berm which is approximately num ft to num ft num mm to num m wide at the top and minimum num ft num m wide at the base .
do not use compost filter berms in areas where the use of fertilizer is restricted .
the construction of the compost filter berm includes the following a .
keeping the berm in a functional condition .
b .
installing additional berm material when necessary .
c. removing the berm when no longer required as determined by the engineer .
at the engineers discretion berm material may be left to decompose naturally or distributed over the adjacent area .
e. other temporary structures when special conditions occur during the design stage the plans may show other temporary structures for erosion control with required materials and construction methods .
f. temporary grass use a quick growing species of temporary grass such as rye grass millet or a cereal grass suitable to the area and season .
use temporary grass in the following situations when required by the specifications or directed by the engineer to control erosion where permanent grassing can not be planted .
to protect an area for longer than mulch is expected to last num calendar days .
plant temporary grass as follows num .
use seeds that conform to subsection num seed .
perform seeding according to section num except use the minimum ground preparation necessary to provide a seed bed if further grading is required .
num .
prepare areas that require no further grading according to subsection num.a ground preparation .
omit the lime unless the area will be planted with permanent grass without further grading .
in this case apply the lime according to section num .
num .
apply mixed grade fertilizer at num lbsacre num kgha .
omit the nitrogen .
mulch with straw or hay temporary grass according to section num .
erosion control compost mulch will not be allowed with grassing .
num .
before planting permanent grass thoroughly plow and prepare areas where temporary grass has been planted according to subsection num.a ground preparation .
num .
apply polyacrylamide pam to all areas that receive temporary grassing .
section nummiscellaneos erosion control items num num .
apply pam powder before grassing or pam emulsion to the hydroseeding operation .
num .
apply pam according to manufacturer specifications .
num .
use only anionic pam .
for projects that consist of shoulder reconstruction andor shoulder widening refer to section numh for wood fiber blanket requirements .
g. mulch when stage construction or other conditions prevent completing a roadway section continuously apply mulch straw or hay or erosion control compost to control erosion .
mulch may be used without temporary grassing for num calendar days or less .
areas stabilized with only mulch strawhay shall be planted with temporary grass after num calendar days .
apply mulch as follows num .
mulch hay or straw without grass seed a .
uniformly spread the mulch over the designated areas from num in to num in num mm to num mm thick .
b .
after spreading the mulch walk in the mulch by using a tracked vehicle preferred method empty sheep foot roller light disking or other means that preserves the finished cross section of the prepared areas .
the engineer will approve of the method .
c. place temporary mulch on slopes as steep as num by using a tracked vehicle to imbed the mulch into the slope .
d. when grassing operations begin leave the mulch in place and plow the mulch into the soil during seed bed preparation .
the mulch will become beneficial plant food for the newly planted grass .
num .
erosion control compost without grass seed a .
uniformly spread the mulch erosion control compost over the designated areas num in num mm thick .
b .
when rolling is necessary or directed by the engineer use a light corrugated drum roller .
c. when grassing operations begin leave the mulch in place and plow the mulch into the soil during seed bed preparation .
the mulch will become beneficial plant food for the newly planted grass .
d. plant temporary grass on area stabilized with mulch erosion control compost after num calendar days .
e. do not use erosion control compost in areas where the use of fertilizer is restricted .
h. miscellaneous erosion control not shown on the plans when conditions develop during construction that were unforeseen in the design stage the engineer may direct the contractor to construct temporary devices such as but not limited to bulkheads sump holes half round pipe for use as ditch liners uv resistant plastic sheets to cover critical cut slopes the engineer and the contractor will determine the placement to ensure erosion control in the affected area .
i .
diversion channels when constructing a culvert or other drainage structure in a live stream that requires diverting a stream construct a diversion channel .
j .
temporary check dams temporary check dams are constructed of the following materials stone plain rip rap according to section num or of sand bags as in section num without portland cement .
place plastic filter fabric on ditch section before placing rip rap .
fabric type c silt fence section nummiscellaneos erosion control items num hay bales temporary check dams shall be constructed according to plan details and shall remain in place until the permanent ditch protection is in place or being installed and the removal is approved by the engineer .
k. construction exits locate construction exits at any point where vehicles will be leaving the project onto a public roadway .
install construction exits at the locations shown in the plans and in accordance with plan details .
l. retrofit add the retrofit device to the permanent outlet structure as shown on the plan details .
when all land disturbing activities that would contribute sedimentladen runoff to the basin are complete clean the basin of sediment and stabilize the basin area with vegetation .
when the basin is stabilized remove the retrofit device from the permanent outlet structure of the detention pond .
m. inlet sediment trap inlet sediment traps consist of a temporary device placed around a storm drain inlet to trap sediment .
an excavated area adjacent to the sediment trap will provide additional sediment storage .
inlet sediment traps may be constructed of type c silt fence plastic frame and filter hay bales baffle box or other filtering materials approved by the engineer .
construct inlet sediment traps according to the appropriate specification for the material selected for the trap .
place inlet sediment traps as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
n. rock filter dams construct rock filter dams of the material selected as shown in the approved erosion and sediment control plan .
construct and place this item in accordance with the approved erosion control construction details and standard specification section num .
rock filter dams shall remain in place until the permanent ditch protection is in place or is being installed and their removal is approved by the engineer .
o .
stone filter berms construct stone filter berms of the material selected as shown in the approved erosion and sediment control plan .
construct and place this item in accordance with the approved erosion control construction details and standard specification section num .
stone filter berms shall remain in place until the permanent slope protection is in place or is being installed and their removal is approved by the engineer .
p. stone filter rings construct stone filter rings of the material selected as shown in the approved erosion and sediment control plan .
construct and place this item in accordance with the approved erosion control construction details and standard specification section num .
a stone filter ring shall remain in place until final stabilization of the area which drains toward it is achieved and its removal is approved by the engineer .
section nummiscellaneos erosion control items num num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. silt control gates silt control gates are measured for payment by the entire structure constructed at each location complete in place and accepted .
silt control gates constructed at the inlet of multiple lines of drainage structures are measured for payment as a single unit .
b .
temporary slope drains temporary slope drains are measured for payment by the linear foot meter of pipe placed .
when required the inlet spillway and outlet apron andor other dissipation devices are incidental and not measured separately .
c. sediment basins sediment basins are measured for payment by the entire structure complete including construction maintenance and removal .
measurement also includes earthwork drainage spillways baffles rip rap final cleaning to remove the basin permanent and temporary grassing for sediment basins is measured separately for payment .
d. diversion channels diversion channels are not measured for payment .
costs for the entire structure complete including materials construction including earthwork and removal is included in the price bid for the drainage structure or for other contract items .
e. temporary grass temporary grass is measured for payment by the acre hectare .
lime when required is measured by the ton megagram .
mulch and fertilizer are measured separately for payment .
f. mulch mulch straw or hay or erosion control compost is measured for payment by the ton megagram .
g. baled straw sediment barrier baled straw check dam and fabric check dams baled straw sediment barrier baled straw check dams and fabric check dams are measured by the linear foot meter .
when the contractor substitutes a product allowed in subsection num.d for baled straw sediment barrier or when the engineer directs this substitution the product will be measured by the linear foot meter .
section nummiscellaneos erosion control items num h. rip rap check dams rip rap check dams are measured per each which will include all work necessary to construct the check dam including plastic filter fabric placed beneath the rip rap or sand bags .
i .
construction exits construction exits are measured per each which will include all work necessary to construct the exit including the required geotextile fabric placed beneath the aggregate .
j. retrofit retrofit will be measured for payment per each .
the construction of the detention pond and permanent outlet structure will be measured separately under the appropriate items .
k. inlet sediment trap inlet sediment traps regardless of the material selected are measured per each which includes all work necessary to construct the trap including any incidentals and providing the excavated area for sediment storage .
l. rock filter dams rock filter dams are measured for payment per each required .
this includes the entire structure at each location and all the work necessary for construction .
m. stone filter berms stone filter berms are measured for payment per each required .
this includes the entire structure at each location and all the work necessary for construction .
n. stone filter rings stone filter rings are measured for payment per each required .
this includes the entire structure at each location and all the work necessary for construction .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a. silt control gates the specified silt control gates are paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment is full compensation for furnishing the material and labor constructing the concrete apron as shown on the plans excavating and backfilling to place the apron removing the gate b .
temporary slope drains temporary slope drains are paid for by the linear foot meter .
payment is full compensation for materials construction removal if required inlet spillways velocity dissipaters and outlet aprons .
when temporary drain inlets and pipe slope drains are removed they remain the contractors property and may be reused or removed from the project as the contractor desires .
reused pipe or inlets are paid for the same as new pipe or inlets .
section nummiscellaneos erosion control items num c. sediment basin sediment basins measured according to subsection numc measurement are paid for by the unit per each for the type specified on the plans .
price and payment are full compensation for work and supervision to construct and remove the sediment basin including final cleanup .
d. diversion channel diversion channels are not paid for separately they are included in the price bid for the drainage structure or for other contract items .
e. temporary grass temporary grass is paid for by the acre hectare .
payment is full compensation for all equipment labor ground preparation materials wood fiber mulch polyacrylamide and other incidentals .
lime when required is paid for by the ton megagram .
mulch and fertilizer are paid for separately .
f. mulch mulch is paid for by the ton .
payment is full compensation for all materials labor maintenance equipment and other incidentals .
the weight for payment of straw or hay mulch will be the product of the number of bales used and the average weight per bale as determined on certified scales provided by the contractor or state certified scales .
provide written documentation to the engineer stating the average weight of the bales .
the weight of erosion control compost mulch will be determined by weighing each loaded vehicle on the required motor truck scale as the material is hauled to the roadway or by using recorded weights if a digital recording device is used .
the contractor may propose other methods of providing the weight of the mulch to engineer for approval .
g. baled straw sediment barrier baled straw check dams and fabric check dams type c silt fence baled straw sediment barrier baled straw check dams and fabric check dams type c silt fence complete in place and accepted are paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter .
payment is full compensation for constructing and removing when directed the baled straw sediment barrier or either check dam .
when the contractor substitutes any product allowed in subsection num.d for baled straw sediment barrier or when the engineer directs this substitution payment is made at the bid price per linear foot meter for baled straw sediment barrier .
h. rip rap check dams rip rap check dams are paid for per each .
payment is full compensation for all materials construction and removal .
reused stone plain rip rap or sandbags are paid for on the same basis as new items .
filter fabric required under rip rap check dams is included in the price bid for each check dam .
i .
construction exits construction exits are paid for per each .
payment is full compensation for all materials including the required geotextile construction and removal .
j. retrofit this item is paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment is full compensation for all work supervision materials including the stone filter labor and equipment necessary to construct and remove the retrofit device from an existing or proposed detention pond outlet structure .
k. inlet sediment trap inlet sediment traps are paid for per each .
payment is full compensation for all materials construction and removal section nummiscellaneos erosion control items num l. rock filter dams rock filter dams are paid for per each .
payment is full compensation for all materials construction and removal for each .
clean reused stone type num riprap and num stone are paid for on the same basis as new items .
plastic woven filter fabric is required under rock filter dams and is included in the price bid for each .
m. stone filter berms stone filter berms are paid for per each .
payment is full compensation for all materials construction and removal for each .
clean reused stone type num riprap and num stone are paid for on the same basis as new items .
plastic woven filter fabric is required under rock filter berms and is included in the price bid for each .
n. stone filter rings stone filter rings are paid for per each .
payment is full compensation for all materials construction and removal for each .
clean reused stone type num riprap and num stone are paid for on the same basis as new items .
plastic woven filter fabric is required under stone filter rings and is included in the price bid for each .
the items in this section except temporary grass and mulch are made as partial payments as follows when the item is installed and put into operation the contractor will be paid num percent of the contract price .
when the engineer instructs the contractor that the item is no longer required and is to remain in place or is removed whichever applies the remaining num percent will be paid .
temporary devices may be left in place at the engineers discretion at no change in cost .
payment for temporary grass will be made based on the number of acres hectares grassed .
mulch will be based on the number of tons megagrams used .
payment is made under item no .
num construct and remove silt control gate type__ per each item no .
num construct and remove temporary pipe slope drains per linear foot meter item no .
num construct and remove temporary sediment barrier or baled straw check dam per linear foot meter item no .
num construct and remove sediment basin type__ sta .
no.___ per each item no .
num construct and remove fabric check dam type c silt fence per linear foot meter item no .
num construct and remove rip rap check dams stone plain rip rapsand bags per each item no .
num construction exit per each item no .
num construct and remove retrofit sta .
no.____ per each item no .
num construct and remove rock filter dam per each item no .
num construct and remove stone filter berm per linear foot meter item no .
num construct and remove stone filter ring per each item no .
num construct and remove inlet sediment trap per each item no .
num temporary grass per acre hectare item no .
num mulch per ton megagram num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section nummaintenance of temporary erosion and sedimentation control devices num general description this work consists of providing maintenance on temporary erosion and sediment control devices including but not limited to the following silt fence sediment basins silt control gates check dams silt retention barriers rock filter dams stone filter berms stone filter rings it also consists of removing sediment that has accumulated at the temporary erosion and sediment control devices .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
section nummaintenance of temporary erosion and sedimentation control devices num num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
general as a minimum clean the sediment from all temporary erosion control devices except sediment basins installed on the project when one half the capacity by height depth or volume has been reached .
clean the sediment from all temporary sediment basins installed on a project when one third the capacity of the storage volume has been filled .
handle sediment excavated from any erosion or sediment control device in one of the following ways remove sediment from the immediate area and immediately stabilize it to prevent the material from refilling any erosion or sediment control device .
place and mix it in the roadway embankment or waste it in an area approved by the engineer .
repair or replace at no cost to the department any erosion or sediment control devices that are not functioning properly or are damaged due to negligence or abuse .
b .
temporary silt fence maintenance of temporary silt fence consists of furnishing all labor tools materials equipment and necessary incidentals to remove and dispose of accumulated sediment down to the original ground line num filled .
also included is the removal of sediment accumulations filtercake on the fabric by tapping the fabric on the downstream side .
c. silt control gates maintenance of temporary silt control gates consists of all labor tools materials equipment and necessary incidentals to remove and dispose of accumulated sediment down to the original ground line num filled .
when applicable this item will include the removal of sediment accumulations on the fabric by tapping the fabric on the downstream side .
d. check dams all types maintenance of temporary erosion control check dams shall consist of all labor tools materials equipment and necessary incidentals to remove and dispose of accumulated sediment down to the original ground line num filled .
this item also includes the removal of any material deposited in sump holes .
when applicable this item will include the removal of sediment accumulations on the fabric by tapping the fabric on the downstream side or from the baled straw by similar means .
e. silt retention barrier maintenance of temporary silt retention barrier consists of all labor tools materials equipment and necessary incidentals to remove and dispose of accumulated sediment down to the original ground line num filled .
f. temporary sediment basins maintenance of temporary sediment basins consists of all labor tools materials equipment and necessary incidentals to remove and dispose of accumulated sediment down to the original bottom of the basin .
this also includes removing accumulated sediment from the rock filter and restoring the rock filter to its original specified condition and any work necessary to restore all other components to the premaintenance conditions .
g. sediment barrier baled straw maintenance of sediment barrier baled straw consists of furnishing all labor tools materials equipment and necessary incidentals to remove and dispose of accumulated sediment down to the original ground line num filled .
also included is the removal of sediment accumulations on the bales by tapping .
section nummaintenance of temporary erosion and sedimentation control devices num h. triangular silt barrier maintenance of triangular silt barrier consists of all labor tools materials equipment and necessary incidentals to remove and dispose of accumulated sediment down to the original ground line num filled .
i. retrofit maintenance of the retrofit device consists of all labor tools materials equipment and necessary incidentals to remove and properly dispose of accumulated sediment in the permanent detention pond being utilized as a temporary sediment basin .
this item also includes any maintenance that is required to ensure the retrofit device is maintained per plan details and any maintenance of the stone filter to maintain its filtering ability including cleaning and replacement .
j .
construction exit maintenance of the construction exit consists of all labor tools materials equipment and incidentals including additional stone and geotextile fabric as required to prevent the tracking or flow of soil onto public roadways .
this includes scarifying existing stone cleaning existing stone or placement of additional stone .
cleaning of the construction exit by scraping andor brooming only will not be measured for payment .
k. inlet sediment trap maintenance of inlet sediment traps consists of all labor tools materials equipment and necessary incidentals to remove and properly dispose of accumulated sediment in the trap andor the excavated area adjacent to the trap .
it also includes any maintenance that is required to remove sediment accumulations filtercake from the material selected to construct the inlet sediment trap .
l. rock filter dams maintenance of rock filter dams consists of all labor tools materials equipment and necessary incidentals to remove and dispose of accumulated sediment down to the original ground line num filled .
this item also includes the removal of any material deposited in sump holes .
m. stone filter berms maintenance of stone filter berms consists of all labor tools materials equipment and necessary incidentals to remove and dispose of accumulated sediment down to the original ground line num filled .
this item also includes the removal of any material deposited in sump holes .
n. stone filter rings maintenance of stone filter rings consists of all labor tools materials equipment and necessary incidentals to remove and dispose of accumulated sediment down to the original ground line num filled .
this item also includes the removal of any material deposited in sump holes .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
section nummaintenance of temporary erosion and sedimentation control devices num num measurement a .
temporary silt fence maintenance of temporary silt fence type a b or c is the actual linear feet meter of silt fence measured in place where sediment is removed .
b. silt control gates maintenance of temporary silt control gates type i ii iii or iv as specified on the plans is measured as a single unit .
c. check dams all types maintenance of temporary erosion control check dams as specified on the plans is the actual linear feet meter of baled straw type c silt fence or rip rap measured in place where sediment is removed .
d. silt retention barrier maintenance of temporary silt retention barrier as specified on the plans is measured by the linear foot meter where sediment is removed .
e. temporary sediment basins maintenance of temporary sediment basins as specified on the plans is measured as a single unit .
f. sediment barrier baled straw maintenance of sediment barrier baled straw is the actual linear feet meter of baled straw measured in place where sediment is removed .
g. triangular silt barrier maintenance of triangular silt barrier as specified on the plans is measured by the linear foot meter where sediment is removed .
h. retrofit maintenance of retrofit device at the location specified on the plans is measured per each .
i .
construction exit maintenance of construction exit at the location specified on the plans or as directed by the engineer is measured per each .
j. inlet sediment trap maintenance of inlet sediment trap at the location specified on the plans or as added by the engineer is measured per each .
k. rock filter dams maintenance of rock filter dams as specified on the plans is measured as a single unit .
l. stone filter berms maintenance of stone filter berms as specified on the plans is measured as a single unit .
m. stone filter rings maintenance of stone filter rings as specified on the plans is measured as a single unit .
section nummaintenance of temporary erosion and sedimentation control devices num num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a .
temporary silt fence maintenance of temporary silt fence type a b or c is paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter .
b. silt control gates maintenance of temporary silt control gates type i ii iii or iv as specified on the plans is paid for at the contract unit price bid per each .
c. check dams all types maintenance of check dams as specified on the plans is paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter .
d. silt retention barrier maintenance of temporary silt retention barrier as specified on the plans is paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter .
e. temporary sediment basins maintenance of temporary sediment basins as specified on the plans is paid for at the contract unit price bid per each .
f. sediment barrier baled straw maintenance of sediment barrier baled straw as specified on the plans is paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter .
g. triangular silt barrier maintenance of triangular silt barrier as specified on the plans is paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter .
h. retrofit maintenance of the retrofit device at the location specified on the plans is paid for at the contract unit price bid per each .
i .
construction exit maintenance of the construction exit at the location specified on the plans or as added by the engineer is paid for at the contract unit price per each .
j. inlet sediment trap maintenance of the inlet sediment trap at the location specified on the plans or at the location specified by the engineer is paid for at the contract unit price per each .
k. rock filter dams maintenance of rock filter dams as specified on the plans is paid for at the contract unit price bid per each .
l. stone filter berms maintenance of stone filter berms as specified on the plans is paid for at the contract unit price bid per each .
m. stone filter rings section nummaintenance of temporary erosion and sedimentation control devices num maintenance of stone filter rings as specified on the plans is paid for at the contract unit price bid per each .
payment will be made under item no .
num maintenance of temporary silt fence type____ per linear foot meter item no .
num maintenance of silt control gate type ____ per each item no .
num maintenance of check dams all types per linear foot meter item no .
num maintenance of silt retention barrier per foot meter item no .
num maintenance of temporary sediment basin sta .
no .
____ per each item no .
num maintenance of sediment barrier baled straw per linear foot meter item no .
num maintenance of triangular silt barrier per linear foot meter item no .
num maintenance of retrofit sta .
no.____ per each item no .
num maintenance of construction exit per each item no .
num maintenance of inlet sediment trap per each item no .
num maintenance of rock filter dam per each item no .
num maintenance of stone filter berm per linear foot meter item no .
num maintenance of rock filter dam per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numrestoration or alteration of lakes and ponds num general description this specification gives the contractor responsibility for altering or restoring a lake or pond and adjoining property .
refer to subsection num protection and restoration of property and landscape .
num definitions in this specification lake means lake or pond regardless of its shape or size .
use the method indicated on the plans and in the proposal .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials materials required to complete the work are shown on the plans or used as directed .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment provide equipment necessary to complete the work or as directed .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
restore lakes and dams when indicated on the plans and in the proposal use the lake or pond area as a settling basin to contain silt debris or other foreign matter during the construction period .
before the work begins the engineer will establish the condition of the lake and dam and determine the existing contours of the lake bottom .
restore lakes and dams as follows num .
remove at no additional cost to the department the silt etc .
as often as necessary to avoid polluting the downstream area .
section numrestoration or alteration of lakes and ponds num num .
when roadway work progresses enough that a normal stand of grass can prevent erosion and pollution of the lake excavate and clean the lake of foreign matter .
return the lake to the original contour and condition or proposed contour if different than the original .
num .
dispose of material removed in a manner satisfactory to the engineer .
num .
after removing the deleterious materials from the lake grade and grass disturbed areas not under water .
b .
alter lakes or ponds if alteration is shown as a pay item work shall include activities to change the physical size shape or depth of the lake or to change the highwater level or elevation of the dam or portions of it .
this work shall be done according to the plan details .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement alteration or restoration of a lake is measured by the unit as indicated on the plans and in the proposal .
payment is full compensation for all necessary labor equipment tools materials and incidentals required to complete the work to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment alteration or restoration of a lake is paid for at the contract unit price bid per each for the specified operation as defined in subsection num construction .
payment is full compensation for furnishing all labor equipment materials tools and incidentals and performing the work .
a .
restoration of a lake when the lake or pond is used as a settling basin the work is paid for on the following schedule ten percent of the bid amount will be paid each time the lake or pond is cleaned of silt and debris during the construction period up to four occurrences .
the remaining amount will be paid when the final cleaning and restoration are complete and accepted .
b. alteration of a lake alteration is paid on a prorata basis of the bid amount as the work progresses .
payment will be made under item no .
num restoration of lake sta.__ per each item no .
num alteration of lake sta.__ per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numwater quality monitoring num general description this specification establishes the contractors responsibility to meet the requirements of the national pollutant discharge elimination system npdes infrastructure permit no .
gar num as it pertains to part iv .
erosion sedimentation and pollution control plan .
num definitions certified personnel certified personnel are defined as persons who have successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the georgia soil and water conservation commission .
for department projects the certified person must also have successfully completed the departments wecs certification course .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of soil erosion and sedimentation b. referenced documents npdes infrastructure permit no .
gar num part iv gdot wecs seminar .
environmental protection divisions rules and regulations chapter num georgia soil and water conservation commission certification level ia course .
ocga num num submittals general provisions num through num num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel use certified personnel to perform all monitoring sampling inspections and rainfall data collection .
use the contractor designated wecs or select a prequalified consultant from the qualified consultant list qcl to perform water quality monitoring .
ensure that monitoring consultants employees who perform monitoring sampling inspections and rainfall data collection are gaswcc certified .
num equipment provide equipment necessary to complete the work or as directed .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
section numwater quality monitoring num num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
general perform inspections rainfall data collection testing of samples and reporting the test results on the project according to the requirements in part iv of the npdes infrastructure permit and this specification .
take samples manually or with the use of automatic samplers according to the permit .
analyze all according to the permit regardless of the method used to collect the samples .
if samples are analyzed in the field using portable turbidemeters the monitoring results shall state that they are being used and a digital readout of ntus is what is provided .
submit bench sheets work sheets etc .
when using portable turbidemeters .
there are no exceptions to this requirement .
perform required inspections and submit all reports required by this specification within the time frames specified .
failure to perform the inspections within the time specified will result in the cessation of all construction activities with the exception of traffic control and erosion control .
failure to submit the required reports within the times specified will result in nonrefundable deductions as specified in subsection num.b .
b .
inspections the department will provide one copy of required inspection forms for use and duplication .
inspection forms may change during the contract to reflect regulatory agency needs or the need of the department .
any costs associated with the change of inspection forms shall be considered incidental .
alternate formats of the provided forms maybe created used and submitted by the contractor provided the required content andor data fields and verbatim certification statements from the departments current forms are included .
the engineer shall inspect the installation and condition of each erosion control device required by the erosion control plan within seven days after initial installation .
this inspection is performed for each stage of construction when new devices are installed .
the wecs shall ensure all installation deficiencies reported by the engineer are corrected within two business days .
ensure that the inspections of the areas listed below are conducted by certified personnel and at the frequencies listed .
document all inspections on the appropriate form provided by the department .
num .
daily a .
petroleum product storage usage and handling areas b .
all locations where vehicles enterexit the site continue these inspections until all entry and exit sites are stabilized and fuel is not stored or transferred on the site .
utilize the daily inspection form .
num .
weekly and after rainfall events conduct inspections on these areas every seven calendar days and within twentyfour hours after the end of a rainfall event that is num in num mm or greater a .
disturbed areas not permanently stabilized b .
material storage areas c. structural control measures best management practices bmps d. water quality monitoring locations and equipment continue these inspections until all bmps have been removed .
utilize the ecnum form .
num .
monthly section numwater quality monitoring num once per month inspect all areas where final stabilization has been completed .
look for evidence of sediments or pollutants entering the drainage system and or receiving waters .
inspect all permanent erosion control devices that remain in place to verify the maintenance status and that the devices are functioning properly .
continue these inspections until the notice of termination is submitted .
utilize the monthly inspection form .
c. reports num .
inspection reports summarize the results of inspections noted above in writing on the appropriate daily weekly monthly or ecnum form provided by the department .
include the following information dates of inspection name of personnel performing inspection status of devices observations action taken signature of personnel performing the inspection any incidents of noncompliance the inspection form certification sheet shall be signed by the project wecs and the inspector performing inspections on behalf of the wecs if not the same person .
submit all inspection reports to the engineer within twentyfour hours of the inspection .
the engineer will review the submitted reports and inspect the project to determine their accuracy .
the engineer will notify the certified personnel of any additional items that should be added to the inspection report .
correct any items listed in the inspection report requiring routine maintenance within num seventy two hours of notification .
assume responsibility for all costs associated with additional sampling as specified in part iv.d.num.d.num.c of the npdes gar num permit if either of these conditions arise bmps shown in the plans are not properly installed and maintained or bmps designed by the contractor are not properly designed installed and maintained .
num .
monitoring reports a .
report requirements include in all reports the following certification statement signed by the wecs or consultant providing monitoring on the project i certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direct supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that certified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted .
based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information the information is to the best of my knowledge and belief true accurate and complete .
i am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations .
b .
when a rainfall event requires a sample to be taken submit a report of the monitoring results to the engineer within seven working days of the date the sample was obtained .
include the following information num .
date of sampling num .
rainfall amount on sample date sample date only num .
ntu of sample analysis method num .
location where sample was taken station number etc .
num .
receiving water or outfall sample num .
project number and county section numwater quality monitoring num num .
whether the sample was taken by automatic sampler or manually grab sample c. report requirements with no qualifying rainfall events in the event that a qualifying rainfall event does not occur prior to the submittal of the not notice of termination submit a report that states no qualifying rainfall event occurred and no samples were taken .
d. test results provide monitoring test results to the engineer within num hours of the samples being analyzed .
this notification may be verbal or written .
this notification does not replace the requirement to submit the formal monitoring summary to the engineer within num working days of the samples being collected .
num .
rainfall data reports record the measurement of rainfall once each twentyfour hour period .
measure rainfall data at the active phase of construction on the site .
project rain gauges and those used to trigger the automatic samplers are to be emptied after every rainfall event .
this will prevent a cumulative effect and prevent automatic samplers from taking samples even though the rainfall event was not a qualifying event .
the daily rainfall data supplied by the wecs to the engineer will be the official rainfall data for the project .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement water quality inspections in accordance with the inspection and reports subsections will be measured for payment by the month up to the time the contract time expires .
required inspections and reports after contract time has expired will not be measured for payment .
water quality monitoring and sampling are measured per each .
when the monitoring location is receiving water the upstream and downstream samples constitute one sample .
when the monitoring location is an outfall a single outfall sample constitutes one sample .
num limits general provisions num through num .
submit the monitoring summary report to the engineer within num working days num payment payment for water quality monitoring and sampling will be made as follows water quality monitoring and sampling per each is full compensation for meeting the requirements of the monitoring sections of the npdes permit and this specification obtaining samples analyzing samples any and all necessary incidentals and providing results of turbidity tests to the engineer within the time frame required by the npdes infrastructure permit and this specification .
this item is based on the rainfall events that require sampling as described in part iv.d.num of the permit .
the department will not pay for samples taken and analyzed for rainfall events that are not qualifying events as compared to the daily rainfall data supplied by the wecs .
water quality inspections will be paid at the contract price per month .
this is full compensation for performing the requirements of the inspection section of the npdes permit and this specification any and all necessary incidentals and providing results of inspections to the engineer within the time frame required by the npdes infrastructure permit and this specification .
payment will be made under section numwater quality monitoring num item no .
num water quality inspections per month water quality monitoring and sampling will be paid per each .
payment will be made under item no .
num water quality monitoring and sampling per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numcomprehensive monitoring program num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numsilt retention barrier num general description this work includes controlling water pollution where embankment construction or material removal may cause stream pollution .
requirements of sections num num and num apply to this item .
however payment will not be made for erosion control items in those sections used with this work .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of soil erosion and sedimentation section numerosion control check dams section nummiscellaneous erosion control items section numtemporary silt fence b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use suitable permeable or impermeable materials .
these materials include canvas duck clear or black polyethylene film or fabric that meets the requirements of type c temporary silt fence found in section num .
alternate solutions and materials may be used if engineer approves .
use barriers long enough and wide enough to control turbidity .
section numsilt retention barrier num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction install a silt retention barrier as follows barriers shall be either staked or floating depending upon current tides water depth and other variables or as shown in the plans and contract .
a .
floating silt retention barrier num .
confine dredged materials to ponding areas or settlement basins using standpipes or weirs .
num .
place the barrier approximately num ft num m outside the affected construction area and at a depth within num ft num m of the bottom .
num .
if the body of water has a significant current place the barrier parallel to the water flow .
num .
vary the dimensions and methods to suit the conditions and to meet the requirements of other local and state water control agencies to ensure that silt dispersion is effectively controlled .
num .
provide a fabric that is weighted to prevent the bottom from floating .
b .
staked silt retention barrier num .
where a staked barrier is used to protect a stream or inundated area ensure the fabric a .
extends to the bottom of the stream or inundated area and is weighted to prevent it from floating b .
is not trenched in at the bottom c. extends num foot num mm above normal water num .
posts options either num inch num mm x num inch num mm wood num ½ inch num mm min .
diameter wood or steel at a minimum of num pounds per foot num kgm a. space posts at a maximum spacing of num feet num m b. posts are minimum of num feet num m in length c. posts extend a minimum of num inches num mm into the soil num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
section numsilt retention barrier num num measurement silt retention barriers either floating or staked are measured by the linear foot meter of barrier required to prevent siltation and pollution .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the applicable requirements of sections num num and num apply to this item except that the erosion control items contained in those sections will not be paid for when used in conjunction with this work .
silt retention barriers will be paid for at the contract unit price for each barrier complete in place and accepted .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials erecting the barrier removing and disposing of the barrier when no longer required .
payment will be made under item no .
num floating silt retention barrier per linear foot meter item no .
num staked silt retention barrier per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numsilt fence num general description this work includes furnishing installing and removing a water permeable filter fabric fence to remove suspended particles from drainage water .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummiscellaneous erosion control items section numgrassing section numwood posts and bracing section numfabrics section numfencing b. referenced documents astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num section numsilt fence num gdt num qpl num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials materials shall meet the requirements of the following specifications material section filter fabrics num fencing num wood posts and bracing num conditions during project construction will affect the quantity of the silt fence to be installed .
the engineer may increase decrease or eliminate the quantity at his or her direction .
variations in quantity are not changes in details of construction or in the character of the work .
for type a b and c fences use fabric as specified in subsection num silt fence filter fabric .
num delivery storage and handling during shipment and storage wrap the fabric in a heavyduty covering that will protect the cloth from sunlight mud dust dirt and debris .
do not expose the fabric to temperatures greater than num f num c. when installed the engineer will reject the fabric if it has defects rips holes flaws deterioration or damage incurred during manufacture transportation or storage .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction install the silt fence according to this specification as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer as perimeter ditch check or similar protection .
a .
install silt fence num .
install silt fence by either of the following methods a. excavated trench method excavate a trench num to num in num to num mm deep using equipment such as a trenching machine or motor grader .
if equipment can not be operated on the site excavate the trench by hand .
b .
soil slicing method section numsilt fence num create a mechanical slice in the soil num to num in num to num mm deep to receive the silt fence .
ensure that the width of the slice is not more than num in num mm .
mechanically insert the silt fence fabric into the slice in a simultaneous operation with the slicing that ensures consistent depth and placement .
num .
install the first post at the center of the low point if applicable .
space the remaining posts a maximum of num ft num m apart for types a and b fence and num ft num m apart for type c fence .
num .
bury the posts at least num in num mm into the ground .
if this depth can not be attained secure the posts enough to prevent the fence from overturning from sediment loading .
num .
attach the filter fabric to the post using wire cord staples nails pockets or other acceptable means .
a .
staples and nails wood posts evenly space staples or nails with at least five per post for type a fence and four per post for type b fence .
b .
pockets if using pockets and they are not closed at the top attach the fabric to a wood post using at least one additional staple or nail or to a steel post using wire .
ensure that the additional attachment is within the top num in num mm of the fabric .
c. install the filter fabric so that num to num in num to num mm of fabric is left at the bottom to be buried .
provide a minimum overlap of num in num mm at all splice joints .
d. for type c fence num .
woven wire supported steel post use wire to attach the fabric to the top of the woven wire support fence at the midpoint between posts .
also use wire to attach the fabric to the post .
num .
polypropylene mesh supported wood post use at least six staples per post .
use two staples in a crisscross or parallel pattern to secure the top portion of the fence .
evenly space the remaining staples down the post .
steel post use wire to attach the fabric and polypropylene mesh to the post .
num .
install the fabric in the trench so that num to num in num to num mm of fabric is against the side of the trench with num to num in num to num mm of fabric across the bottom in the upstream direction .
num .
backfill and compact the trench to ensure that flow can not pass under the barrier .
when the slice method is used compact the soil disturbed by the slice on the upstream side of the silt fence first and then compact the downstream side .
num .
when installing a silt fence across a waterway that produces significant runoff place a settling basin in front of the fence to handle the sediment load if required .
construct a suitable sump hole or storage area according to section num .
b .
install silt fence ditch checks num .
temporary silt fence ditch checks temporary silt fence ditch checks shall be constructed of the material type selected and shown on the approved erosion and sediment control plan .
item installation shall be constructed and placed according to approved plan details .
temporary ditch checks shall remain in place until the permanent ditch protection is in place or being installed and the removal is approved by the engineer .
c. remove the silt fence num .
keep all silt fences in place unless or until the engineer directs it to be removed .
a removed silt fence may be used at other locations if the engineer approves of its condition .
num .
after removing the silt fence dress the area to natural ground grass and mulch the area according to section num .
num .
the silt fence shall remain until the project is accepted or until the fence is removed .
also remove and dispose of the silt accumulations at the silt fence .
section numsilt fence num num .
remove and replace any deteriorated filter fabric that reduces the effectiveness of the silt fence .
num .
repair or replace any undermined silt fence at no additional cost to the department .
num quality acceptance approved silt fence is listed in qpl num .
approved fabrics must consistently exceed the minimum requirements of this specification as verified by the office of materials .
the office of materials will remove fabric that fails to meet the minimum requirements of this specification from the qpl until the products acceptability has been reestablished to the departments satisfaction .
at the time of installation the engineer will reject the fabric if it has defects rips holes flaws deterioration or damage incurred during manufacture transportation or storage .
num contractor warranty the silt fence shall remain until the project is accepted or until the fence is removed .
also remove and dispose of the silt accumulations at the silt fence .
remove and replace any deteriorated filter fabric that reduces the effectiveness of the silt fence .
repair or replace any undermined silt fence at no additional cost to the department .
num measurement the quantity of silt fence silt fence ditch checks to be paid for is the actual number of linear feet meters of silt fence measured in place from end post to end post of each separate installation .
the silt fence must be complete and accepted .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment silt fence type a b or c measured as defined in subsection num measurement is paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter .
payment is full compensation for the following furnishing materials erecting the fence dressing and grassing when required removing the fence when required payment for this item is made as follows seventyfive percent of the contract price bid per linear foot meter is paid when each fence is complete in place .
twentyfive percent is paid at removal or acceptance .
if the silt fence must be repaired or removed as the result of neglect or damage perform the work at no additional cost to the department .
payment will be made under item no .
num silt fence type__ per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numsoil test boring num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numclearing and grubbing right of way num general description this work includes clearing grubbing removing and disposing of vegetation buildings and debris within the entire rightof way and easement areas adjacent to the rightofway or as designated by the engineer .
except do not remove objects designated to remain or removed according to other sections of these specifications .
this work also includes preserving from injury and defacement vegetation and objects designated to remain in place .
num definitions clearing removing and disposing trees brush stumps logs grass weeds roots decayed vegetable matter poles stubs rubbish refuse dumps sawdust piles and loose boulders of num yd³ num m³ or less existing outside of the construction limits debris resting on or protruding through the ground surface or appearing on the rightofway before final acceptance of the work .
clearing also includes removing and disposing of obstructions such as fences bridges buildings and other incidental structures within the rightofway unless the work or a portion of the work is removed as excavation shown in the proposal as a separate pay item performed by others grubbing removal from the rightofway and proper disposal of all objectionable matter defined above under clearing which is embedded in the underlying soil .
grubbing also includes removing and properly disposing of parking lots abandoned pavements sidewalks driveways catch basins drop inlets pipes manholes curbing retaining walls utilities foundations paved floors underground tanks for removal of underground tanks see section num and other structures within the rightofway unless the work or portions of the work are obstructions removed as one of the excavation items shown in the proposal as separate pay items removed by others to be incorporated in the project .
objectionable roots any of the following types of roots matted trees and brush roots regardless of the size of the roots individual roots more than num in num mm diameter individual roots more than num ft num m long regardless of size large quantities of smaller roots present in the top num ft num mm of the finished subgrade or road surface when detrimental to the work as determined by the engineer .
stumps the butt of a tree with a diameter of num in num mm or more .
section numclearing and grubbing right of way num num related references a .
standard specifications section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public section nummeasurement and payment section numreclamation of material pits and waste areas section numcontrol of erosion and sedimentation section numembankments section num removal of solid waste section numremoval of underground storage tanks b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
general establish rightofway and construction lines .
the engineer will designate which trees shrubs and plants will remain in the ground .
preserve things designated to remain .
apply the requirements of subsection num subsection num and section num to clearing and grubbing operations .
strip grass immediately ahead of grading .
to prevent the spread of introduced invasive pest species do the following num .
adhere to the restrictions of section num.a for moving soil mulch sod or plants stump wood or timber with soil attached .
section numclearing and grubbing right of way num num .
adhere to the requirements of section num.b for cleaning of equipment except that the usda inspection will not be required for vegetative matter .
num .
dispose of vegetative parts of plants that may reproduce roots and aboveground parts that bear fruit by burning on site where permitted or bury with a minimum cover of num feet num meter at an approved site .
obtain the engineers approval for any other methods of disposal .
b .
clearing clear objects within the rightofway and easement areas as follows num .
choose a method of clearing that prevents damage to property trees or retained shrubbery in or outside of the right ofway .
num .
remove stumps that are part of the clearing operations as specified under subsection num.c grubbing .
num .
cut the stumps not grubbed as specified in this section .
num .
dispose of cleared materials as specified in subsection num.e .
c. grubbing grubbing consists of removing and disposing objectionable matter embedded in the underlying soil defined in subsection num.b clearing from the rightofway and easement areas .
num .
grubbing operations when grubbing remove abandoned obstructions referenced in subsection num definitions to the following depths a .
under pavements remove to a depth of at least num ft num m below the finished subgrade .
b. underneath other structures remove to at least num ft num m below the foundations of any proposed structure including installations such as guard rail posts and utility poles .
c. elsewhere in the rightofway and easement areas remove as follows num remove to at least num ft num m below the finished surface of slopes and shoulders and num ft num mm below natural ground outside construction lines .
num thoroughly crack or break abandoned structures that may impound water .
these structures include concrete floors basements and catch basins within num ft num m of finished grade .
num break floors so that no section greater than num ft² num m² remains intact .
num .
except as modified under subsection num.d use the following procedure to perform grubbing a .
remove stumps and other matter that can not be removed by a root rake .
remove stumps to a minimum depth of num ft num mm below the ground line .
b. rake areas containing objectionable roots to a depth of at least num in num mm below the surface .
c. remove remaining objectionable matter by hand or other suitable means .
when necessary remove small roots see subsection num objectionable roots detrimental to the work .
d. backfill stump holes and compact backfill to the approximate density of the surrounding soil .
e. harrow the area with a heavyduty disc harrow that penetrates and turns the ground to at least num in num m deep .
f. remove objectionable matter exposed by the harrowing .
g. level the harrowed areas with blading equipment .
leave the grubbed areas smooth enough for a power mower .
d. modifications of clearing and grubbing modify clearing and grubbing as follows num .
in excavation areas section numclearing and grubbing right of way num modify clearing and grubbing in excavation areas as follows a. harrowing and leveling may be omitted .
b .
do not fill stump holes except when the bottom of any stump hole extends below the elevation of the finished subgrade .
in this case fill the portion of each hole below subgrade elevation with suitable material compacted to at least the density of the surrounding soil .
num .
in embankment areas modify clearing and grubbing in embankment areas as follows a .
under num ft num m clear and grub areas without modification where the original ground and finished grade differ in elevation num ft num m or less .
b .
over num ft num m clear but do not grub areas covered by embankments exceeding the num ft num m elevation difference specified in step a above .
except the removal of unsound or decayed stumps .
remove and backfill stumps according to subsection num.c.num .
when leaving sound stumps in place cut them off to no more than num in num mm above the original ground line .
c. embankment areas over old roads clear and grub without modification ditches and slopes of old roads to a depth that removes all objectionable matter to provide a firm foundation .
num .
areas outside of roadway except as specified in this section clear and grub the entire rightofway and easement areas outside construction limits and leave it smooth and free from loose boulders and debris that would interfere with power mowers .
exceptions to the above requirements are as follows a .
selective clearing when the engineer directs to preserve certain trees and plants protect them from injury .
trees to be removed shall be felled to prevent injury to standing trees plants and improvements to be preserved .
cut off tree branches overhanging the roadway within num ft num m of the finished grade close to the boles .
also remove other branches to create a balanced appearance .
grub areas adjacent to selected trees and shrubs without damage to living roots of the selected trees or shrubs .
b .
special treatment areas clear special treatment areas according to the plan notes .
c. steep slopes clear or selectively clear slopes that are too steep for power mowers slopes steeper than num horizontal to num vertical and clear or selectively clear slopes that are subject to excessive erosion .
do not grub in these areas .
d. grassed areas do not grub if the engineer approves reasonably large areas outside construction limits covered with grasses and smooth enough for power mowers .
remove stumps trees and other objectionable matter .
num .
bridge sites modify clearing and grubbing at bridge sites as follows a .
stream bridges clear the rightofway for stream bridges for the full length of the proposed structure .
cut stumps and brush flush with the ground line .
the engineer will require a second cutting if high water prevents cutting stumps flush with the ground .
if the engineer requires more than two cuttings see subsection num for payment .
remove drift and stumps where necessary to permit installation of rip rap piling piers abutments wing walls and bents .
properly backfill the holes .
section numclearing and grubbing right of way num preserve stump and brush root systems at river and stream banks when they have been cut flush with the ground line .
b .
other bridges clear and grub bridges other than stream bridges as specified within this specification for roadway areas and areas outside of the roadway .
e. removal and disposal of materials num .
merchantable timber and buildings the department may dispose of merchantable timber and buildings or may allow a property owner to remove them from the land granted for rightofway before the contractor begins operation .
therefore the department does not guarantee that merchantable timber or buildings will be on the rightofway when the work begins .
material salvaged from removing timber or buildings becomes the property of the contractor .
demolish remove and dispose of all building structures within the right of way and easement areas including concrete slabs footings foundations etc .
except building structures designated to remain in place .
grade to drain all disturbed ground to a reasonably smooth and pleasing appearance free from loose boulders and other debris that would interfere with the use of power mowers .
grass all disturbed areas .
prior to demolition or removal a .
inspect all building structures for the presence of asbestos .
the inspection shall be done by an epa asbestos hazard emergency response act ahera accredited inspector whose certification is current .
b .
provide a copy of all inspection reports including the inspectors credentials to the engineer .
c. provide written notice of intent to demolish to the georgia environmental protection division epd of the georgia department of natural resources in accordance with epd regulations with a copy to the engineer .
this notice is required even if there is no asbestos present .
if there is asbestos present its removal shall be done by a contractor licensed with the epd in accordance with the rules of georgia department of natural resource environmental protection division chapter num .
all asbestos removal and disposal shall be done in accordance with epd regulations .
all asbestos removal shall be considered as extra work and payment will be made in accordance with subsection num .
num .
combustible material abide by federal state and local codes when the rightofway or any portion of the rightofway lies within an area where burning is restricted .
all combustible material except sawdust piles may be burned on the rightofway except where prohibited by federal state or local air pollution control regulations .
a .
prevent fire from spreading to adjacent areas and damaging living trees and shrubs designated to remain on the rightofway and easement areas .
b .
prevent damage to public and private installations either within or adjacent to the rightofway and prevent damage to traveling public .
c. obtain suitable areas for burning the combustible material when necessary at the contractors expense .
burning area are subject to the approval of the engineer .
d. dispose of unburned combustible material according to subsection num.e.num .
if the disposal area is located on private property present written authority to the engineer signed by the property owner granting the contractor and the department permission to use the area for the purpose intended .
reclaim the disposal area according to section num except that the reclamation is at the contractors expense .
e. completely remove sawdust within the construction limits .
haul the sawdust to approved disposal areas or deposit it on the rightofway in a layer less than num in num mm deep .
immediately mix the sawdust with the underlying soil by discing and harrowing .
leave the harrowed surface smooth .
num .
solid waste material section numclearing and grubbing right of way num place solid waste material either in the embankment provided the material is satisfactory for embankment construction or in a departmentapproved solid waste disposal site .
the classification of nonregulated and regulated solid waste materials are defined by the environmental protection division epd of the georgia department of natural resources gdnr rules and regulations .
dispose of these materials using the following procedures .
a. nonregulated solid waste material num excess material such as soil rock brick concrete with and without reinforcement and cured asphalt may be placed within the rightofway provided there is available room .
place these materials according to section num and as directed by the engineer .
num common fill such as soil rock brick and concrete with and without reinforcement may be placed outside the rightofway .
place the material in uniform layers num ft num m thick or less and distributed to avoid pockets .
fill voids with finer material .
cover the last layer of fill with at least num ft num mm of soil .
construct the fill according to section num except compact it to at least num percent of the maximum laboratory dry density .
num materials that may be recycled or reused such as asphaltic concrete portland cement concrete plastic metal and materials that qualify under epd regulations for sale or use may be reclaimed by the contractor .
b .
regulated material num obtain an inert landfill permit according to gdnrepd rules for the following material deposed of off the rw inert waste items listed in subsection num.e.num.a if not properly layered and compacted and organic debris such as stumps limbs and leaves cured asphalt .
or take the material to a permitted solid waste landfill .
num take other regulated constructiondemolition and nonhazardous solid waste such as forms barrels plastic and other byproducts of construction to a constructiondemolition landfill or to a municipal solid waste landfill .
num dispose of oils solvents fuels untreated lead paint residue and other solid hazardous waste through a properly licensed hazardous waste disposal facility .
remove municipal solid waste discovered during construction or shown on the plans according to section num .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the department does not measure clearing and grubbing separately for payment .
the area is considered the full rightofway width for the length of the project including slope and construction easement areas shown on the plans .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment for this item completed and accepted will be made at the lump sum price bid .
the payment will be full compensation for all work specified in this section including final cleanup as required .
if the engineer requires more than two cuttings to clear the rightofway for stream bridges according to subsection num.d.num.a the additional cuttings will be paid for as a force account according to subsection num .
section numclearing and grubbing right of way num no separate payment will be made for the disposal of solid waste materials .
payment will be made under item no .
num clearing and grubbing per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numrandom clearing and grubbing num general description this work includes clearing and grubbing borrow and material pits .
see subsection num .
it also includes such ditch inlets outlets channel changes and easement areas where clearing and grubbing are required but not shown on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public section numclearing and grubbing rightofway b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numrandom clearing and grubbing num num construction perform the work according to section num .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the area of completed and accepted clearing and grubbing is measured in acres hectares .
only the area cleared and grubbed as shown on the plans or as designated by the engineer is measured .
the department will make no separate payment for removing grass weeds debris small underbrush other vegetation from cultivated lands and isolated trees or stumps .
include the cost for removing these items in the price bid for other pay items .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the department will pay for clearing and grubbing and clearing at the contract unit price per acre hectare which is full compensation for all work specified .
payment will be made under item no .
num clearing and grubbing per acre hectare item no .
num clearing per acre hectare num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numfoundation exploration num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numchannel excavation num general description this work includes excavating and properly disposing of material encountered when changing cleaning or widening waterway channels .
excavation for inlet ditches outlet ditches tail ditches and takeoff intercepting side or berm ditches will not be classified as channel excavation .
this work is included in section num num definitions general provisions num through num .
section numchannel excavation num num related references a .
standard specifications section numroadway excavation b .
related documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction excavate channel to the lines grades typical sections and details shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
coordinate the work with grading constructing drainage structures and performing other work on the project .
num .
maintain the channel to ensure continued adequate drainage until final acceptance of the project .
num .
use suitable excavated material as defined in the plans or permitted by the engineer when constructing roadway embankments .
num .
waste and deposit all surplus excavated material as follows a .
do not deposit material from channel excavation within numft num m of the channel edge .
b .
do not deposit excavated material within jurisdictional wetlands either on or off the rightofway .
c. the engineer may permit surplus material to be wasted in flushing out slopes if ditch lines slope stability and other features are not impaired .
do not leave material in unsightly piles .
spread it in uniform layers neatly leveled and shaped .
leave adequate openings in spoil banks to allow adjacent land surfaces to drain .
d. apply provisions pertaining to soil erosion and stream pollution to this work .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
section numchannel excavation num num measurement channel excavation authorized and accepted by the engineer is measured in its original position by the method of average end areas .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the department will pay for the quantity of channel excavation as measured above at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter .
payment will not be made for excavation beyond the authorized typical sections grades or lengths established by the engineer .
payment will be made under item no .
num channel excavation per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numroadway excavation num general description roadway excavation shall conform to the lines grades and crosssections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
if artifacts of historical or archaeological significance are encountered temporarily stop excavation operations until directed by the engineer .
see subsection num.a .
roadway excavation includes the following excavating hauling and placing or disposing of materials not removed under another contract item from within the limits of areas designated in the contract .
excavating ditches except channel excavation and filling andor plugging abandoned wells both dug and drilled located within the rightofway and construction easements according to georgia standard numh .
removing paving aggregates and ballast not incorporated into the new work as a result of alignment shifts grade changes or reasons that may or may not be shown on the plans .
salvaging aggregates paving only if designated on the plans and removed railroad ballast .
the department claims salvaged materials unless the engineer directs that materials be wasted .
dispose of materials not salvaged .
stockpile salvaged materials on the project unless other sites for stockpiling are shown on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
related specifications section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public section nummeasurement and payment section numclearing and grubbing rightofway section numrandom clearing and grubbingsection numembankments section numroadway excavation num section numsubgrade construction section numasphaltic concrete pavement partial removal section numremoval of miscellaneous roadway items b .
related documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials define excavated material regardless of its nature or composition as unclassified excavation unless otherwise specified in the plans .
the engineer will designate materials that are unsuitable .
num delivery storage and handling a .
disposal of surplus material unless directed by the engineer do not waste excavated material until satisfying embankment and backfill requirements unless material is designated on the plans as unsuitable for embankment or backfill construction .
dispose of materials to be wasted according to subsection num.e and the following information use suitable surplus material to widen embankments uniformly or to flatten fill slopes or deposit the material in places on the rightofway as directed by the engineer .
do not leave an unsightly pile of material that will damage abutting property or deposit material above the grade of the adjacent roadway unless so directed by the engineer .
do not place the edge of a waste bank nearer than num ft num m from the top of a cut slope .
dispose of unsuitable and surplus materials unless they are used as fill for slopes abandoned ditches or other areas shown on the plans .
deposit unsuitable material excavated from ditches and do not allow it to remain within num ft num m of the ditch edge .
spread material neatly in level uniform layers .
use suitable materials from ditches for constructing roadway embankments unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
b .
waste disposal areas when unable to dispose of unsuitable or surplus excavation material on the rightofway dispose of it in the following areas num .
disposal areas shown on plans check disposal areas shown on the plans .
they may or may not be adjacent to the rightofway .
when shown on the plans the department will obtain rightofway or easement to permit disposal of material .
the plans contain the amounts of royalties and the conditions for the acquiring of the waste easement .
when the department furnishes the waste areas and the engineer provides measurements of the area used do the following a .
promptly pay royalties to the owners of waste pits .
b .
meet other conditions agreed to with the owners .
section numroadway excavation num c. submit to the engineer a written statement signed by the owner stating that the owner has been paid in full and the agreed conditions including proper draining and final cleanup have been fulfilled to the owners satisfaction before receiving final payment from the department .
the department will not make separate payment for these costs of acquisition .
if the property owner is not paid within num days after the engineer has furnished the measurement the department may pay the property owner directly any amounts due and deduct it from funds due the contractor .
this provision does not affect the obligation of the contractor under his bond or the rights of the property owner or the department under the bond .
in case of dispute between the contractor and the department the chief engineer will make the final and conclusive decision .
when disposal areas are shown on the plans and are elected to be used comply with the terms of the option before resorting to other areas .
num .
disposal areas not shown on plans when waste disposal areas are not shown on the plans obtain suitable disposal areas at no expense to the department .
exercise the right to sell or otherwise dispose of the surplus material in these cases .
see subsection num and subsection num .
num .
reclamation reclaim disposal areas according to section num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction perform roadway excavation according to the plans and all of the requirements of this subsection .
num .
provide adequate openings in spoil banks to allow the adjacent land surface to drain .
num .
to carry water from the side hill cut surface ditches at the top of cut slopes that extend to each end of the cuts .
num .
turn side ditches or gutters that empty from cuts to embankments outward to avoid embankment erosion .
num .
discharge water from surface ditches at terraces or in tail ditches cut along contour lines wherever possible .
num .
provide outlets or flumes for roadway ditches where necessary according to the plans .
surface ditches outlets and other such ditches will be paid for as unclassified excavation .
num .
uniformly round the intersection of cut slopes with natural ground surfaces including the beginning and end of cut slopes .
num .
bring cut slopes to the grade and crosssection shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
num .
finish to reasonably uniform surfaces acceptable for seeding and mulching operations .
num .
dispose of material from slides and overbreaks that occur before final acceptance as directed by the engineer .
section numroadway excavation num a. constructing serrated slopes construct serrated slopes as follows num .
grade the backslope according to the construction detail .
the pay line is the template line or the final staked cross section slope line .
the department will not make additional measurement or payment for constructing serrated slopes .
num .
start the first serration step as designated on the construction detail .
ensure that it is level instead of parallel to the roadway grade .
num .
use the tiltcontrol blade bulldozer to cut steps in alternate directions .
b. constructing nonserrated slopes construct nonserrated slopes by leaving the front and back slopes in a roughened condition to provide a seed bed for temporary or permanent grassing operations .
c. erosion and siltation control take the measures necessary throughout the project to control erosion and to prevent silting of rivers streams and impoundments .
construct drainage facilities and perform all other construction work that contributes to erosion and siltation control in conjunction with earthwork operations as required by section num .
d. rock excavation remove rock and dispose of it as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
transition any flattening of a cut slope already begun when rock is encountered to ensure the cut has a pleasing appearance .
use the presplitting technique to reduce overbreakage and to establish a free surface or shear plane in the rock along the cut periphery or proposed break lines .
presplit a periphery plane to the excavation depth before blasting within the plane .
conduct the presplitting process by drilling appropriately sized holes at intervals that will ensure a neat break to the desired depth along the plane of the proposed cut .
load and stem the holes with an appropriate light charge explosive and detonate the explosives simultaneously .
allow an num in .
num mm offset in the slope to begin succeeding drilling operations when the depth of the cut is more than can be drilled from the top .
create a relatively smooth shear plane as indicated in the plans with localized irregularities that do not exceed num ft num mm behind or num ft num mm in front roadway side of the plane surface .
do not presplit slopes flatter than num .
num .
overbreakage material that is excavated beyond or below the crosssection shown on the plans or designated will be at the contractors expense except unavoidable overbreakage in solid rock .
the allowable overbreakage is a maximum of num ft num mm below or outside the original template lines .
backfill to replace material removed below the limits specified at no expense to the department .
num .
precautions see use of explosives in subsection num .
num .
rock and boulders handle rock and boulder excavation as follows a. excavate solid rock and boulders in the roadbed to at least num ft num mm below the finished subgrade elevation and backfill the space to the correct grade with suitable subgrade material .
b .
leave the side slopes of rock cuts with uniform faces whether or not the excavation is carried beyond the specified side slope .
c. remove loose rock on cut slopes immediately after blasting .
section numroadway excavation num d. place stones broken rock and boulders found within the construction limits and not required for other construction into embankment slopes when possible .
num .
ensure that sloped surfaces conform to the typical section shown on the plans or to natural cleavage planes compatible with the typical section .
leave sloped surfaces safe and natural looking .
e. unsuitable material excavation the engineer may require unsuitable material be removed from its location .
num .
remove material and backfill with properly compacted approved material .
num .
undercut material to the depth shown on the plans or established by the engineer in cut areas where the material is not suitable for subgrades or shoulders .
backfill the area with suitable material .
num .
excavate unsuitable material in roadway cuts and dispose of the material as directed by the engineer .
the department will not designate the unsuitable material excavation as a separate pay item unless specifically designated on the plans but will pay for it as roadway excavationunclassified .
f. obliteration of old roads obliterate old roads or other areas by completing the following work as directed by the engineer obliterate discontinued roads or other areas inside or outside the project construction limits .
grade scarify plow and harrow obliterated areas .
the department will pay for excavation other than that necessary for finishing and dressing as roadway excavation unclassified .
follow this procedure to obliterate the road num .
fill old ditches and grade the roadway after the old road is no longer needed for traffic .
restore the original contour of the ground and produce a surface of naturally rounded slopes .
num .
use borrow required for the new roadway from fills in the old road where feasible .
num .
place surplus and waste material from the new roadway in cuts in the old road where feasible .
num .
break down and remove or bury old structures not required to maintain drainage flow .
remove and store material with salvage value or use it in the new construction .
num .
scarify harrow and smooth the old surface .
regrass disturbed areas or establish a vegetative cover according to section num or section num as applicable .
g. surcharge removal remove and properly dispose of materials placed as surcharge for consolidation or other purposes .
num .
waste the material removed or use it for other purposes as specified on the plans or in the special provisions .
num .
provide other areas for disposal if adequate areas are not available for disposing of excess surcharge within the rightofway .
h. use of select materials conserve and use excavated materials suitable for subgrade shoulder construction plant topsoil blanket for fill slopes or other purposes as directed by the engineer according to subsection num .
num .
reserve suitable material by either leaving it in its original position or stockpiling it as directed by the engineer .
num .
haul select materials directly from the excavation area to the final placement area whenever possible .
do not stockpile materials unless specifically directed .
the department will again pay for roadway excavationunclassified which includes necessary hauling and placement when the material is removed from the stockpile .
i .
final finishing of roadway after excavation has been completed use the following procedure to finish the roadway section numroadway excavation num num .
shape the surface of the roadbed and slopes to reasonably true grade alignment and crosssection shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
finish according to section num .
num .
leave cut slope surfaces in rock reasonably uniform and remove loose overhanging rock .
num .
open all ditches drains and culverts constructed to effectively drain the roadway .
the department will make no separate payment for finishing done under this section .
include the work in the cost of the roadway excavation .
num .
maintain the excavated areas until final acceptance of the project .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement original ground surface measurements will be obtained using conventional methods photogrammetric means or a combination of these methods .
the engineer will determine the methods and time when the measurements are to be taken for each project .
the volume of roadway excavationunclassified authorized and accepted by the engineer will be computed by the method of average end areas or other acceptable means using the original ground surface the final ground surface crosssection or approved templates .
the final ground surface will be obtained from conventional field measurements asbuilt templates photogrammetric means or a combination of these methods .
the engineer will determine the methods to be used on each project .
the measurement will include overbreakage and slides in roadway excavation unless they are caused by contractor negligence authorized excavation of rock or unsuitable material below template grade material reexcavated from stockpiles and used in construction as directed by the engineer surcharge removal excavation outside of staked lines and slopes will never be measured for payment unless ordered or approved by the engineer .
ditch excavation will be measured as specified in paragraph one above .
retaining wall construction will be measured to the back and bottom of the select material backfill or footing as the engineer determines .
any exception outside these lines by the grading contractor to provide stable slopes and positive drainage will not be measured and will be considered incidental to the work .
filling or plugging abandoned wells will not be measured for payment but all costs shall be included in the price bid for roadway excavation when item num is shown as a pay item .
otherwise all costs shall be included in the overall contract bid price .
removing paving aggregates and ballasts will be measured and included in the computations for roadway excavation when section num is shown as a pay item unless those items are shown in the plans as a separate pay item .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment removing paving aggregates and ballast will be paid for at the contract price bid per cubic yard meter when item num is shown as a pay item unless the items are shown in the plans as a separate pay item .
section numroadway excavation num the department will withhold a percentage of the progress payments for the estimated quantity of earthwork not to exceed num percent until final dressing subgrade construction and satisfactory disposal of unsuitable or surplus materials is completed .
this percentage withheld shall be in addition to that specified in subsection num .
the contract price per cubic yard meter for roadway excavationunclassified will be paid for quantities of excavation excavating hauling placing and compacting excavated material .
removing loading hauling stockpiling as designated and sawing pavement when payment is included under item num .
presplitting rock disposing of unsuitable or surplus materials excavating shaping disposing of unsatisfactory excavated materials maintaining ditches except channel excavation specified in section num constructing subgrades and shoulders and finishing dressing and maintaining the work until final acceptance .
payment will be made under item no .
num unclassified excavation per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numborrow excavation num general description this work includes excavating material from borrow areas or pits outside the project rightofway hauling and using the material as required on the plans or directed by the engineer stripping excavating and disposing of unsuitable material from borrow areas .
see subsection num and subsection num num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public section numreclamation of material pits and waste areas section numclearing and grubbing rightofway section numrandom clearing and grubbing section numembankments section numsubgrade construction b. referenced documents section num of the national historical preservation act num submittals the engineers approval of borrow pits will be subject to the requirements of section num of the national historical preservation act being fulfilled .
section numborrow excavation num give the engineer sufficient notice to perform necessary investigations measurements staking and actions required in subsection num.a .
working in the pit before receiving the following approvals may result in rejection of the borrow pit without payment approval for environmental considerations and material acceptability approval from pit investigation cross sectioning and staking num materials perform work using embankment materials that meet the requirements in section num .
do not use material that contains roots or stumps .
the engineer will approve borrow excavation materials .
use selected borrow of class iibnum or better when specified for subgrade construction or other uses unless otherwise stated in the plans or the proposal .
num delivery storage and handling before obtaining material from borrow areas use material to construct the embankment that is excavated from within the slope stakes or stockpile the material for topping out the roadbed unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment ensure that equipment and methods used in borrow pits produce the following results various strata pockets or accumulations of different types of material are excavated and used in the correct proportions and sequence .
material is used to produce borrow or selected borrow with the best possible gradation and stability within the specified range .
material is excavated uniformly to facilitate measurement .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
general the department will investigate and take necessary actions to satisfy requirements of section num of the national historical preservation act .
b .
clearing and grubbing clear and grub borrow pits as necessary before removing borrow material as specified in section num and section num .
c. draining pits prevent water from standing in the pits unless the engineer determines not to drain the pit .
leave slopes presentable .
machine slope the bottom of the excavated area to smooth the surfaces suitable for revegetation .
section numborrow excavation num the department will not measure for payment ditch excavation for draining borrow pits .
the bid price for borrow excavation shall include this work .
d. disposing of waste material dispose of material unsuitable for embankments such as stone broken rock boulders and other material found in the borrow pits .
num .
dispose of the material in a manner satisfactory to the engineer and at no expense to the department .
num .
do not leave piles of unsightly material in pits with or without the consent of the property owner .
num .
dispose of waste materials according to subsection num.e .
e. reclamation leave borrow pits or waste disposal areas presentable .
reclaim them according to section num unless exempted by subsection num .
develop boundary slopes of reclaimed areas and grade them to num slopes or flatter .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the quantity of borrow and selected borrow is measured in its original position by the method of average end areas or other acceptable means .
when designated in the plans selected borrow may be measured by volume of the hauling vehicle according to section num .
the following will have no payment material excavated before the original surface of the pit is obtained by the engineer materials excavated for maintaining the work materials excavated that run out of the embankment on a flatter slope than indicated on the crosssection shown on the plans or established by the engineer unsuitable material excavated from the borrow area and not used on the roadway the department will measure original and final ground surfaces by conventional field or photogrammetric or other methods as determined by the engineer .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the provisions of section num apply to borrow pits .
the department will not pay for the following delays caused by fulfilling the requirements of section num or costs involved if the borrow pit is rejected work done to provide or improve access or haul roads to borrow pits except when specifically stated in the proposal the prices bid for borrow excavation shall include this cost .
the quantities of borrow and selected borrow are measured as described in subsection num and will be paid for at the contract price per cubic yard meter .
this is full compensation for excavating hauling placing and compacting the material according to the plans and specifications and for draining and dressing the borrow area .
section numborrow excavation num borrow material furnished at no cost no royalty to the contractor is borrow excavation .
if royalties must be paid for material shown on the plans as a possible source of borrow or if the source of borrow must be furnished the bid item is borrow excavation including material .
the same criteria applies to selected borrow .
payment will be made under item no .
num borrow excavation per cubic yard meter item no .
num borrow excavation including material per cubic yard meter item no .
num selected borrow excavation per cubic yard meter item no .
num selected borrow excavation including material per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures num general description this work includes excavating backfilling or disposing of materials required to install a bridge culvert box culvert pipe arch culvert headwall and retaining wall according to the specifications the plans and the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numscope of work section nummeasurement and payment section numroadway excavation section numborrow excavation section numembankments section numroadway materials section numbackfill materials b. referenced documents gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures num material section foundation backfill materialtype i subsection num foundation backfill materialtype ii subsection num imperfect trench backfill materialtype iii subsection num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
locations and elevations the engineer will determine final locations and elevations of the structure .
the locations and elevations shown on the plans are approximate .
b. excavation the engineer will determine the minimum requirements for length and depth of excavation for each structure .
assume the responsibility for the cost of installing necessary sheeting and bracing .
when excavating follow these requirements excavate through rock or boulder formations to at least num ft num mm below the bottom of the structure except for where the entire concrete or masonry structure rests on solid rock .
backfill with type i or type ii material to the proper subgrade elevation .
as the embankment is constructed excavate and place pipe on the new embankment .
pipe may be placed incrementally on steep gradients .
cut surfaces at structure trenches to prevent damage to the adjacent pavement when existing paved areas will be retained .
saw pavements deep enough to cause the edges to break in straight lines .
ensure that the width depth and vertical walls of an excavated imperfect trench conform to plan details and dimensions within num in num mm .
dispose of surplus and unsuitable materials as directed by the engineer .
consider excavated material as unclassified excavation according to section num except that the department will not pay for excavation for minor structures .
include the cost of fulfilling these requirements in the price bid for the pipe .
section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures num c. backfill obtain backfill materials that meet the specifications from sources approved by the engineer .
num .
foundation backfill materials types i and ii use the following materials as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer a .
use type i material in dry structure trenches and type ii material in wet trenches .
b .
use type i material as a finishing course for type ii material when permitted by the engineer .
c. backfill excavations beyond the specified limits with the same type of material required for the adjacent area however the department will not measure excess backfill material for payment .
d. place type i and type ii backfill material in layers of no more than num in num mm loose .
e. compact each layer as follows num type i backfill material compact to num percent of the theoretical dry density determined by gdt num .
num type ii backfill material compact to a satisfactory uniform density as directed by the engineer .
num .
imperfect trench backfill material type iii place this material as loose uncompacted backfill over pipe structures as shown on the plans where imperfect trench backfill is specified .
num .
normal backfill ensure that normal backfill material meets the requirements of subsection num class i or ii .
class iiicnum material may be used in districts num and num .
place and compact according to section num except as follows a .
do not place rock more than num inches num mm in diameter within num ft num mm of any drainage structure .
b .
for backfill behind retaining walls use a pervious material that meets the requirements of case i or case ii as follows num case i .
case i refers to backfills for retaining walls that support roadbeds and parking areas .
ensure that the backfill conforms to section num .
do not place rock more than num in num mm in diameter within num ft num mm of the retaining wall or finished surface .
num case ii .
case ii refers to backfills for retaining walls that do not support roadbeds or parking areas .
ensure that the backfill conforms to the requirements of case i above except compact the backfill to the density of the adjacent soil .
d. pavement replaced replace pavement removed at structure trenches in kind where adjacent pavements will be retained .
an equal or better material may be used when approved by the engineer .
backfill and maintain a smooth riding surface until repaving is complete .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. excavation the following considerations are not measured for payment excavation for minor structures including undercut for backfill materials as shown on the plans section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures num excavation for an imperfect trench which is required at locations specified in the plans but which is not measured for payment removal of water removal of material from any area required to be reexcavated excavation and backfill of temporary drainage ditches b .
extra depth excavation the following extra depth excavations are not measured for payment num .
extra depth excavation because of contractor negligence num .
extra depth excavation required by the engineer below the original plan elevation of the bottom of the footing or the flow line of a culvert pipe that does not exceed num ft num m if the engineer relocates the structure or orders the elevation of the bottom of the footing or the flow line of the pipe to be lowered or undercut more than num ft num m the contractor will be compensated for the extra depth excavated below the num ft num m limit according to subsection num and subsection num .
calculate the width of extra depth excavation using the diameter of the pipe or the width of the footing plus num ft num mm .
the length of extra depth excavation is equal to the length of that portion of the structure that is lowered more than num ft num m below plan elevation .
c. backfill materials types i ii and iii num .
types i and ii these materials in place and accepted are measured in cubic yards meters compacted .
lateral measurements are confined to an area bounded by vertical planes lying not more than num ft num mm outside of and parallel to the limits of the structure .
length and depth measurements are confined to the dimensions of compacted material in place as specified by the engineer .
materials placed outside the above limitations are not measured for payment .
num .
type iii the department measures type iii material complete in place and accepted in cubic yards meters .
lateral measurements of type iii material are confined to an area bounded by vertical planes lying directly above the outside walls of the structure .
longitudinal measurements are confined to the length of treatment installed as specified .
measurements of depth are the dimensions shown on the plans or as directed .
d. normal backfill this item is not measured separately but is included in the measurement of the items of excavation from which normal backfill materials are obtained .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a. excavation for minor structures this item will not be paid for separately except as provided in subsection num.b .
section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures num b. sheeting and bracing sheeting and bracing will not be paid for separately unless these materials are left in place at the written direction of the engineer .
in this case the contractor will be paid at invoice cost plus num percent .
c. backfill materials backfill material type i measured as shown in subsection num.c.num will be paid for according to section num or section num .
the department will pay for types ii and iii separately at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter .
this payment is full compensation for furnishing the materials from sources inside or outside the rightofway loading unloading hauling handling placing and compacting the material .
d. normal backfill this item will not be paid for directly but will be paid at the unit price for the applicable excavation item from which the normal backfill materials are obtained .
payment will be made under item no .
num foundation backfill material type ii per cubic yard meter item no .
num imperfect trench backfill material type iii per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numembankments num general description this work includes placing embankments backfilling structures and constructing earth berms and surcharges with suitable material excavated under section num section num section num and section num .
complete the work according to the lines grades and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
the work also includes preparing areas by backfilling stump holes and correcting surface irregularities where the embankment is to be constructed .
this includes forming compacting and maintaining the embankment and placing and compacting approved material where unsuitable material has been removed .
payment for this work is included in other appropriate pay items unless a specific pay item is set up in the contract .
apply all provisions of section num to the work in this section .
perform shoulder construction according to section num .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of soil erosion and sedimentation section numclearing and grubbing rightofway section numchannel excavation section numembankments num section numroadway excavation section numborrow excavation section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures section numsubgrade construction section numunpaved shoulders section numroadway materials section numrock embankment section numpond sand b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt numa gdt numb gdt num gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials embankment material classes are defined in section num section num and section num .
the material incorporated into the roadway will be subject to the following limitations a. embankment material use embankment material classified as class i ii iii v or vi except as noted below num .
inundated embankments a special provision in the proposal will contain required gradation and other characteristics of materials for constructing embankments through reservoirs .
num .
intermittently inundated embankments build intermittently inundated embankments using any material suitable for embankment .
num .
embankments at structures use class i or ii embankment materials within num ft num m of any bridge structure .
class iiicnum material may be used in districts num and num .
class iiicnum or iiicnum material may only be used in districts num and num if approved by the office of materials geotechnical engineering bureau .
ensure that materials do not contain rock larger than num in num mm for any dimensions .
b .
rock embankment ensure that rock embankment placed as indicated on the plans meets the requirements of section num unless specified otherwise in the plans or in the special provisions .
section numembankments num c. inplace embankment construct inplace embankment with class i ii iii v or vi material .
d. backfill material use class i or class ii backfill material furnished and stockpiled as defined in subsection num.a .
class iiicnum material may be used in districts num and num .
class iiicnum or iiicnum material may only be used in districts num and num if approved by the office of materials geotechnical engineering bureau .
e. pond sand embankment use pond sand that meets the requirements of section num as embankment material .
material is subject to the following approval limitations num .
pond sand will be approved on a stockpile basis only .
num .
pond sand will not be approved for type i or normal backfill materials or for backfill for mechanically stabilized walls .
num .
pond sand shall be encapsulated when used as fill with num ft num mm of soil on the slopes and num ft num m of soil on top .
num .
pond sand shall not be used on sidehill fills or fill widenings where any of the following conditions exist a .
the proposed fill slope is steeper than num. b .
the thickness of the proposed fill at its thinnest point as measured perpendicularly from the new fill line to the existing ground slopefill slope is less than num ft num m including num ft num mm of soil cover .
c. the fill height exceeds num ft num m. num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. benching excavation for embankment this work includes excavating material forming benches in the existing ground beneath proposed embankments .
form benches to increase the bond between the existing ground and the proposed embankment .
this work is required where embankments are placed on hillsides or against existing embankments which will be indicated on the plans .
construct the benches approximately num ft num m wide unless otherwise shown on the plans .
use material removed in the excavation in the embankments .
the department will make no additional payment for this work .
section numembankments num b. embankments follow these requirements when constructing embankments num .
preparation for embankments before starting embankment construction clear and grub the embankment area according to section num and install drainage structures according to section num. a. depressions and undercut areas fill depressions below the ground surface and undercut areas with suitable material .
remove unsuitable or unstable material and compact according to subsection num.b.num.c before beginning embankment construction .
b. scarification and other preparation plow and scarify the entire area upon which the embankment is to be placed except inundated areas at least num in num mm deep .
before placing the embankment recompact loosened soil to the approximate density of the underlying soil .
cut benches as specified in subsection num.a .
c. compaction under shallow fills when the depth of fill and surfacing is num ft num m or less compact the original ground compact at least num ft num mm deep to at least num percent of the maximum laboratory dry density as determined from representative samples of the compacted material using gdt num gdt numa gdt numb or gdt numwhichever applies .
the inplace density of the compacted fill will be determined according to gdt num gdt num or gdt num whichever applies .
d. embankments over existing roads parking areas and floors thoroughly plow or scarify all portions of existing unpaved roads and flexible pavements .
destroy cleavage planes before placing the embankment .
num remove the old pavement with rigid surfaces if the new embankment is not more than num ft num m high .
num break remaining rigid pavements that are within num ft num m of the finished grade so that no section larger than num ft² num m² remains intact .
num .
embankment formation use the following requirements when constructing the embankment formation a. layer construction except as noted in subsection num.b.num.d construct the embankments in parallel layers .
deposit the material and spread in horizontal layers not more than num in num mm thick loose measurement for the full width of the crosssection .
use motor graders bulldozers or other approved equipment to keep layers uniform .
compact the layers using a sheepsfoot roller .
the engineer may permit the use of vibratory rollers whenever the embankment soils consist of class ianum ianum or ianum materials .
b. moisture content compact each layer within the range of optimum moisture content to achieve the compaction specified below .
do not construct successive layers on previous layers that exhibit excessive pumping under construction equipment regardless of compaction .
dry material if it contains too much moisture .
ensure the moisture content is sufficient for stability and compaction .
add water if the material is too dry and uniformly mix it with the soil for stability and compaction .
the department will not measure water added to the material under this requirement for payment .
it is considered incidental to the satisfactory completion of the work .
c. degree of compaction section numembankments num compact the embankment at bridge structures to at least num percent of the maximum laboratory dry density .
compact for the full depth of the embankment beginning at the toe of the slope and extending num ft num m from the end of the bridge .
compact embankment other than at bridge structures to at least num percent of the maximum laboratory dry density to within num ft num mm of the top of the embankment .
compact the top num ft num mm of the embankment to at least num percent of the maximum laboratory dry density .
if grading and paving are let in separate contracts the paving contractor shall recompact the top num in num mm to at least num percent of the maximum laboratory density .
the maximum laboratory dry density will be determined from representative samples of the compacted material using gdt num gdt numa gdt numb or gdt num whichever applies .
the inplace density of the compacted fill will be determined according to gdt num gdt num or gdt num whichever is applicable .
d. special conditions follow these special requirements num build layers as parallel as possible .
in certain cases the engineer may permit steeper slopes at ends of the embankments .
num in swamp or inundated areas that will not support the equipment build the lower part of the fill by dumping successive loads in layers no thicker than necessary to support the hauling equipment .
num build and compact the remainder of fills in layers as specified above .
e. embankments at structures use class i or ii material when constructing embankments over and around pipes culverts arches and bridges according to subsection num.a.num .
class iiicnum material may be used in districts num and num .
num compact the material as specified in subsection num.b.num.c .
num place the specified material on both sides of bridge structures for a distance of at least num ft num m. note do not place rock larger than num in num mm diameter within num ft num mm of any drainage structure .
before any traffic is allowed over any structure provide a sufficient depth of material over and around the structure to protect it from damage or displacement .
f. method of handling classes of soils handle the different classes of soils using the following methods num class iibnumand better soils distribute and compact these soils in num in num mm uniform layers over the entire width of the embankment .
use these soils when available in sufficient quantities in the top num ft num mm of the roadbed .
reserve these soils for this purpose when directed by the engineer .
num class iibnum soils distribute and compact these soils in num in num mm layers over the entire width of the embankment .
if class iibnum or better soils are available in borrow pits use these soils in the top num inch num mm of subgrade .
class iibnum soils may be used in the top num inch num mm of subgrade if approved by the office of materials geotechnical engineering bureau .
num class iii soils class iiicnum soils may be used in districts num and num within the top num inch num mm of subgrade if approved by the office of materials geotechnical engineering bureau .
do not use class iiicnum iiicnum or iiicnum soils within the top num inch num mm of subgrade unless a stabilizing agent approved by the engineer is added or if approved by the office of materials geotechnical engineering bureau .
class iiicnum chert clay soils in district num with less than num percent passing the no .
num num mm sieve may be used for subgrade .
num class iv soils section numembankments num do not use these soils in embankments .
waste these soils or when designated in the plans or directed by the engineer stockpile them and use them for blanketing fill slopes .
num class v soils place these soils in the same manner as class iibnum soils .
pulverize large particles to obtain the proper compaction .
num class vi rock place rock in uniform layers not over num ft num m thick and distribute it over the embankments to avoid pockets .
fill voids with finer material .
do not place rock larger than num in num mm in diameter within num ft num m of the finished surface of the embankment .
do not place rock larger than num in num mm in diameter within num ft num mm of the outer limits of proposed posts or utility poles .
do not place rock at bridge end bents within num ft num m of pile locations .
num all classes place mixtures of the above classes together with random material such as rock gravel sand cinders slag and brokenup pavement so that coarse particles are dumped near the outer slopes and finer particles near the center of the roadway .
produce a gradual transition from the center to the outside .
if material is too large to place in num in num mm layers treat it as rock or break it down and place it in num in num mm layers .
num .
embankment consolidation at bridge ends when consolidating embankments at bridge ends use the following specifications a .
when a waiting period is required in the plans or by special provision place end fills at bridges in time for consolidation readings to indicate that both the fill and the natural ground have reached the desired degree of stability .
b .
delay constructing bridge portions during the period of consolidation as shown on the plans or as required by a special provision .
the plans or the special provisions will indicate the estimated time required to reach consolidation .
the engineer may extend or shorten this waiting period based on settlement readings taken on points placed in the fills .
the longer or shorter waiting period will not constitute a valid claim for additional compensation .
follow these specifications when extending a waiting period num extending an estimated waiting period may lead to increasing the contract time .
if the contract is on a calendar day or completion date basis the department may increase the calendar days equal to the maximum number of calendar days involved in the extension .
num when a time extension causes additional delay due to seasonal changes the engineer may recompute the time extension on an available day basis .
when the contract is on an available day basis the time increase will be equal to the greatest number of available days involved in the extension .
num when time charges on separate bridge contracts are controlled by special provisions that set forth the availability of bridge sites extending an estimated waiting period controls the availability of that bridge site only time charges will be adjusted according to the special provision .
c. construct the embankment at bridge ends fulldepth to the subgrade template except for the stage construction providing a bench for the end bent unless otherwise stated in the plans and compact thoroughly before driving a piling at bridge ends .
section numembankments num the minimum acceptable length of completed fulldepth embankment is equal to the maximum width of fill between slope stakes at the end of the bridge .
the department will measure the minimum length of fulldepth embankment along the roadway centerline away from the endofbridge station .
c. inplace embankment construct embankments designated on the plans and in the proposal as inplace embankment using either a hydraulic or conventional dry land construction method and using materials obtained from within the construction limits of the rightof way or from borrow pits whichever is appropriate .
regardless of the method of construction the department will measure the entire embankment for payment as inplace embankment .
num .
construction build embankments according to this section when hydraulic or conventional dry land construction methods are used .
furnish equipment suitable for the method chosen to complete the work .
equipment is subject to the engineers approval .
when using a hydraulic method is used conform to these additional requirements a .
using baffles for construction is permitted as long as the embankment slopes are not steeper than indicated on the plans .
b .
use of excess material placed outside the prescribed slopes to raise the fill is permitted .
c. leave openings in the embankments at the bridge site as indicated on the plans .
dredge material that invades the openings or existing channels at no additional expense to the department .
provide the same depth of channel at mean low water as existed before the construction of the embankment .
d. do not excavate or dredge material within num ft num m of the toe of the embankment or existing structures unless otherwise shown on the plans .
e. place inplace embankment in areas previously excavated below the ground line in a uniform mass beginning at one end of the excavated area and continuing to the other end of the operation .
avoid forming of muck cores in the embankment .
f. construct the embankment at the farthest points along the roadway from the bridge ends and progress to the end of the excavation area beyond the toe of the slope of endrolls at bridge ends .
g. remove timber used for temporary bulkheads or baffles from the embankment .
h. fill and thoroughly compact the holes .
num .
maintenance a .
maintain the embankment at grade until it has been completed and accepted .
assume responsibility for slides washouts settlement subsidence or mishaps to the work while under construction .
b .
keep constructed embankment stable and replace displaced portions before final acceptance of the entire contract .
c. remove and dispose of excess materials including fill detours and erosion deposits placed outside the prescribed slopes in wetland areas .
num .
permits obtain at no additional expense to the department necessary permits or licenses from the appropriate authorities to operate dredges and other floating equipment in waters under their jurisdiction unless otherwise provided for in the contract .
num .
erosion control section numembankments num in addition to the provisions of section num follow additional erosion siltation and pollution control measures specified in the plans or special provisions .
d. rock embankment this work includes furnishing materials either from the roadway excavation or other sources and hauling and the placing of rock embankment .
use materials that meet the requirements of subsection num.b as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
num .
place the rock in uniform layers not over num ft num m thick .
distribute rock over the embankment to avoid pockets .
num .
fill voids with rock fines .
do not use rock larger than num in num mm for any diameter within num ft num m of the finished grade of the embankment or within num ft num m of any structure .
num .
do not place rock at bridge end bents within num ft num m of pile locations .
construct rock embankment and adjoining earth embankment concurrently .
ensure that neither is larger than num ft num m higher than the other at any time .
e. final finishing after constructing the entire embankment shape the surface of the roadbed and the slopes to reasonably true grade and crosssections as shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
open ditches channels and drainage structures both existing and those constructed or extended to effectively drain the roadway .
maintain the embankment areas until final acceptance of the project .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the following section details measurement for payment for the work described in this section a .
except as provided herein there will be no measurement for payment for the work covered by this section .
b .
the department will compute the quantity of inplace embankment or rock embankment using the average end area method or other acceptable methods when embankment is in place and accepted .
the quantity will be calculated as the neat volume above the original ground surface between the template line shown on the plans or authorized changes by the engineer and the original ground surface .
the original ground surface is determined by conventional field photogrammetric or other methods .
the department will not deduct for the volume of culverts and manholes .
inplace embankment necessary for the construction of temporary detours will not be measured for payment and is considered incidental to the completion of the work unless specifically stated otherwise on the plans .
where work includes excavating of unstable materials below the ground line the volume of embankment required for backfill below the ground line is calculated based on the neat line measurement for the crosssection shown on the plans or established by the engineer by the average end area method or other acceptable methods .
where permitted by the engineer or required by the plans material removed from the existing roadbed special ditches berm ditches or dry land borrow pits and used in making embankment will be paid for as inplace embankment regardless of the method of excavation .
num limits general provisions num through num .
section numembankments num num payment except as provided for herein the department will not make separate payment for placing embankments backfilling structures and constructing earth berms including surcharges .
payment will be included at the contract unit price for the items covered by section num section num and section num .
prices are full compensation for the work covered by this section .
the unit prices bid per cubic yard meter for inplace and rock embankments when included as contract bid items are full compensation for furnishing suitable material hauling placing compacting finishing and dressing according to these specifications or as directed by the engineer .
payment will be made under item no .
num inplace embankment per cubic yard meter item no .
num rock embankment per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numsubgrade construction num general description this work includes placing mixing compacting and shaping the top num in num mm or the planindicated thickness of the roadbed in both excavation and embankment areas .
this work also includes subgrade stabilization select material subgrade and shoulder stabilization .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numbituminous prime section numstabilizer aggregate section numroadway materials section numgraded aggregate b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt numa gdt numb gdt num gdt num section numsubgrade construction num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials a. subgrade materials if the plans do not show the source of material for subgrade the engineer will direct the contractor according to the specifications or implement a supplemental agreement to ensure a satisfactory subgrade .
if the existing roadway excavation or borrow materials are not suitable or available for stabilizing the subgrade use the quantity of stabilizer materials defined below in subsection num.b .
b. subgrade stabilizer materials material section type i stabilizer aggregate num type ii stabilizer aggregate num class iibnum or better soil num.a.num type iii stabilizer aggregate num type iv stabilizer sand num c. select material subgrade material section class iibnum or better soil num.a.num graded aggregate num d. shoulder stabilization material section shoulder stabilization num type ii num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numsubgrade construction num num construction a. subgrade construction construct subgrade as follows num .
plow harrow and mix the entire surface of the inplace subgrade to a depth of at least num in num mm .
num .
after thoroughly mixing the material bring the subgrade to plan line and grade and compact it to num percent of the maximum laboratory dry density .
num .
if the subgrade needs to be stabilized or if a subsequent contract provides for base construction do not apply density requirement at this stage .
if a subsequent contract provides for base construction eliminate mixing and compact the inplace subgrade to num percent of the laboratory maximum dry density .
num .
ensure that the subgrade can firmly support construction equipment before placing subsequent layers of base and paving materials .
the subgrade must support construction equipment without excessive movement regardless of compaction .
num .
rework unstable areas of subgrade to a moisture content that will provide stability and compaction .
the engineer may direct the contractor to proof roll the subgrade with a loaded dump truck .
num .
compact the subgrade using a sheepsfoot roller .
the engineer may permit the use of vibratory rollers whenever the subgrade soils consist of class ianum ianum or ianum materials .
num .
ensure that subgrade material used underneath soilcement base meets the requirements of subsection num.a .
b. subgrade stabilization construct a stabilized subgrade according to plans or as directed num .
undercut and dispose of the amount of subgrade material that will be displaced with the aggregate or selected material according to the engineers direction .
num .
leave material off the subgrade in fill sections requiring stabilization .
num .
place the amount of material specified in subsection num.b .
on the subgrade as specified on the plans or established by the engineer .
num .
thoroughly incorporate the material into the existing subgrade to a depth of num in num mm or as indicated on the plans .
plow disk harrow blade and then mix with rotary tillers until the mixture is uniform and homogeneous throughout the depth to be stabilized .
num .
finish the stabilized subgrade to the plan line grade and crosssection .
compact it to num percent of the maximum laboratory dry density as defined in subsection num .
plant mixing is permitted as an alternative to the mixedinplace method .
num .
eliminate the mixing and scarifying method before compaction in undercut areas where type iii stabilizer aggregates are specified unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
c. select materials subgrade place select materials as follows num .
construct the subgrade with a uniform blanket of select material consisting of class i or ii soil or graded aggregate according to plan dimensions or as directed by the engineer .
class iiicnum soils may be used in districts num and num within the top num inch num mm of subgrade if approved by the office of materials geotechnical engineering bureau .
do not use class iiicnum iiicnum or iiicnum soils within the top num nummm of subgrade unless a stabilizing section numsubgrade construction num agent approved by the engineer is added or if approved by the office of materials geotechnical engineering bureau .
num .
use the select material reserved from the grading or borrow operations .
if material is not available through this source obtain it from other sources .
num .
finish and compact the material according to subsection num.a .
d. shoulder stabilization stabilize the shoulder as follows num .
spread the stabilizer aggregate at the rate and to the dimensions indicated on the plans .
num .
mix the aggregate with the inplace shoulder material thoroughly to the plan depth .
num .
compact the area thoroughly and finish it to plan dimensions .
num .
prime the stabilized area according to section num when a paving course is required on the shoulders .
e. finishing subgrade when finishing subgrade use the following procedure num .
leave the underlying subgrade in cuts and fills low enough to accommodate the additional material when the work requires either subgrade stabilization select material subgrade or stabilization for shoulders .
num .
test short sections in curb and gutter areas might be necessary to obtain the proper elevation .
num .
blade the surface of the completed subgrade to a smooth and uniform texture .
num quality acceptance the department will test representative samples of compacted material to determine the laboratory maximum dry density using gdt num gdt numa or gdt num as applicable .
the department will determine inplace density of the compacted subgrade according to gdt num gdt num or gdt num as applicable .
ensure that the centerline profile conforms to the established elevations with an acceptable tolerance of num in num mm .
the acceptable tolerance under a template conforming to the designated cross section shall be num in num mm .
have the department test the maximum dry density using methods according to subsection num.a .
when base construction is not in the same contract the tolerances may be num in num mm num in num mm and num percent respectively .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. subgrade construction and finishing subgrade the department will make no separate measurement or payment for the work described in this section .
b. subgrade stabilization subgrade stabilization materials as defined in subsection num.b is measured by the ton megagram cubic yard meter or square yard meter of the specified thickness if none of the existing roadway excavation andor borrow materials are suitable and available for stabilizing the subgrade .
section numsubgrade construction num c. select material subgrade select materials conforming to subsection num.c are measured by the cubic yard meter in the hauling vehicle per ton megagram according to subsection num or by the square yard meter of the specified thickness when roadway excavation andor borrow materials are not available or suitable for this item .
d. shoulder stabilization shoulder stabilization is measured by the cubic yard meter or ton megagram as specified in subsection num.b .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a. subgrade construction the department will make no separate payment for subgrade construction or for finishing subgrade .
b. subgrade stabilization subgrade stabilization complete and accepted according to subsection num.b will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter per ton megagram or per square yard meter .
this price is full compensation for furnishing the materials hauling placing mixing compacting and finishing the stabilized subgrade .
c. select material subgrade select material complete accepted and measured according to subsection num.c will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter per ton megagram or per square yard meter .
this price is full compensation for furnishing the material where required hauling placing mixing compacting and finishing the select material subgrade .
d. shoulder stabilization this item will be measured by subsection num.b .
and paid for according to subsection num.b .
this item also includes furnishing and applying bituminous prime .
payment will be made under item no .
num stabilizer materials class type thickness per ton megagram cubic yard meter or square yard meter item no .
num select material subgrade class type thickness per ton megagram cubic yard meter or square yard meter item no .
num stabilizer aggregate for shoulders per ton megagram or cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numgrading complete num general description this work includes excavating of all materials including ditches undesirable material including removal and replacement and borrow if required hauling forming embankments constructing shoulders and subgrades finishing dressing and disposing of undesirable or surplus material clearing and grubbing according to section num and section num unless these items are established as pay items in the contract removing and disposing of miscellaneous roadway items including but not limited to curbs drainage structures and pavements unless established as separate contract items ensure that the completed grading work conforms to the horizontal and vertical alignment and typical cross sections shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numclearing and grubbing rightofway section numrandom clearing and grubbing section numchannel excavation section numroadway excavation section numborrow excavation section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures section numembankments section numsubgrade construction b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use materials required for grading construction that conform to the requirements of section num section num section num section num section num and section num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section numgrading complete num num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment use equipment approved by the engineer that will not damage base pavement or other appurtenances to be retained .
num preparation before placing base material finish the subgrade according to subsection num.e .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction perform the work according to the appropriate portions of section num section num section num section num section num section num section num and section num of the specifications .
measurement and payment shall be according to the provisions of this section .
see subsection num and subsection num below .
num quality acceptance when the engineer determines that the existing material in areas where fills are to be placed is undesirable the engineer may require the contractor to remove the undesirable material and replace it with suitable material .
compact the replacement materials according to the applicable portions of section num .
in cut areas where the material below the template line is undesirable for subgrade or shoulders undercut it to a depth established by the engineer and replace it with suitable material .
compact the replacement materials as specified herein .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. grading complete the work under this item is not measured separately for payment .
b. grading per mile kilometer this item is measured in linear miles kilometers along the centerline of the road or the median including ramps where shown on the plans .
c. undercut excavation the amount of undercut excavation when directed by the engineer and not addressed in the plans measured for payment is the product of the length width and depth of excavation .
replacement material for undercut excavation is not measured for payment .
there will be no separate payment for undercut excavation required by the plans or rock excavation required under subsection num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
section numgrading complete num num payment a. grading complete this item completed and accepted will be paid for at the lump sum price bid .
payment is full compensation for all work and materials specified in this section .
b. grading per mile kilometer this item will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear mile kilometer complete in place and accepted .
this price is full compensation for furnishing the materials and performing the work specified in this section .
c. undercut excavation undercutting areas not shown in the plans when directed by the engineer will be paid for at the rate of num per cubic yard num per cubic meter for quantities up to num yd³ num m³ .
quantities exceeding num yd³ num m³ will be considered extra work as defined in subsection num and will be paid for accordingly .
payment is full compensation for excavating and disposing of undesirable material and supplying placing and compacting replacement material .
payment will be made under item no .
num grading complete per lump sum item no .
num grading per mile kilometer per mile kilometer item no .
num undercut excavation per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numbridge excavation and backfill num general description this work includes the following responsibilities removing materials necessary for the construction of bridge footings and substructures disposing of excess materials and required backfilling including porous backfill constructing and removing work bridges cribs cofferdams and caissons dewatering draining sheeting and exploratory boring of foundations necessary to complete the work excavate and backfill concrete box culverts as specified in section num .
num definitions foundation material on which the footing of the substructure or seal rests .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numclearing and grubbing rightofway section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures section numbridge excavation and backfill num section numconcrete structures section numcofferdams section numremoval of existing bridge b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num materials num delivery storage and handling a .
surplus materials dispose of surplus stockpiled and excavated materials as directed by the engineer .
materials may be spread neatly and smoothly on the rightofway so as not to obstruct the channel of any existing or proposed waterway .
dispose of wasted materials according to subsection num.e .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a. cofferdams and sheeting use necessary protection such as cofferdams and sheeting when working in or near excavations where the surrounding earth could fail and endanger personnel or damage the work .
use cofferdams or sheeting to prevent undesirable changes in channels and slopes .
construct remove and dispose of cofferdams according to section num regardless of whether they are measured separately for payment .
num preparation a .
preparation of foundations prepare and maintain foundations as follows num .
do not subject concrete to the action of water before final setting except as provided for seal concrete in subsection num.v .
num .
where footings are placed on a slightly sloped foundation of rock or hardpan key the center of the foundation approximately num ft num mm deep throughout an area approximately equal to the dimensions of the column to be placed unless the plans require entire footing to be keyed .
num .
when the engineer requires step the foundation and remove all loose fragments and clean and fill seams as directed .
num .
do not disturb the top of the foundation to ensure that footings are placed on undisturbed material when they are not resting on rock or hardpan foundations .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numbridge excavation and backfill num num construction a .
foundations and footings the sizes and elevations shown on the plans are approximate and are subject to change when directed .
b .
inspection provide the engineer ample opportunity and safe conditions as determined by the engineer to inspect foundations and measure removed materials .
do not place concrete or close foundation areas from view until the area has been inspected and approved .
c. boring of foundations and seals bore foundations as requested and in an approved manner so that the foundations adequacy can be determined by the engineer .
borings are usually required only for foundations and seals with no piles .
all borings shall be made in the engineers presence .
bore to at least num ft num m deep in rock and num ft num m deep in other material excluding seals .
the entire depth of the seal will usually be bored in only one location .
d. backfill construction follow these requirements when backfilling num .
general backfilling is a part of the work of excavation except as noted .
a .
place the backfill in layers not exceeding num ft num mm of loose material .
compact the layer before placing the next layer .
backfill around all substructures except those located within the banks of a stream at normal water level .
b .
do not jet backfills .
c. place backfill material to apply only balanced horizontal loads to a newly placed structure or portion of structure .
do not backfill portions of structures that do not have backfill on all sides until the concrete has reached the required strength as determined by the engineer to withstand the earth pressures .
num .
intermediate bents and piers compact backfill for intermediate bents and piers to the approximate density of the surrounding soil .
a .
begin and complete backfilling around substructures not supported by piling the next workday after placing the lift if possible .
backfill at least within three calendar days after placement .
b. backfill footings before beginning form work on the columns .
c. begin backfilling around pilesupported footings and columns after removing forms .
complete as soon as possible but within five calendar days after placing concrete .
num .
end bents and abutments compact backfill for end bents and abutments including their wingwalls to the density shown on the standard plans or special plans .
a .
begin and complete the work no later than five calendar days after placing concrete unless other time limits are indicated on the plans .
if other time limits are indicated this work may be second stage construction or second stage backfill construction .
section numbridge excavation and backfill num b .
step slopes behind abutments unless otherwise shown and take precautions to prevent the backfill from wedging against the abutment .
c. provide drainage behind abutments and their wingwalls as shown on the plans .
d. place backfill for abutment footings and portions of walls having fill on both sides of the wall according to subsection num.d.num .
num .
backfill material backfill around intermediate bents and piers with material removed from the excavation unless the material is unsatisfactory to the engineer .
a .
ensure that material for end bents and abutments meets the requirements shown on the standard plans or special plans .
when suitable material is not available within the immediate vicinity of the bridge within the rightofway locate a source acceptable to the engineer and haul the material to the site .
b .
obtain and place backfill material necessary for end bent and abutment construction including special backfill material used in constructing mechanically stabilized earth wall abutments .
c. ensure that material located and hauled to the bridge site meets the requirements of class i class ii or as shown in subsection num.a.num unless otherwise noted .
class iiicnum material may be used in districts num and num. d. ensure that porous backfill when specified consists of coarse aggregate size no .
num as specified in subsection num or crushed stone drainage material as specified in subsection num.a .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. bridge excavation bridge excavation is measured for payment as follows bridge excavation is measured in cubic yards meters of bridge excavation acceptably removed .
no payment is made for materials removed outside the area bounded by vertical planes a maximum of num in num mm outside of and parallel to the neat lines of the footings unless otherwise shown on the plans .
no separate measurement is made under the item of bridge excavation for excavation necessary for end bent construction unless otherwise shown on the plans .
portions of structures removed under section num that fall within the excavation limits are not included in the measurements for bridge excavation .
the vertical pay dimension is measured from the original ground line .
however for grade separation structures the vertical pay dimension is measured from the subgrade template of the roadway passing underneath unless otherwise shown on the plans .
the vertical pay dimension for excavation at an intermediate bent constructed within the limits of a previously placed end roll includes the portion of the end roll that falls within the excavation limits .
each portion of a stepped footing is considered a separate footing for measurement purposes .
the bottom of each footing or step will be crosssectioned by the engineer to obtain the elevation of the completed excavation .
section numbridge excavation and backfill num b. bridge backfill bridge backfill is measured for payment as follows no separate measurement is made for bridge backfill .
backfill material hauled to intermediate substructure locations according to subsection num.d.num .
is not measured as bridge backfill but is considered a specification allowance as set forth in subsection num.b .
no allowance is made for material hauled in for use at bridge ends .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a. bridge excavation this work will be paid for at the contract price per cubic yard meter complete or at the contract price modified as specified below num .
the department will pay for all eligible excavation down to num ft num mm below the plan foundation elevation at the contract price for bridge excavation .
num .
the amount of payment for excavating lower than num ft num mm below the plan elevation is determined by increasing the contract price for bridge excavation as follows a .
if excavations extend num ft num m or less below the plan foundation elevation payment for excavating the material from num ft num mm below the plan foundation elevation is at the contract price plus num percent .
b .
if excavations extend more than num ft num m but not more than num ft num m payment for excavating the material from num ft num mm below the plan foundation elevation is at the contract price plus num percent .
c. if excavations extend more than num ft num m below the plan foundation elevation payment for excavating the material from num ft num mm below the plan foundation is at the contract price plus num percent .
b. bridge backfill the department will not pay for this work separately .
include the cost in other pay items included in the bridge contract .
the department will pay num percent of the contract price for bridge excavation when the contractor furnishes and hauls material used as replacement for unsuitable material excavated at intermediate substructure locations .
maximum dimensions and deductions are specified in subsection num.b .
payment will be made under item no .
num bridge excavation per cubic yard meter item no .
num bridge excavation grade separation per cubic yard meter item no .
num bridge excavation stream crossing no.___ per cubic yard meter item no .
num porous backfill per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numgranular embankment num general description this work includes furnishing hauling and placing granular material for constructing or reconstructing of the embankment according to the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numroadway materials b .
related documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that granular material meets the requirements of class ianum soil subsection num.a modified as follows percent passing no .
num num µm num to num percent clay num to num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction follow these requirements when constructing a granular embankment num .
place the embankment at the locations shown on the plans .
num .
ensure that thickness of the lifts and the compaction are approved by the engineer .
section numgranular embankment num num .
when granular embankment material is placed under water place the granular material on dry ground above the highwater level then push the material toward and into the water according to the limits and dimensions shown on the plans .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement furnished granular embankment material complete in place and accepted is measured by volume according to the following cases a .
pit with multiple party access when granular embankment material is obtained from a pit from which multiple parties have access the granular embankment is measured by volume in the hauling vehicle as specified in subsection num .
b .
pit with exclusive access when granular embankment material is obtained from a pit dedicated exclusively to the project on which payment for granular embankment is being made the granular embankment is measured for payment using the average end area method to determine the volume of material removed from the pit and incorporated into the work .
c. quarry when granular embankment material is obtained from a quarry a certified weight ticket shall accompany the material .
the weight of the material delivered and accepted is converted to an equivalent volume based on the dry loose unit weight of the material provided .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment granular embankment material will be paid for at the contract price per cubic yard meter .
this price is full compensation for furnishing material hauling placing compacting and providing labor equipment and superintendence necessary to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num granular embankment including material and haul per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numsand backfill num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section nummitigation site construction num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numremoval of solid waste num general description this work includes excavating removing and disposing of solid waste discovered during construction or shown on the plans .
remove materials according to this specification plan details and as directed by the engineer .
num definitions solid waste discarded putrescible i.e .
liable to rot and nonputrescible wastes such as trash garbage animal carcasses debris and materials not natural to the area .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public section nummeasurement and payment section numembankments b. referenced documents qpl num num submittals submit a report of disposal from the municipal solid waste landfill to the engineer for each load of solid waste removed from the project .
num materials handle hazardous materials according to subsection num hazardous andor toxic waste .
a .
soil cover materials soil materials used to cover exposed areas of a removal site may be any noncontaminated earth material approved by the engineer .
b .
odor control chemicals acceptable odor control chemicals used for solid waste removal are listed on the georgia department of transportation qpl num .
similar or equal chemicals may be substituted when approved by the engineer .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section numremoval of solid waste num num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
worker protection provide effective engineering and work practice controls to protect employee health and safety .
b. applicable specifications perform this work according to this specification and strictly comply with federal state or local codes or ordinances pertaining to removing solid waste .
verify the accuracy and existence of applicable codes ordinances or other regulations by obtaining and interpreting state county city or local municipality bylaws for solid waste disposal .
c. site information the department will make available existing boring logs of sites shown on the plans .
prospective bidders can obtain this information by contacting the geotechnical engineering bureau of the office of materials at num num .
d. site categories solid waste removal sites are designated as shown on the plans or discovered during construction for the purpose of this specification .
e. removal and disposal procedures remove and dispose of solid waste using these requirements num .
sites shown on the plans work with solid waste sites shown on the plans according to these requirements a .
give the engineer two weeks notice before removing solid waste .
the engineer will notify the local governing authority of the proposed work and tentative time schedules .
b .
after beginning to excavate solid waste give the work constant attention .
excavate the material to the full depth and width of the cut in one continuous operation leaving minimum exposed surface .
c. leave working faces of the cut as near vertical as possible .
however slope them enough to safely place a layer of soil over the exposed areas .
d. transport solid waste to a permitted municipal solid waste landfill .
obtain a listing of permitted municipal solid waste landfills by contacting the georgia environmental protection division land protection compliance program at num num. e. obtain permission for disposal from the landfill .
you must have the engineers approval of the disposal site .
f. fill trucks hauling material from the removal site to less than full capacity to prevent spills .
section numremoval of solid waste num completely cover the truck body with a waterproof tarpaulin large enough to extend over the sides and end of the bed to secure the material in transit .
fasten the tarpaulin securely .
g. at the end of each days work cover exposed areas of the removal site with a num in num mm layer of clean earth .
include the cost of this work in the overall bid submitted .
h. spray odor control chemicals on the exposed solid waste and on hauling vehicles as outlined in subsection num.f odor control .
i .
when directed by the engineer overexcavate the area based on the conditions of the solid waste site during removal .
overexcavation is measured and paid for according to subsection num measurement and subsection num payment .
j .
when removal is complete backfill solid waste areas according to the embankment construction requirements in section num .
include the cost of this work in the applicable bid prices for unclassified and borrow .
num .
solid waste sites discovered during construction control solid waste sites discovered during construction by following these requirements a .
report solid waste sites discovered during construction to the engineer immediately .
stop work in the vicinity until the engineer determines an appropriate plan for removal and payment .
b .
conduct work approved by the engineer under the provisions of subsection num extra work .
c. remove dispose of and backfill according to this specification and subsection num hazardous andor toxic waste .
f. odor control control objectionable odors from the exposed solid waste at the removal site and on haul trucks in transit as follows num .
use an effective odor control chemical selected from qpl num or an approved equivalent .
the engineer will cooperate with the local governing authority to determine the acceptability of the odor control chemical the application concentration and the application frequency in the removal area and on the hauling vehicles .
num .
keep available a minimum threeday supply of odor control chemical to treat the solid waste during removal operations .
during the last three days of removal the engineer may allow the odor chemical inventory be reduced to save expenses .
include the cost of spray material labor and equipment necessary to control objectionable odors in the overall bid submitted .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the work performed under this item is measured as follows a .
sites shown on the plans removing solid waste from sites shown on the plans is measured by the cubic yard meter .
the volume of material measured for payment will be based on crosssection measurements using the average end area method .
excavating outside the neat lines shown on the plans is not measured for payment unless the work is directed and authorized by the engineer .
section numremoval of solid waste num b .
sites discovered during construction work for solid waste removal sites discovered during construction is measured according to subsection num extra work .
c. overexcavation of solid waste overexcavating solid waste to depths below those shown on the plans is measured by the cubic yard meter .
volume calculations are described in subsection num.a sites shown on the plans .
num payment work performed under this item will be paid for as follows a .
sites shown on the plans removing solid waste from sites shown on the plans will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per cubic yard meter .
this is full compensation for excavating the solid waste material hauling and properly disposing of the hazardous materials closing the remaining landfill site constructing necessary haul roads furnishing chemicals and spraying the removal site trucks and contents as required disposing at a permitted municipal solid waste landfill and providing fencing labor equipment tools direction and incidentals necessary to complete the item .
b .
sites discovered during construction removing solid waste from sites discovered during construction will be paid for according to subsection num .
c. overexcavation of solid waste when the engineer requires removal of solid waste beyond the limits shown on the plans payment for removal and disposal will be as follows num .
solid waste removed from within the neat cross sections shown on the plans and to the depth of num ft num m below those cross sections will be paid for at the unit price bid per cubic yard meter for removing solid waste .
num .
solid waste removed to depths below the num ft num m specified above will be paid for as follows a .
over num ft num m but not over num ft num m deep this material will be paid for at the rate of num percent of the unit price bid per cubic yard meter for that portion of the material over num ft num m but not over num ft num m of extra depth .
b .
more than num ft num m deep if the extra depth exceeds num ft num m stop work in that area .
the engineer will request an investigation by the office of materials .
if necessary to excavate below the num ft num m level do not resume work until a satisfactory plan for payment has been established .
payment will be made under item no .
num removal of solid waste per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numunpaved shoulders num general description this work includes constructing unpaved shoulders .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numroadway excavation section numgrading complete section numshoulder material b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt numa gdt num gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials unless otherwise specified in the proposal ensure that the material conforms to section num .
the provisions of section num apply to shoulder materials obtained from sources off the rightofway .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment before beginning shoulder construction have the required equipment on the project and in good working condition .
use equipment approved by the engineer .
the engineer will not permit tractors with treads or equipment that damage existing base surfacing or pavement .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
section numunpaved shoulders num num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
general shape and compact shoulders in sequence as required for the type of base or pavement being constructed .
promptly repair damage to an existing base surface or pavement due to shoulder construction .
repairs are to be made at no expense to the department .
b. compaction immediately compact shoulders as follows to reduce erosion num .
grassed shoulders compact shoulder areas above subgrade elevation that require grassing or sodding to a firm and stable condition as determined by the engineer .
num .
ungrassed shoulders ensure that ungrassed shoulder areas including ungrassed stabilized shoulders and paved shoulders have a resultant density of at least num percent of the maximum laboratory dry density .
the density is determined from compacted representative samples of the material using gdt num gdt num or gdt numa whichever applies .
the inplace density of the compacted shoulder will be determined according to gdt num gdt num or gdt num whichever applies .
num .
all shoulders compact shoulders adjacent to a flexible base at least num in num mm wider on each side along with the base course .
c. maintenance maintain shoulders as follows num .
cut weep holes through shoulders constructed prior to flexible bases to prevent impoundment of water on the road bed or subgrade .
num .
provide adequate temporary drainage facilities to prevent excessive erosion when front slopes are subject to concentrated water at weep holes .
num .
promptly repair excessive erosion to prevent damage to the adjacent base or pavement .
num .
repair and dress adjacent slopes and remove excess material from adjacent ditches when shaping dressing and compacting shoulders .
d. construction sequence construct unpaved shoulders as follows num .
portland cement concrete bases and pavements construct shape and compact the shoulders as soon as the curing period is complete on each section .
num .
hot mix asphaltic concrete pavement construct shoulders adjacent to hot mix asphaltic concrete pavement according to the following case scenarios a .
hot mix asphaltic concrete bases construct shape and compact the shoulders as soon as the final rolling is complete on each section .
b .
hot mix asphaltic concrete intermediate and surface courses place the shoulder material for the underlying base course and compact it before beginning the intermediate or surface course .
place shape and compact the remaining shoulder material after completing the final rolling of each section of surface course .
num .
flexible bases or pavements except those listed under subsection num.d.num.a and subsection num.d.num.b follow these requirements except when constructing shoulders and base courses of the same materials section numunpaved shoulders num a .
before constructing the base or pavement place loose shoulder material to construct the compacted width of shoulder shown on the plans .
place the loose shoulder material at a proper distance outside the proposed edge of base or pavement .
b .
after initially manipulating and compacting the base or paving material use the blade grader to pull the shoulder up to but not inside of the proposed edge of the base or pavement .
c. when constructing multiple courses construct the shoulders base or pavement using the same number of courses .
prevent excessive erosion from concentrated water at weep holes by keeping the distance from the base or pavement construction to the shoulder construction to a minimum .
move smoothly and efficiently between the two operations .
num .
stabilized shoulders when the plans or proposal call for stabilized shoulders add the stabilizer according to the specification pertaining to that item .
num .
shoulders constructed with base material when constructing shoulders and base courses out of the same materials place and construct the shoulder material in the same way as the base material .
num .
shoulders constructed under traffic when constructing shoulders on highways that are open to traffic use the following construction operations a .
removing existing shoulder materials do not remove existing shoulders or portions of existing shoulders more than num ft num m ahead of paving operations .
also comply with this limitation when constructing new shoulders and paving is not involved .
b. constructing shoulders complete and compact shoulders within a distance of num ft num m or less behind finished paving operations .
c. enforcing construction limitations when trenching out or rebuilding the shoulders on opposite sides of the pavement simultaneously separate the two operations by at least num mile num m leaving at least one usable shoulder to protect passing traffic .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a .
materials obtained from roadbed shoulders constructed from material obtained from adjacent portions of the roadbed are measured according to subsection num measurement or subsection num measurement as applicable .
b .
shoulders adjacent to stabilized bases when bases are constructed by stabilizing the existing roadbed and the shoulders are to be bladed into section using materials from the existing roadbed no measurement of shoulder materials will be made .
c. shoulders constructed with new base course materials new shoulders constructed of the same material as the new base course by spreading the base course material full width of the roadbed is measured for payment according to the appropriate specification for the type base course .
section numunpaved shoulders num d. shoulders constructed with selected shoulder material selected shoulder material including accepted pervious and impervious shoulder material obtained from pits or other sources off the rightofway is measured in cubic yards meters loose volume in vehicles when dumping .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a .
shoulders constructed with materials obtained from existing roadbed measured shoulder material obtained from the existing roadbed will be paid at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter for section num .
shoulders constructed out of existing roadway materials including selected borrow already in position from prior construction operations will not be paid for separately .
payment for these materials will be made under the pertinent items required to place these materials in position .
b .
shoulders constructed with new base course materials shoulders constructed from new base course materials will be paid for according to the appropriate specifications for the type of base course .
c. shoulders constructed with selected shoulder material selected shoulder material including accepted pervious and impervious shoulder material obtained from pits or other sources off the rightofway will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter or square yard meter of a specified thickness .
payment is full compensation for furnishing the material when specified and for performing construction compaction and other work specified in this section pertaining to the item .
if under the provisions of section num the contractor shall pay royalties for the selected shoulder material the pay item is listed with the words including material added .
payment will be made under item no .
num selected material for shoulder construction per cubic yard meter or square yard meter ___ in mm average thickness item no .
num selected material for shoulder construction including material per cubic yard meter or square yard meter ___ in mm average thickness num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numremoval of underground storage tanks num general description this work includes excavating removing and disposing of underground storage tank ust systems discovered during construction or shown on the plans .
remove materials according to this specification plan details and as directed by the engineer .
num definitions underground storage tank system a tank with at least num percent of its volume underground including the pipes and pumps connected to the tank .
the tanks may be used to store petroleum products or hazardous chemicals .
tanks used for the following are specifically excluded from georgia epd rules chapter num and epa regulation num cfr part num farm or residential tanks of num gal num l or less capacity used for storing motor fuel for noncommercial uses tanks used for storing heating oil for consumptive use of the premises where stored pipeline facilities remove tanks excluded from georgia epd rules chapter num and epa regulation num cfr part num according to the american petroleum institutes recommended practice num api num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public section nummeasurement and payment section numembankments b. referenced documents georgia epd rules chapter num epa regulation num cfr part num american petroleum institutes recommended practice num api num num submittals a. ust systems shown on the plans submit documentation of proper disposal to the engineer no later than the day following disposal .
submit the soil or water samples to a laboratory approved by the engineer for testing .
submit to the engineer a completed test report sketch and certification that the tests were performed according to epd rules .
submit the documentation within num days after the date the samples were taken .
num materials a .
soil backfill to backfill a ust removal site use earth materials approved by the engineer .
b .
hazardous materials handle materials classified as hazardous according to subsection num hazardous andor toxic waste .
section numremoval of undergroung storage tanks num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation two weeks before working on ust systems shown in the plans notify the engineer in writing .
the engineer will inspect the work with the office of materials and the districts ust tank pull inspector .
when the engineer grants approval to proceed and the ust tank pull inspector is present onsite to monitor the ust removal proceed with the work according to the requirements outlined in subsection num.a applicable specifications .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. applicable specifications remove and dispose of ust systems according to the american petroleum institutes recommended practice num api num georgia epd rules chapter num and epa regulation num cfr part num .
in addition to these requirements strictly comply with federal state or local codes or ordinances pertaining to removing ust systems .
verify the accuracy and existence of applicable codes ordinances and other regulations by obtaining and interpreting state county city or local municipality bylaws for solid waste disposal .
b. ust categories for this specification ust systems are categorized as those shown on the plans or discovered during construction .
num .
ust systems shown on the plans a .
consider ust systems shown on the plans as a normal part of the contract .
b .
assume liability for improperly removing and disposing of ust systems .
prevent spilling the contents of the tank and carefully handle and transport the tank to the permitted disposal area .
immediately contain any spills and remove and dispose of the contaminated soil at no cost to the department .
if the engineer determines that the contractor is negligent in containing and remediating spills the department will hire outside forces to perform the work and deduct the cost from the contractors payments .
c. dispose of the tank contents and contaminated soils according to epd rules .
d. after removing the tank and its contents take soil samples as specified in the epd rules and sketch the location and depth from which the samples were taken .
e. if soils in the tank pit are visually contaminated remove the soils through additional excavation over excavation .
overexcavate to the limits of contamination or a maximum of num ft. num m deep whichever occurs first .
after completing overexcavation take soil samples as specified above .
if water is present in the pit after removing tank or overexcavating take a water sample .
section numremoval of undergroung storage tanks num f. submit the soil andor water samples to a laboratory approved by the engineer for testing .
give the engineer a complete test report and certification that the tests were performed according to epd rules .
g. place and compact backfill material for tank pit areas within the construction limits according to section num .
tank pit areas on the rightofway outside the construction limits will not require any special placement procedure or compaction testing .
leave the area level smooth and dressed to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num .
ust systems discovered during construction if a ust system is discovered during construction notify the engineer immediately .
a .
stop work in the vicinity of the ust until arrangements for removal and disposal have been made .
b .
upon the engineers approval to proceed perform the work according to subsection num.a and subsection num.b.num.b .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the work performed under this item is measured as follows a. ust shown on plans ust systems shown on the plans are measured on a per each basis .
b. ust discovered during construction work for ust systems discovered during construction is measured according to subsection num .
c. overexcavation of contaminated soil overexcavation of contaminated soil for ust systems shown on the plans is measured by the cubic yard meter .
the volume of material measured for payment is the difference in the tank pit volume based on neat line plan dimensions minus the volume of the completed excavation area as determined from cross sections using the average end area method .
excavation outside plan dimensions or dimensions established by the engineer will not be measured for payment .
disposal of contaminated soil is not measured separately .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment work performed under this item will be paid as follows a. ust shown on plans ust systems shown on the plans and removed under this item will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment is full compensation for excavating testing hauling and handling according to georgia environmental protection division rules as well as backfilling compacting fencing and removing and disposing of contaminated soil tank tank contents and all other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
section numremoval of undergroung storage tanks num b. ust discovered during construction removing ust systems discovered during construction will be paid for according to subsection num .
c. overexcavation of contaminated soil overexcavating contaminated soil will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter .
payment is full compensation for removing hauling properly disposing backfilling and compacting .
payment will be made under item no .
num removal of underground storage tank station no .
_____ per each item no .
num overexcavation of contaminated soil per cubic yard meter num adjustment general provisions num through num .
section numblanket for fill slopes num general description this work includes placing a blanket material on fill slopes as shown on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummiscellaneous planting materials b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use blanket material that meets the requirements on the plans or in the special provisions .
ensure that plant topsoil meets the requirements of subsection num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
section numblanket for fill slopes num num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
remove vegetation roots and trash remove vegetation roots trash or materials that hinder the preparation of a proper bed for grassing as a part of this item .
b .
plant topsoil to reduce plant topsoil loss from erosion place the soil shortly before and in conjunction with grassing operations unless otherwise directed .
after placing material replace material lost from erosion at no additional expense to the department .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the quantity of material placed and accepted under this item is measured in cubic yards meters loose measure in the vehicles at the point of dumping .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment will be made under item no .
num blanket for fill slopes per cubic yard meter num adjustment general provisions num through num .
section numcrushed aggregate subbase num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numspecial subgrade compaction and test rolling num general description this work includes rolling subgrades using a special roller described in this section and repairing weak places discovered during rolling .
the item does not take the place of compaction or subgrade improvement specified elsewhere in the specifications .
it consists of the following complete operations test rolling and performing final compaction and preparation of the finished subgrade using special rolling and compaction equipment replacing or repairing weak areas that develop in the finished subgrade from manipulating the test rolling equipment continuing test rolling to compact repaired areas until the entire subgrade remains firm protecting culverts and bridges from damage according to specified construction methods num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment use the following equipment for special subgrade compaction and test rolling .
do not vary from these specifications except by written permission from the engineer .
a. roller use a pneumatictired roller with these features singleaxle base with four wheels gross weight adjustable from num to num tons num to num mg as determined by the engineer wheels constructed to allow free rocking and oscillation roller no more than num ft num m wide overall with a turning radius of num ft num m or less have a separate tractor unit pull the roller unless a selfpropelled roller meets all of these requirements .
use num x num tires inflated to the pressure recommended by the manufacturer for the wheel load but to not less than num psi num kpa .
section numspecial subgrade compaction and test rolling num ensure that the gross contact area entire surface of the tire on a flat surface is no more than num in² num m² per tire and the net contact area treads is no more than num in² num m² per tire .
num preparation prepare the surface to be test rolled to the proper grade and crosssection .
ensure the top num in num mm of the surface is within num percentage points of the optimum moisture content when rolling .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. subgrade preparation when required stabilize in the specified areas according to the specifications before test rolling .
b .
extent of rolling test roll on all portions of the subgrade under the proposed base subbase or pavement plus a num ft num mm width on each side .
exclude ramps servicing private property .
num .
roll frontage roads spur connections crossovers and intersections according to the same requirements .
the cost of rolling is considered incidental to the item .
num .
test roll parallel to the centerline with the forward speed of the roller between num and num miles num and num km per hour .
num .
roll one outer edge then the other outer edge .
progress uniformly toward the center section until passing over the entire surface area at least twice .
num .
roll the entire width in segments long enough so that each segment takes about half a day .
num .
stop rolling during extreme moisture .
if the moisture content of the subgrade is deficient correct it by adding water .
num .
roll in the presence of the engineer who will mark the extent of weak areas and depressions immediately .
c. repairs to subgrade repair depressions and weak spots discovered while rolling .
num .
the repairs may consist of removing unsatisfactory materials replacing them with satisfactory materials and strengthening or stabilizing the materials in place .
num .
the engineer will decide what repairs to make .
place and compact materials in the roadbed as specified for embankment or subgrades whichever is appropriate .
num .
test roll again after making the repairs until the repaired areas are satisfactory according to these specifications .
d. test rolling at structures protect structures and prevent damage to them .
repair or replace damage caused by the test rolling at no expense to the department .
num .
bridges do not allow the rolling unit within num ft num m of bridge ends or bridge approach slabs .
do not allow the rolling unit to cross a bridge on its own wheels when the units weight exceeds num lbs num num kg for a numaxle loading .
num .
culvert type structures when a culvert type structure falls within the limits of the test rolling area and the finished surface of the subgrade is less than num ft num m above the exterior of the structure do not allow the rolling unit within num ft num m of the structure .
do not allow the rolling unit to cross any portion of the structure except by one of the following methods selected by the contractor .
follow these protection methods .
assume responsibility for damage to a structure .
section numspecial subgrade compaction and test rolling num a. detour the rolling unit off the roadway and around the structure to the opposite side where rolling is resumed .
b .
transport the rolling unit across the structure if the gross weight of the loaded transporting unit does not exceed num lbs num num kg for a numaxle loading .
c. construct an embankment ramp over the structure to provide a minimum cover of num ft num m over the top .
the ramp must extend to the same elevation on each side for a minimum distance of num ft num m from its exterior .
place and remove the ramp at no expense to the department .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a .
test rolling special subgrade compaction and test rolling is measured in miles kilometers along the center of the roadexcluding bridges regardless of the width and number of lanes to be rolled .
frontage roads spur connections crossovers and intersecting roads including their ramp connections falling within the rightofway and within the limits of the project are included in the overall length of the roadway shown for the item or included in the distance for any portion specified on the plans .
b .
repairs to subgrade materials removed under this specification regardless of their nature are measured for payment according to section num as unclassified excavation .
if the moved materials are laid aside or stockpiled and later used again excavating these materials and placing them in the roadbed is measured for payment as unclassified excavation .
if new materials are required they will be measured and paid for at the unit price bid for the materials according to section num or section num as applicable .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a .
test rolling special subgrade compaction and test rolling will be paid for at the unit price bid per mile kilometer completed and accepted .
payment is full compensation for preparing the surface transporting the roller moving the roller across or around prohibited areas rolling as specified watering and providing incidentals necessary to complete the item .
no separate payment will be made for protecting structures .
include the cost in the unit price bid for special subgrade compaction and test rolling .
b .
repairs to subgrade payment for repaired subgrades will be according to section num and section num where applicable .
payment will be made under item no .
num special subgrade compaction and test rolling per mile kilometer section numspecial subgrade compaction and test rolling num num adjustment general provisions num through num .
section numaggregate drainage courses num general description this work includes installing aggregate drainage courses .
the drainage courses shall conform to the specifications and to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numembankments section numsubgrade construction section numaggregate for drainage b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material subsection type i aggregate drainage course num type ii aggregate drainage course num type iii drainage blanket material num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a. embankment or subgrades to spread a uniform layer of coarse or fine aggregate without segregation and compact it to the specified requirements use hauling and spreading equipment approved by the engineer .
section numaggregate drainage courses num b .
other surfaces on any other surface including wet and unstable areas use trucks for enddumping and bulldozers and road machines for spreading .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction construct the roadbed according to the lines grades and typical crosssections shown on the plans and according to section num and section num .
use coarse aggregate drainage course and drainage blanket material as follows type i aggregate drainage course use in a trench around pipe or in the shoulder in conjunction with a trench .
type ii aggregate drainage course use as a drainage blanket under sidewalks curbs and gutter and beneath the pavement system or shoulders .
type iii drainage blanket material use on parts of the roadway shown on the plans as requiring a drainage blanket .
a .
prepared embankments or subgrades num .
place the material spread the material uniformly to obtain the compacted depth required on the plans and as follows a .
the maximum thickness of each course is num in num mm compacted except as noted in subsection num.b other surfaces .
b .
if installing an underdrain system immediately under or adjacent to the aggregate drainage course connect the drainage course directly to the underdrain system .
c. after placing the pavement make the subbase outside of the pavement flush with the outside pavement edge .
do not cut cementstabilized subbasekeep it in place .
d. when necessary cover a shoulder drainage course with a second layer of shoulder pavement to prevent contaminating the aggregate drainage material .
num .
compact the material compact the material according to the following procedures and have the engineer approve it .
a .
unless specified otherwise by the engineer begin rolling on the outer edge of the drainage course and progress toward the center .
on superelevated curves or shoulders begin rolling on the lower edge and progress toward the higher edge .
b .
for a type ii aggregate drainage course roll when the moisture content of the material is at or near the optimum moisture .
c. roll until the surfaces of each layer are uniformly compacted .
d. compact the final layer with a steel wheel roller weighing no less than num tons num mg or a vibratory roller approved by the engineer .
e. if a layer is deficient in required thickness by more than num in num mm scarify the surface and add more material to the thin area .
compact again according to the specifications .
b .
other surfaces num .
prepare the area a .
before placing drainage material excavate or trench low areas for positive drainage as directed by the engineer .
section numaggregate drainage courses num b. excavate trenches and undercutting to the dimensions and grades indicated on the plans .
num .
drain the area drain unstable or wet areas when the area is in the subgrade or the original ground surface is an embankment area or a trench .
spread drainage material to the requirements on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num .
compact the material compact drainage material until stable .
num quality assurance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement aggregate drainage course is measured by the ton megagram or cubic yard meter .
when measured by the ton megagram the weight is determined by approved truck scales at the job site or by other scales approved in advance .
when measured by the cubic yard meter the loose volume is determined as specified in section num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment aggregate drainage course of the type specified will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton megagram or per cubic yard meter .
payment will be made under item no .
num aggregate drainage course type____ per ton megagram item no .
num aggregate drainage course type ____ per cubic yard meter .
item no .
num underdrain pipe including drainage aggregate ____ inmm per linear foot meter num adjustments if the average thickness for any nummile num m increment exceeds the specified thickness by more than num in num mm the department will reduce the contractors payment for the excess material .
the department will calculate the excess material by multiplying how much average thickness exceeded the allowable num in num mm tolerance by the surface area of the course .
num section numsoillime construction num general description this work includes preparing and treating roadbed materials with lime to form a base subbase or subgrade .
water mix shape and compact the necessary material according to these requirements and with the lines grades and thickness indicated on the plans .
lime treated roadbed materials subbases or bases will be designated as class a class b or class c. the requirements of these specifications are applicable to each course or layer unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numroadway excavation section numsubgrade construction section numsoilcement construction section numbituminous prime section num roadway materials section num soil base materials section numcutback asphalt section numwater section numlime b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that the soil is suitable for lime stabilization and that the materials used for stabilization meet the following requirements soil section num or section num as applicable water subsection num section numsoillime construction num lime subsection num bituminous prime subsection num blotter material sand subsection num.g.num a .
soil use soil that consists of materials found in the roadbed base subbase or added materials as specified or directed by the engineer .
ensure that these materials meet the requirements shown on the plans or the pertinent specifications for these items .
remove the following from the soil particles of aggregate too large to pass through a num in num mm sieve roots stumps grass turfs and other vegetable matter b .
water use water without detrimental quantities of oil salt acid alkalis sugar or vegetable matter .
do not use water with total inorganic solids exceeding num percent .
test nonpotable water prior to use and provide test results to the engineer .
do not begin construction until the engineer has approved the test results .
test according to subsection num .
c. lime the application rate for lime will be determined from laboratory tests and provided to the contractor prior to beginning stabilization work .
hydrated lime will be used in all tests .
d. bituminous prime use bituminous prime that consists of cutback asphalt of the following grades rcnum rcnum rcnum mcnum mcnum mcnum e. blotter material use blotter material sand that meets the requirements of section num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel ensure that adequate protection and safety equipment and training is provided for all personnel .
section numsoillime construction num num equipment a .
general equipment use equipment of the right size in satisfactory mechanical condition that can produce satisfactory results .
provide a list of proposed equipment to the engineer prior to the beginning of construction .
provide any necessary equipment including mechanical spreaders capable of uniformly distributing bulk lime or lime slurry to the actual application rate as shown in the plans .
do not distribute dry lime by pneumatic pressure .
equipment capable of continuously mixing materials to a homogeneous blend and to a consistent depth .
weight all rollers sufficiently to accomplish the required compaction .
rotarytype soil mixers capable of mixing to a minimum depth of num inches num mm and capable of injecting mix water directly into the mixing chamber with automatic sensors to monitor water application and mixing depth .
equipment for applying water and prime .
use a type and weight of equipment that will not damage limetreated soil .
do not begin construction until the engineer has approved the proposed equipment .
b. alternate equipment alternate equipment such as continuous or batchtype central plant or traveling mixing plants will be approved if the equipment produces a mixture that meets this specification .
num preparation a .
prepare for soillime construction prepare for soillime construction as follows num .
grade and shape the underlying foundation to the required lines grades and crosssection .
num .
compact the foundation to the required density specified in subsection num.f compact lime layer and subsection num.b finishing requirements .
num .
dry the foundation if necessary .
num .
ensure that the foundation is firm and can support the construction and compaction equipment without displacement .
num .
stabilize any soft or yielding material .
if necessary repeat this step at no additional cost to the department before placing each subsequent layer .
num .
scarify and partially pulverize each layer of material to be treated to the necessary depth .
num .
remove all detrimental material from the soil according to subsection num materials .
b .
test section the first section of each mixing operation will be a test section .
the length of the test section will be the length required to use all of the lime on one truck .
demonstrate the acceptability of the equipment and methods used and provide a standard by which to ensure the finished grade elevation and compacted thickness with this method .
num .
if necessary change the equipment methods or initial grade elevations based on results of the test section .
num .
if changes in methods or equipment are made during the project construct additional test sections when directed by the engineer .
section numsoillime construction num num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction limetreated roadbed materials subbases or bases will be designated as class a b or c as follows a .
class a treatment apply the specified percentage of lime in two equal increments according to the following steps num .
spread the first increment of lime .
num .
mix the material .
num .
allow the material to mellow for a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours .
num .
spread the second increment of lime .
num .
mix the material .
num .
compact and finish the material .
see subsection num.f compact lime layer for compaction and subsection num.b finishing requirements for finishing .
b .
class b treatment apply the specified percentage of lime according to the following steps num .
spread the lime .
num .
mix the material .
num .
allow the material to mellow for a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours .
num .
mix the material .
num .
compact and finish the material .
see subsection num.f compact lime layer for compaction and subsection num.b finishing requirements for finishing .
c. class c treatment apply the specified percentage of lime according to the following steps num .
spread the lime .
num .
mix the material .
num .
compact and finish the material .
see subsection num.f compact lime layer for compaction and subsection num.b finishing requirements for finishing .
d. apply lime num .
general apply lime according to the rate specified by the engineer .
apply lime uniformly so that the quantity applied does not vary more than num percent of the quantity specified for each section .
apply lime only to areas that can be mixed in one day .
do not mix lime with frozen soils or with soils containing frost .
perform lime stabilization only when the air temperature is above num f num c and only between april num and october num unless directed otherwise by the engineer .
distribute lime at the specified rate by making repeated passes over a section until the required amount has been spread .
section numsoillime construction num after each pass incorporate the material into the soil with mixing equipment .
if necessary add more water to the mix to accelerate mellowing .
num .
protect and ensure safety provide the necessary equipment and take the necessary precautions to protect operations personnel from the hazards of lime dust or slurry .
prevent damage discomfort or inconvenience to the public or to private property while preparing and distributing lime .
num .
methods spread lime on scarified areas at the specified rate .
distribute the material uniformly to avoid excessive loss .
choose one of the following three methods to apply lime a .
dry application with quicklime adjust the design application rate that was based on using hydrated lime to reflect the properties of quicklime .
use the following formula to determine the application rate for quicklime arq arh num p where arq application rate for quicklime arh design application rate based on hydrated lime num ratio of molecular weights for hydrated lime num and quicklime num p certified percent purity of the quicklime do not apply quicklime if the engineer determines that wind conditions could make blowing lime hazardous to traffic workers or adjacent property .
minimize lime pockets by applying lime to shaped and rolled areas that are relatively smooth .
spread uniformly at the specified rate using a mechanical spreader approved by the engineer .
b. slurry made with hydrated lime create a lime slurry by mixing num percent dry lime solids by weight with num percent water .
mix slurry in agitating equipment and continue to agitate until arriving at the roadbed .
spread slurry on the scarified area with distributing equipment .
c. slurry made by slaking quicklime create a lime slurry by slaking quicklime using special equipment at or near the project site .
obtain the engineers approval for all equipment and procedures before work begins e. mix lime num .
general maintain the moisture content of the material at its specified optimum or not more than num percent over the optimum at all times .
add water during mixing if necessary even if the material has the optimum moisture content to sustain the chemical reaction between lime and water .
mix the material the same as for dry application or slurry application unless indicated otherwise .
a .
immediately after applying the lime num mix to the required depth and width .
num if the depth to be treated as shown on the plans is more than num in num mm compacted treat in approximately equal layers of not more than num in num mm deep .
section numsoillime construction num num when multilayer construction is required blade the upper layers of the compacted soil in windrows outside the area to be treated until the lower layer is mixed compacted and approved by the engineer .
num blade each successive layer back into place shape and treat it with lime mix compact and shape to typical section .
include the cost of this manipulation in the bid price .
b .
control scarifying and mixing to provide uniform depth .
make the crown of the undisturbed soil underneath conform as closely as possible to the crown of the finished course .
c. until the lime is incorporated or mixed allow only spreading watering or mixing equipment to drive over the section being processed .
d. determine bulking factors from the dry weight of laboratorytested raw and lime treated soils .
furnish a finished course of lime treated material that conforms to the specified thickness and surface requirements in the plans .
num .
mix lime initial a .
class a or class b lime treatment num incorporate lime and water with rotary mixers until uniform .
the mixture must pass through a num in num mm sieve .
num add the amount of water necessary to produce a moisture content of no less than num percent below the mixtures optimum moisture content or no more than num percent above optimum moisture content .
see gdt num .
num after mixing is complete reshape the treated course to the approximate line grade and typical section .
num seal with a light pneumatictired roller and other approved equipment as necessary .
num mellow for a minimum of num hours and a maximum of num hours .
b .
class c lime treatment num incorporate lime and water with rotary mixers until uniform .
continue to mix and add water until obtaining a homogeneous mixture of soil lime and water that is satisfactory to the engineer .
num after mixing and applying water ensure that num percent of the material by dry weight passes a num in num mm sieve and num percent by dry weight passes a no .
num num mm sieve .
num .
mix and pulverize lime final the following applies to class a and class b lime treatments only .
a .
after the required mellowing period scarify the layer .
b .
after a class a treatment add the second application of lime .
c. remix the layer as prescribed in the initial mixing operations adding water as necessary .
d. continue mixing until num percent of the material by dry weight exclusive of gravel and stone passes a num in num mm sieve and num percent passes a no .
num num mm sieve .
e. ensure that the percent of moisture is at or above the laboratory specified optimum moisture .
f. if mixing can not be completed in one day seal the surface of the layer with a rubbertired roller .
continue the process the next day weather permitting .
f. compact lime layer compact the material according to the following requirements and to subsection num.b finishing requirements for finishing .
num .
class a and b lime treatments compact the mixture within num hours after completing the final mixing .
maintain the material at a moisture content within num percent of optimum .
section numsoillime construction num num .
class c lime treatment compact the mixture immediately after completing the first and only mixing .
maintain the material at a moisture content within num percent of optimum .
num .
class a b and c treatments a .
complete compaction operations during one working day .
b .
keep the moisture content of the material uniform when compacting .
maintain the material at optimum moisture content or up to two percent over the optimum content .
c. compact uniformly and continuously beginning at the bottom .
use sheepsfoottype rollers .
continue until the entire depth of the mixture is compacted to the required density specified in subsection num.a .
d. immediately correct depressions or soft spots that develop in the compacted areas with the following methods num scarify the area .
num add lime when required .
num remove the material when required .
num reshape and compact .
e. stop compaction and remove the sheepsfoottype roller when a layer of loose soil not exceeding num in num mm remains .
f. in addition to the requirements specified for density compact the full depth of the mixture to the extent necessary for it to remain stable under construction equipment .
g. cure lime final num .
general a .
after the limetreated soil has been finished as specified in subsection num.b keep it moist for num days .
b .
lime stabilized subgrade or embankment may be cured by applying water to maintain the course moist during curing .
c. to protect a limestabilized base subbase or shoulder course apply bituminous prime material see subsection num.d according to section num. d. apply the prime as soon as possible but not later than num hours after completing the finishing operations unless delayed by wet weather .
if delayed apply prime as soon as the surface is sufficiently dry .
e. ensure the limetreated soil surface is free of all loose and extraneous material and that it contains sufficient moisture to prevent excessive penetration of the bituminous material .
f. if directed by the engineer sweep the limetreated soil clean of loose material before applying the prime .
num .
apply the prime a .
apply the bituminous material uniformly to the surface of the limetreated soil at the rate of num to num galyd² num to num lm² .
b .
properly maintain the material during the entire curing period so that all of the limetreated soil will be covered effectively during this period .
c. complete curing prior to placing subsequent layers of material .
num .
protect lime layer a .
if necessary open completed sections of the limetreated soil to lightweight local traffic .
make sure the curing is not impaired and that the treated sections have hardened sufficiently to prevent marring or distorting the surface .
b .
use construction equipment on the limetreated soil only to discharge material into the spreader during base or paving operations or except as may be permitted for embankment construction .
section numsoillime construction num num quality acceptance a. density requirements after shaping the mixture to line grade and cross section specifications roll the course until uniformly compacted as determined by gdt num .
use the percentages of maximum dry density in the following table .
determine the inplace density according to gdt num gdt num or gdt num as applicable .
all base subbase or shoulder courses num top num ft num mm of embankment subgrade num to within num ft num mm of the top of the embankment num b. finishing requirements ensure that the surface of the completed limestabilized layer conforms to the lines grades and cross sections shown on the plans or established by the engineer and meets the following characteristics uniform lime mixture smooth dense wellbonded unyielding free of cracks or loose material ensure that surface requirements meet the following specifications subgrade subsection num.e .
base subbase or shoulder course section num c. thickness if necessary reconstruct the course or add lime to the course at no additional cost to the department .
num .
determine the thickness of the limestabilized layer according to gdt num at intervals not to exceed num ft num m. num .
do not allow the thickness of the entire layer to vary more than num in num mm plus or minus from the thickness shown on the plans .
num .
immediately reconstruct any section deficient by more than num in num mm according to this specification and the plans .
num .
add additional lime to correct the deficiency of any section exceeding the num in num mm tolerance .
remix to the specified depth and width according to this specification and the plans .
num contractor warranty and maintenance perform the following work at no cost to the department .
repeat this work as often as necessary to keep the limetreated soil intact .
maintain the limetreated soil in good condition until the work is completed and accepted .
maintain a smooth surface on the course by blading .
immediately repair any defects that occur .
section numsoillime construction num num measurement a. soillime material if it is necessary to add other material to the roadbed or to build the base or subbase entirely with new material soillime material is measured by loose volume cubic yard meter as specified in section num .
b. soillime treated roadbed subbase and base course if payment is specified by the square yard meter soillime treated roadbed subbase and base course are measured with the methods used for soilcement specified in section num .
c. lime lime is measured by the ton megagram .
if quicklime canum is slaked on the job in an approved mixing tank to produce a lime slurry the pay quantity for lime is measured in ton megagram of hydrated lime .
the pay quantity is calculated using the certified lime purity for each truckload as follows total weight of hydrated lime produced ton mg a x b x num a c where a actual quicklime delivered b certified purity c inert material num ratio of molecular weights for hydrated lime num and pure quicklime num if quicklime is spread on the roadbed in a dry application it is measured by the ton megagram based on invoice weight .
the formula for converting quicklime to hydrated lime does not apply for dry applications .
d. prime bituminous prime is not measured for separate payment .
application will be according to section num .
e. unsuitable material unsuitable materials removed from the roadbed are measured according to the earthwork item in the contract .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a. soillime material if material is mixed on the job it may be necessary to add other materials to the roadbed or to build up the base or subbase entirely with new materials .
any additional soillime material will be paid at the contract price per square yard meter or per cubic yard meter when in place and accepted .
payment will be full compensation for the following shaping and compacting the existing roadbed all materials except lime loading and unloading materials hauling materials section numsoillime construction num crushing processing mixing spreading watering compacting and shaping materials maintenance all other incidentals necessary to complete the work b. soillime treated roadbed base and subbase course a course of soillime treated roadbed base and subbase will be paid for at the contract price per square yard meter when in place and accepted .
payment will be full compensation for the following preparing the roadbed mixing on the road shaping pulverizing watering and compacting materials repairing all defects maintenance c. premixed soillime treated base and subbase course a course of premixed soillime treated base and subbase will be paid for at the contract price per ton megagram or per square yard meter when completed in place and accepted .
payment will be full compensation for the following shaping and compacting the existing roadbed all materials except lime loading and unloading materials hauling materials crushing processing mixing spreading watering compacting and shaping materials maintenance all other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
d. lime only lime in the finished course or courses will be paid at the contract price per ton megagram .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing hauling and applying the material .
payment will be made under item no .
num soillime materialincluding material and haul per cubic yard meter item no .
num soillime treated roadbed base subbase or shoulder course class ____ thickness____ per square yard meter item no .
num lime per ton megagram num adjustments no payment will be made for lime used to correct defects due to faulty equipment or negligence .
payment will not be made for any lime spread and exposed for four hours or more prior to mixing .
treat such areas again with the full required rate of application .
add lime at no additional cost to the department to any section on which washing or blowing prior to mixing caused excessive lime loss .
section numsoillime construction num reconstruct areas at no cost to the department on which limetreated soil was constructed but not covered with a layer of pavement base or other construction material during the same construction season .
the engineer will test each section as it is completed .
scarify moisten rework and compact any section with a density less than the specified requirements according to the requirements of these specifications and at no additional cost to the department .
no payment will be made for lime application exceeding the num percent plus tolerance .
when the quantity applied is deficient by more than num percent apply additional lime prior to mixing at the contractors expense .
section numgrading modified num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numlump sum construction num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section nummiscellaneous construction unpaved roads and streets num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numrailroad construction num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numhaul roads num general description this work includes maintaining and repairing haul roads that are county roads and city streets within the state of georgia .
haul roads on the state highway system are not included .
num definitions haul roads routes used for transporting materials to a project .
haul roads include routes described in the contract and alternate routes approved by the engineer .
section num haul roads num num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numsubgrade construction section numreconstructed base course section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction section numbituminous prime section numbituminous tack coat section numbituminous surface treatment b. referenced documents form hdnum form hdnuma num submittals if substituting a different road for a haul road designated in the contract conduct an inspection of the proposed haul road in conjunction with the engineer and the governmental agency or political subdivision charged with the control and maintenance of the route .
after the inspection prepare an agreement using form hdnuma which states existing conditions maintenance conditions during hauling and restoration after hauling is completed .
sign the agreement together with the governmental agency or political subdivision .
submit the agreement for the engineers approval before hauling materials on the proposed route .
num materials restore haul roads with materials that meet the requirements of the following specifications material section stabilizer aggregate type i num reconstructed base course num asphaltic concrete num bituminous prime num bituminous tack coat num bituminous surface treatment num if any of the above materials are specified in the original contract under a modified specification furnish materials for haul road maintenance and restoration under the same modified specification .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements maintain the haul road to the engineers satisfaction during hauling .
section num haul roads num num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation the department will determine sources of local materials and commercially produced aggregates and which haul roads exist for transporting the materials .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
restoration requirements when hauling operations are completed restore the haul road to a condition equal to that which existed before hauling operations were started .
the engineer will determine the kind and amount of restoration work required and the procedures and requirements to follow .
an obligation to maintain and restore the road will not be relieved in the event that other traffic uses the haul road concurrently .
if another contractor who is also under contract with the department hauls material over the same route the engineer will determine the amount of maintenance and restoration obligation for each contractor .
num quality acceptance a .
inspection when the restoration work on a haul road is completed a joint inspection of the haul road route will be made under the jurisdiction of a governmental agency or political subdivision other than the department .
inspect the road in conjunction with the engineer and the governmental agency or political subdivision charged with the control and maintenance of the restored road .
the engineer will obtain two copies of the executed haul road release part of form hdnum or hdnuma .
if using a substitute road the contractor must obtain the forms specified above and submit them to the engineer .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement materials ordered by the engineer for maintaining and restoring haul roads are measured as defined in the applicable section of the specifications .
if using a substitute haul road materials are measured for payment according to the quantities shown on the plans for the original haul road .
quantities of materials used above those shown on the plans will not be measured for payment .
blading and shaping costs necessary for maintaining and restoring haul roads are not measured for payment .
section num haul roads num num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment stabilizer aggregate will be paid for under the requirements of section num .
all materials measured as stated above will be paid at the contract price for the items shown on the plans and listed in the proposal .
when the engineer orders materials other than those listed above they will be paid on a force account basis under subsection num extra work .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numgeneral specifications for base and subbase courses num general description this specification applies to all base and subbase courses except asphaltic concrete .
additional requirements for each type of base and subbase are described in the appropriate sections for specific base and subbase type construction .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public section nummeasurement and payment section numtraffic control section numfield laboratory building section numreclamation of material pits and waste areas section numroadway excavation section numborrow excavation section numsubgrade construction section numsoilcement construction section numsandbituminous stabilized base course section numgraded aggregate construction section numcement stabilized graded aggregate construction section numbituminous prime section numadmixtures section num general specifications for base and subbase course num b. referenced documents form omrtmnum daily truck weights form num tally sheet num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials find the specifications for materials to be used and the references for them under the appropriate section for each base and subbase type construction .
ensure that each material meets the requirements for the type specified .
incorporate only materials that meet the engineers approval .
admixtures meeting the requirements of subsection num and approved for use in stabilized bases or subbases shall be governed by the requirements as outlined in laboratory standard operating procedure no .
num quality control of portland cement and blended hydraulic cements and quality control of fly ash and granulated blastfurnace slag .
a .
selecting local materials at the source the engineer has the authority to classify materials at the source and require the materials to be excavated in the proper sequence so that each kind will reach its destination at the best location for that material in the finished work .
the engineer has the authority to reject any unsuitable materials .
b .
sources of local materials outside the rightofway follow the provisions of subsection num local material sources to obtain materials from local sources outside the rightofway .
num delivery storage and handling a. storing at central mix plants store material at a plant site with enough space for separate stockpiles bins or stalls for each size of aggregate .
keep aggregates separated until delivery to the plant feeders for proportioning .
keep the storage yard neat and the stockpiles bins and stalls accessible for obtaining samples .
num construction requirements num personnel supply all personnel and equipment necessary for obtaining samples from base plants and delivering them to the plant laboratory .
num equipment ensure that all equipment for constructing base and subbase courses is of an approved design and in satisfactory condition before construction begins .
the equipment required for each type of base or subbase will be determined according to the construction method used .
a .
central mix plants the central mixing plant will not be approved for proportioning batching or mixing unless a field laboratory meeting the requirements of section num is available for the exclusive use of the engineer or inspector .
design coordinate and operate plants so that the mixture is produced within the specified tolerances .
the requirements are as follows .
num .
scales section num general specifications for base and subbase course num before any mixture is delivered to the project check all scales with standard weights for accuracy and for agreement with each other .
if weight proportioning is used provide accurate scales so all ingredients of the mixture can be weighed separately .
use scales that are accurate to within num percent of the measured load .
support scales with rigid supports so that vibration from the plant does not interfere with accurate readings .
a .
weight box and hopper scales use springless dial scales of a standard make and design for weight boxes and hopper .
inspect and seal scales when the engineer determines it necessary to assure accuracy .
ensure that at least ten num lb .
num kg weights are available for testing the scales .
b .
motor truck scales with each plant include a motor truck scale with a platform large enough to accommodate the entire length of any vehicle used .
ensure that the scale is certified according to section num and is large enough to weigh the largest anticipated load .
do not measure weights greater than the rated capacity of the scales .
ensure that the weights of the aggregate batches in the truck before delivery to the project are within two percent of the sum of the weights of the batch ingredients .
complete forms omrtmnum daily truck weights and form num tally sheet for each days production and submit them to the engineer .
num .
mixer equip each central mix plant with an approved mixer .
if portland cement is required begin mixing immediately after the cement is added to the coarse aggregate and soil mortar .
continue mixing until a homogeneous and uniform mixture is produced .
if the equipment does not produce a homogeneous and uniform mixture that meets these specifications the engineer will require the contractor to make the changes necessary to accomplish this result .
any adjustments made to the charge in a batch mixer or the rate of feed to a continuous mixer must ensure a complete mix of all of the material .
correct dead areas in the mixer where the material does not move or is not sufficiently agitated by reducing the volume of material or by making other adjustments .
num .
mixture proportioning add portland cement bituminous materials aggregates or other ingredients in such a manner that they are uniformly distributed throughout the mixture during the mixing operation .
num .
water proportioning in all plants proportion water by weight .
provide a means for the engineer to verify the amount of water per batch or the rate of flow for continuous mixing .
use spray bars to evenly distribute moisture throughout the mixture .
num .
sampling use sampling equipment approved by the engineer to obtain samples before combining them with other ingredients or introducing them into the mixer .
use sampling equipment to provide an accurate representation of the furnished material .
num .
additional requirements for continuousmixing plants a. feeder system continuous mixing plants shall use a feeder system that accurately proportions aggregate from each bin by weight .
equip each feeder with a device that can change the quantity of material being fed .
use a feeder with adjustments that can be securely fastened .
ensure that the plant has an interlocking system of feeders and conveyors that can be synchronized to supply a continuous flow of aggregate including a positive flow of dry and liquid additives for mixing .
section num general specifications for base and subbase course num provide an electronic beltweighing device to monitor the combined aggregates .
ensure that there are meters for maintaining the aggregates and additives at varying production rates .
use an electronic control package capable of tracking which accepts a signal from the beltweighing device and signals to continuously vary the dry and liquid additive feeder speed and maintain the feed rate .
proportion dry additives with a gravimetric depleting weight system meeting the following requirements the dry additive gravimetric depleting weight system includes an isolation vessel supported by load cells independent of the fines silo .
use load cells in conjunction with an electronic scale package having remote digital display and the necessary controls .
continuously weigh the material being metered with a positive displacement feeder mounted on the discharge of the isolation vessel .
b .
control system use a control package that has a plant interlock shutdown capability .
plants must be able to shut down if actual flow rates differ from desired flow rates excessively .
if the flow rate deviates excessively an alarm shall sound at any of the aggregate dry additive or liquid additive metering devices .
provide a monitoring station to control the entire operation that shows continuous quantitative data on the production and proportioning of the mix ingredients .
c. portable power units equip plants that use portable electric power generators with a frequency meter graduated and accurate to one hertz and a voltmeter graduated and accurate to two volts installed in the power circuit .
d. mixer use a mixer equipped with enough paddles or blades to produce a uniform and homogeneous mixture .
replace paddle blades that show more than num percent wear in the face area .
use paddles that can be adjusted to angular positions on the shafts and that can be reversed to retard the flow of the mix .
keep the mixer level .
e. surge hopper equip the mixer with a surge hopper .
use a surge hopper that automatically discharges the mixture when it reaches a predetermined level .
num .
additional requirements for batchmixing plants a .
weigh box or hopper use weigh boxes and hoppers that are suspended on scales large enough to hold a full batch without spilling or needing hand raking and equipped with a device for accurately weighing each size of aggregate .
provide a convenient and accurate means of obtaining samples of aggregates from each bin before the material enters the mixing chamber .
equip each bin compartment with a bin level indicator that automatically stops weighing when a bin is empty .
b. mixer include an approved leakproof batch mixer in the plant .
use a mixer fast enough or equipped with enough paddles or blades to produce a properly and uniformly mixed batch .
replace paddles and blades that show more than num percent wear in the face area .
c. weighing cement weigh cement on scales separate from the aggregate batching scales .
ensure that all scales meet the requirements of section num. d. proportioning bituminous introduce bituminous material into the mixer through spray bars and weigh it on scales separate from the aggregate batching scales .
e. control of mixing time use a timelocking device that automatically limits mixing time .
do not mix materials less than num seconds .
section num general specifications for base and subbase course num b. inplace mixers for inplace mixing operations use mixers that meet the following requirements num .
multiple pass mixers use approved rotarytype multiple pass mixers with sufficient tines that mix cement soil or soilaggregate and water uniformly for the full depth of the course .
num .
traveling plant mixers use approved traveling mixing plants to pick up the aggregate soil or other materials from the windrow or roadway .
use plants equipped with a bottom shell or pan that pick up and mix the material while it is separated from the foundation material during at least num percent of the mixing cycle .
use plants that mix the material for the full depth of the section .
ensure that travelling plants move forward with successive increments the length and width of the roadbed so that the roadbed is compacted and finished in one operation .
ensure that none of the materials being mixed are lost or segregated .
use plants mounted on wheels or crawler tracks wide enough so that they will not rut or damage the mixed surface when loaded to capacity .
use plants with a pressurized metering device that introduces water during mixing .
ensure that devices for proportioning water and materials to be mixed accurately measures the specified amounts while the machine is in motion .
for bituminous stabilization use plants equipped with a metering device that accurately measures the bituminous material into the mixer within the tolerances specified in section num.b .
ensure that the meter indicator dial has a scale with divisions indicating gallons liters .
if mixing equipment does not produce a homogeneous and uniform mixture make the changes necessary to produce this result as required by the engineer .
c. mechanical cement spreader when the material is to be mixed inplace use an approved mechanical cement spreader to uniformly and accurately spread the cement .
do not use pneumatic tubes to transfer the cement from the tanker to the material to be stabilized .
d. mixture spreader use an approved mechanical spreader that meets the following requirements to uniformly spread the mixture a heightadjustable strikeoff plate to obtain the specified thickness of the finished base a selfpropelled spreader with rollers to contact the truck tires and push the truck without skewing the spreader or truck a hopper large enough to prevent spilling or wasting the material e. static rollers use static rollers that meet the following requirements .
use selfpropelled static rollers on cement stabilized base .
num .
trench roller in this context roller describes a wheel made of a flat metal surface wheel describes a rubber wheel of the automotive type .
when base widening is specified use at least one trench roller .
use a trench roller that has a guiding roller or wheel that operates in tandem with the compression roller on the area to be compacted or with the auxiliary wheel or roller .
ensure that the trench roller is equipped with an auxiliary wheel or roller mounted on a heightadjustable axle .
the contact surface of the auxiliary wheel or roller must be adjustable to at least num in num mm above and num in num mm below the rolling plane of the compression roller .
if this adjustment is not sufficient to compact the subgrade to the plan elevation adjust the contact surface the necessary amount .
if the steering roller or wheel operates in tandem with the auxiliary wheel or roller it does not need to be height adjustable .
section num general specifications for base and subbase course num ensure that the auxiliary wheel or roller operates on the surface of the pavement adjacent to the area to be compacted and at a distance from the edge of the pavement that no damage occurs .
keep the height adjustment of the auxiliary wheel or roller such that the compression roller will develop a smooth compacted surface true to crown .
use gaspropelled trench rollers equipped with reversing smooth operating friction clutches .
ensure that friction clutches have smooth operating brakes of ample capacity .
use either handpowered or poweroperated steering devices .
the compression per inch num mm width of compression roller shall not be less than num lbs num kg and not greater than num lbs num kg .
if necessary use a hollow compression roller and secure the minimum weight with liquid ballast .
the trench roller must compact a minimum width of at least num in num mm .
fit rollers with adjustable spring scrapers that can scrape in both directions .
num .
steelwheel rollers use threewheel or tandem steelwheel rollers .
use selfpropelled rollers equipped with cleaning devices to prevent material from adhering to the wheels .
for base or subbase materials use numwheel rollers on base or subbase materials that have a minimum weight of num tons num mg and a minimum compression of num pounds per inch num kgnum mm of width for the rear wheels .
use steel wheel tandem rollers with a minimum weight of num tons num mg and a minimum compression of num pounds per inch num kgnum mm of width for the rear drum .
num .
pneumatictire rollers use pneumatictire rollers with a minimum contact pressure of num psi num kpa per wheel .
equip rollers to uniformly distribute the load between all wheels .
use multiple axle multiple wheel rollers with wheels staggered on the axles and spaces between each wheel to provide uniform compaction for the full compacting width of roller .
ensure that the air pressure of any tire does not vary more than num psi num kpa from the established pressure .
operate rollers between num mph num kph and num mph num kph unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
num .
sheepsfoot rollers use vibratory or static compaction sheepsfoot rollers of sufficient size and weight to obtain the desired compaction .
f. vibratory rollers use an approved vibratory roller designed to activate the frequency of vibration and the roller movement separately .
ensure that the weight and amplitude of the roller can compact the surface to specifications with a minimum number of passes .
g. bituminous sampling valve use bituminous transfer pumps that include a valve for sampling bituminous materials .
h. fine grading machine specifications for the fine grading machine are included in either a special provision or a supplemental specification in the proposal or in the current supplemental specification book .
num preparation a. alternate methods when alternate methods of construction are provided without restriction the contractor may select these alternate methods at will provided the equipment and organization are suited to the method selected .
before starting construction discuss the proposed method with the engineer .
the method selected must spread base or subbase material uniformly without damaging the subgrade subbase or the material being placed section num general specifications for base and subbase course num mix the materials until they are homogeneous use the specified water and cement or bitumen content compact throughout the depth of the course to the density specified complete the work within the specified time limits organize the work and equipment so that spreading compacting and finishing the base or subbase is a continuous operation .
do not exceed minimum or maximum time limits where the detailed specifications require them except in unusual cases where permitted by the engineer .
b .
preparing the pit site remove grass weeds roots and other debris from local materials pits .
adhere to the requirements of subsection num environmental considerations when performing this work .
include the cost in the prices bid for the pertinent pay items .
this work is not considered as clearing and grubbing .
c. preparing the subgrade if the subgrade does not meet the requirements of section num for surface compaction and stability repair all defective portions until it meets the requirements of that section .
remove unsuitable materials and replace with acceptable material if necessary .
compact the subgrade as specified in section num .
have enough prepared subgrade meeting the requirements of section num for at least one day of base construction before beginning work .
d. preparing the subbase if a subbase is required prepare it according to the requirements for surface and compaction .
ensure that it is stable enough to support the equipment that will place the base material without rutting or pumping .
repair all defective portions and replace any unsuitable material with acceptable material if the subbase does not meet the requirements of the specifications .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
draining and leaving materials pits keep materials pits well drained while materials are being removed from them .
after removing materials leave pits in the condition required by section num and section num .
b .
mining and mixing in a pit mine all local materials pits within the pit boundaries and grid depths established by the engineer .
mine all materials from top to bottom .
mix materials in the pit before hauling to the roadbed or plant .
place materials in windrows or stockpiles with a dragline or backhoe .
blend the gradation and moisture strata from each pit to a uniform mixture .
when a rim ditch is required and its depth exceeds the specified grid depth of soilcement material include only the material above the grid depth as base material .
use this material for the windrow or stockpile of material to be used for soilcement base unless the engineer determines that belowthegrid material is satisfactory .
only use ladder pans and scrapers for stockpiling and windrowing in pits that are less than num in num mm deep .
after the preliminary mixing prevent the coarse materials from segregating from the fine materials with loading equipment that continues to blend the material .
section num general specifications for base and subbase course num c. placing materials num .
mixture control the engineer will determine the proportions of the materials to be used in compounding the base or subbase .
the engineer will determine the analysis basis of the components .
change the mix if required by the engineer to ensure that the finished base meets the requirements of these specifications .
num .
moisture control control the moisture content according to the specified requirements for each type of base or subbase .
add water uniformly allow it to evaporate or aerate and roll the materials as often as necessary to control the moisture content within the limits specified .
num .
number of courses because the maximum thickness of base or subbase materials to be mixed or spread in one course varies with the equipment used it is subject to the engineers approval .
ensure that the thickness meets the requirements of subsection num.c.num compaction .
num .
widening work ensure that widening work conforms to section num .
when widening in traffic areas excavate an area that can be completed in the same day .
when widening pavement on which there is traffic on both sides stagger operations to keep the widening trench open in one lane of traffic at a time .
num .
compaction compact the entire thickness of all bases and subbases to the specified maximum dry weight per cubic foot meter as determined by the method specified in the section for each base or subbase .
if any base or subbase is more than num in num mm thick construct according to the following table for layer thickness material layer thickness topsoil sandclay or chert two equal layers or one layer not to exceed num in num mm graded aggregate two equal layers or one layer not to exceed num in num mm cement stabilized graded aggregate two equal layers or one layer not to exceed num in num mm cement stabilized soil aggregate two equal layers or one layer not to exceed num in num mm sand bituminous two equal layers or one layer not to exceed num in num mm soilcement one layer not to exceed num in num mm d. meeting surface requirements produce a smooth uniform surface that complies with these specifications .
rebuild any areas that do not meet the requirements or remove or add material to the area until the engineer approves of the work .
num quality acceptance a .
monitoring quality control ensure that the mixture and the materials used meet the following quality controls before producing any mixture for the project calibrate the electronic sensors devices or settings for proportioning all mixture ingredients by scale weight .
calibrate in the presence of the engineer the proportioning of every ingredient for all rates of production .
section num general specifications for base and subbase course num maintain a dated written record of the most recent calibration .
post the calibration at the base plant and make the record available for the engineers inspection at all times .
format records as graphs tables charts or mechanically prepared data .
if the material changes the rate of production changes by more than num the plant is not producing base material for more than two weeks or if a component affecting the ingredient proportions has been repaired replaced or adjusted check and recalibrate the proportions .
verify the moisture of the mixture being produced .
perform checks on ingredient proportioning and verify truck weight as directed by the engineer .
provide quality control personnel and all necessary equipment to perform and document moisture tests .
perform moisture tests at a frequency of at least one test per hour of base plant production .
b .
repairing defects during construction if materials that do not meet these specifications are placed on the roadway at any time during construction remove and replace them with acceptable materials as a part of the pay item for the base or subbase being constructed .
after construction promptly correct defects discovered in the surface finish thickness or compaction of the completed base or subbase before the work is accepted .
if the base subbase or shoulders are deficient in thickness and it is determined that the subgrade elevation is high remove the materials lower the subgrade and reconstruct the course according to these specifications at no cost to the department .
if job conditions permit and the engineer mandates correct areas deficient in thickness by raising the elevation of the surface or adding material to the course .
in other cases the engineer may determine that the defective portions must be entirely removed .
add mix spread and compact new material according to the specifications and at no cost to the department .
if a surface is less than num in num mm deep scarify the area to a depth of at least num in num mm except in the case of stabilized bases or subbases .
mix and compact the new and old materials .
repair stabilized bases or subbases according to section num section num section num or section num whichever is applicable .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement base and subbase courses will be measured in accordance with the specification section for the item .
bituminous prime will not be measured for separate payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment base and subbase courses will be paid for in accordance with the specification section for the item .
include the cost of furnishing and applying bituminous prime in the unit price bid for each individual base item according to the applicable provisions of section num .
no separate payment will be made for adding water or for aerating or rolling for the purpose of adding water .
include the cost of controlling moisture content in the prices bid for the pertinent pay items .
separate payment will be made only for clearing and grubbing listed in the proposal or required in the plans and designated a pay item by the engineer .
no separate payment will be made for stripping excavation unless shown on the plans and included in the proposal as a pay item .
section num general specifications for base and subbase course num num adjustments if the contractor for the subbase or base is responsible for the subgrade under another pay item no additional payment will be made for any repairs made to the subgrade except as provided in section num .
if another party not the contractor is responsible for the subgrade removing unsuitable materials will be paid for according to the earthwork item in the contract .
include compaction scarification and any other preparation necessary for the subgrade in the unit price bid for the pertinent base course .
section numsoilcement construction num general description this work includes constructing a base subbase or shoulder course composed of soil or a mixture of soils and stabilizing with portland cement .
construct according to these specifications and conform to the lines grades and typical sections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
the provisions in section num apply to this item .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numroadway excavation section numgeneral specifications for base and subbase courses section numbituminous prime section numsoil base materials section numcutback asphalt section numportland cement section numadmixtures section numwater b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num aashto t num section numsoilcement construction num num submittals before constructing a test section submit a construction work plan to the engineer for approval .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material specification soilcement material subsection num portland cement subsection num water subsection num fly ash and slag subsection num cutback asphalt rcnum rcnum rcnum or mcnum mcnum mcnum subsection num blotter material sand subsection num.g.num when fly ash or slag is specified as a mixture in the soilcement base use fly ash or slag that meets the physical requirements of subsection num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements a .
general num .
methods this specification is based on the mixedinplace and central plant mix methods .
supplement inplace or plant mixing with plow harrow or blade mixing when the engineer permits .
when the plans and proposal indicate that the material will be paid by the ton megagram use the central plant mixing method .
if the work will be paid by the square yard meter the plans and proposal will indicate the required thickness and the mixing method to be used .
when payment is made by the square yard meter and a roadway mixer is used the engineer will determine if the materials in the roadbed are suitable for use .
if the engineer approves use materials in the roadbed without payment except for the payment per cubic yard meter provided in subsection num.a soilcement material below .
if it is necessary to add other materials to those in the roadbed to meet the desired thickness or to modify the physical properties of the existing materials these materials will be measured and paid by the cubic yard meter .
num .
fly ash and slag unless otherwise specified in the contract fly ash and slag shall be used only in central plant mix construction .
apply fly ash and slag to the mix according to the procedures for cement established in subsection num.a central mix plants and subsection num.a.num cement .
num .
weather limitations ensure the following mix and place cementtreated base or subbase only when the weather permits the course to be finished without interruption in the time specified .
mix and place materials only when the moisture content of the soil to be used in the mixture meets the limits specified in this subsection .
begin mixing only when the air temperature is above num f num c in the shade and rising .
section numsoilcement construction num ensure that the temperature of the soil to be used in the mixture and the subbase or subgrade is above num f num c. num .
interruption of work if the work is interrupted for more than two hours after cement has been added or if rain increases the cements moisture content outside the limits specified in subsection num.b.num.c moisture control remove and replace the affected portion at no additional cost to the department .
num personnel ensure that only experienced and capable personnel operate equipment .
num equipment use equipment that meets the requirements of subsection num and this subsection .
the engineer will approve equipment type and condition before construction begins .
provide sufficient equipment in good working condition to do the following allow continuous prosecution of the work .
mix place and compact within the required time limits .
use any applicable equipment specified in subsection num equipment for bituminous prime .
num preparation a. subgrade or subbase preparation prepare the subgrade or subbase as specified in subsection num.c preparing the subgrade or subsection num.d preparing the subbase if the base subbase or shoulders will be composed entirely of new materials whether mixedin place or central plant mixed .
in addition to the above requirements ensure that subgrade material used underneath soilcement base meets the sulfates and ph requirements of subsection num.a .
place materials only on dry thawed subgrade or subbase .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. inplace mixing num .
soil if additional soil is needed on the roadbed place and spread the soil uniformly to the proper depth to obtain the specified thickness .
num .
pulverization pulverize the roadbed materials as follows a .
loosen and pulverize roadbed materials to the width and depth to be stabilized without disturbing or damaging the underlying subgrade .
b .
continue pulverizing until num percent of roadbed material passes through a num in num mm sieve and until at least num percent of the soil excluding any stone or gravel passes through a no .
num num mm sieve .
c. add water to assist pulverization if necessary .
d. remove all roots sod and rocks that exceed num in num mm in diameter .
e. remove all other harmful materials .
num .
moisture adjustments immediately before spreading cement adjust the moisture content of the inplace material so it will stabilize to within num to num percent of optimum moisture amount of moisture in the mixture at maximum dry density .
section numsoilcement construction num num .
cement spread cement as follows a .
uniformly spread the required amount of portland cement with a cyclonetype mechanical spreader or its equivalent .
b .
apply the portland cement at a rate that ensures the pounds spread are within num percent of the amount specified .
furnish a squareyard cloth scales and personnel for checking the spread rate of cement placed .
c. apply cement on soils with a moisture content less than num percent of optimum .
d. apply cement on days when wind will not interfere with spreading .
e. if the cement content is below the num percent limit in the mixing area add additional cement to bring the affected area within the tolerance specified and recalibrate the mechanical spreaders spread rate .
if the cement content is more than the num percent limit in the mixing area the excess quantity will be deducted from the contractors pay for cement .
f. regulate operations to limit the application of cement to sections small enough so that all of the compacting and finishing operations specified in subsection num.b.num compacting and finishing can be completed within the required time limits .
g. pass only spreading and mixing equipment over the spread cement .
operate this equipment so that it does not displace cement .
h. replace damaged cement at no additional cost the department when damage is caused by hydration due to rain before or during mixing operations spreading procedures contrary to the requirements mentioned above displacement by the contractors equipment or other traffic num .
mixing mix the material as follows a .
uniformly windrow the material if the mixing plant requires it .
otherwise shape the material to the proper line grade and crosssection before mixing .
b .
mix the material according to either roadmix method in subsection num.a.num road methods .
c. begin mixing as soon as practical after the cement is spread and continue until a homogeneous and uniform mixture is produced .
if the equipment does not produce a homogeneous and uniform mixture meeting these specifications make any necessary changes to meet the engineers requirements .
num .
road methods a .
multiple pass mixing perform multiple pass mixing as follows num after spreading the cement mix it with the material to be treated .
num ensure that the material has been adjusted for moisture as stated in subsection num.b.num.c moisture control .
num continue mixing with successive passes until a uniform mixture of cement and soil or soilaggregate is obtained .
num immediately after the preliminary mixing of cement and soil or soilaggregate add water as needed to maintain or bring the mixture to within the moisture requirements of subsection num.b.num.c moisture control .
num uniformly mix the additional water to incorporate it into the full depth of the mixture .
b .
traveling plant mixing section numsoilcement construction num perform traveling plant mixing as follows num after spreading the cement mix it with an approved traveling plant mixer .
num ensure that the mixer picks up the full depth of material from the windrow on the roadbed onto the bottom shell or pan .
num mix at a speed that ensures a uniform mixture of soil cement and water .
num apply water through a watermetering device on the plant to uniformly distribute the proper amount of water to the loose material on the shell or pan .
distribute the water so that cement balls do not form .
num continue to mix the cement and water so that all material to be treated is mixed at once .
num ensure that there is enough mixture to produce after final compaction a course within allowable tolerances .
num .
compacting and finishing compact and finish according to subsection num.b.num compacting and finishing .
b .
central plant mixing num .
soil do the following a .
before introducing any soil into the mixer pulverize it until num percent passes a num num in num mm sieve .
b .
ensure that at least num percent of the soil excluding any stone or gravel passes through a no .
num num mm sieve .
c. have enough stockpile material meeting the requirements of subsection num.b mining and mixing in a pit for at least one day of base construction before operations begin .
num .
cement do the following a .
measure cement by weight .
uniformly add cement into the mixture .
the cement incorporated per ton megagram of soil shall be within num percent of the amount prescribed by the engineer .
b .
perform cement checks that compare the actual percent cement in the mixture with the required percent cement specified in the approved mix design for the project on each of the first two tankers supplying cement to the plant .
if these checks are within the specified tolerance one cement check per day will be required .
c. perform and make available to the engineer a minimum of four daily comparison checks between the certified scales and the plant computer to ensure the proper percentage of cement is being incorporated into the mixture between cement checks .
d. when a cement check is out of the specified tolerance at least two passing onetanker checks are required before returning to a one cement check per day basis .
when three consecutive cement checks fail to meet the specified tolerance discontinue soilcement plant production .
correct the problem and recalibrate the plant as specified in subsection num.a monitoring quality control before resuming the work .
e. when the cement content exceeds the specified tolerance the department will deduct the excess cement from the contractors pay for cement .
when the cement content does not meet the specified tolerance the engineer will evaluate the strength of the affected area after num days .
f. correct any areas of base with deficient strength as specified in the strength correction chart at no additional cost to the department regardless of the percent of compaction .
this correction also applies to the test section described in subsection num.b.num.a test section .
g. quantities of cement used in calibrating the plant will also be deducted from the contractors pay for cement .
num .
mixing section numsoilcement construction num do the following a .
measure proportions of soil cement and water separately and accurately before mixing .
b .
charge all materials into the mixer together .
begin mixing immediately .
c. mix until a homogeneous and uniform mixture is produced .
if the final blend of materials is not homogeneously mixed or does not meet the moisture range specified in subsection num.b.num.c moisture control cease plant operations until corrections are made in the plant or to the materials .
num .
hauling do the following a .
deliver soilcement material to the project .
b .
spread soilcement material so that compaction can begin within num minutes after the soil cement and water have been charged into the mixer .
c. protect the mixture in transit by using a securely fastened waterproof cover large enough to extend down over the sides and the end of the bed of each haul vehicle .
num .
spreading spread the soilcement mixture as follows a .
use an approved mixture spreader as specified in subsection num.d mixture spreader to obtain the specified thickness .
spread the mixture the full width of the area to be covered .
b .
ensure that trucks and other construction equipment including motor graders do not travel over the material until compaction equipment has made initial passes over the mixture .
c. ensure that less than num minutes elapse between the placement of cementtreated material in adjacent lanes at any location unless longitudinal joints are specified .
num .
thickness of course compact the soilcement base to a maximum thickness of num in num mm .
place the full thickness in one course only and compact as specified in subsection num.b.num compacting and finishing below .
num .
compacting and finishing a .
test section construct a test section as follows num use the first section of each constructed soilcement base course as a test section .
num use a test section between num ft num m and num ft num m long for the designated width .
num before constructing a test section submit a construction work plan to the engineer for approval .
the construction work plan must indicate proposed equipment and compaction procedures .
num if the construction work plan is approved the engineer will evaluate the work plan during test section construction .
the engineer will evaluate compaction moisture homogeneity of mixture thickness of course and laminations or compaction planes scabbing .
num if the engineer determines that the work plan is not satisfactory revise the compaction procedure and augment or replace equipment as necessary to complete work according to the specifications .
b .
time limits observe the following time limits num begin compaction within num minutes of the time water is added to the soilcement mixture .
num complete compaction within num hours .
num complete all operations in four hours from adding cement to finishing the surface .
section numsoilcement construction num c. moisture control control moisture as follows num during compaction ensure a uniform moisture content of the mixture that is between num and num percent of the optimum moisture content .
num if the moisture content exceeds the tolerance at any time cease operations immediately and make the adjustments necessary to bring the moisture content within tolerance .
num do not use materials that pump under construction traffic regardless of moisture content .
d. additional compaction requirements perform the following additional compaction requirements num compact the soilcement base subbase or shoulder course to at least num percent of the maximum dry density as determined in this subsection .
num do not perform vibratory compaction on materials more than num hours old measured from the time the cement was added to the mixture .
num uniformly compact the mixture and then finegrade the surface to the line grade and crosssection shown on the plans .
num loosened material accumulated during this process is considered waste and is to be removed from the project .
do not use additional layers of cementtreated materials in order to conform to crosssectional or grade requirements .
num use a pneumatictired roller to roll the finished surface until the surface is smooth closely knit free from cracks and in conformance with the proper line grade and crosssection .
if the engineer requires lightly apply water to the finished surface to aid in sealing the completed base and preparing the surface for priming .
num at any place inaccessible to the roller secure the required compaction with mechanical tampers approved by the engineer .
the same compaction requirements stated in the above subsection apply .
e. additional finishing requirements perform the following additional finishing requirements num use the automatically controlled screed equipment when required by subsection num.h fine grading machine of the specifications .
control finegrading for this requirement with sensing wires or a taut stringline .
furnish install and maintain this operation as a part of this pay item .
when automatically controlled screed equipment is not required finegrading with motor graders is permitted .
num finegrade the surface of the cementstabilized subbase for portland cement concrete pavement or the cementstabilized base for asphaltic concrete pavement .
num finegrade immediately after placement and compaction .
roll the subbase again according to this subsection .
num .
construction joints form construction joints as follows a .
form a straight transverse joint at the end of each days construction or when the work is interrupted so that the material can not be compacted within the time limit specified in this subsection .
b .
create the straight transverse joint by cutting back into the completed work to form a true vertical face free of loose or shattered material .
c. form the joint at least num ft num mm from the point at which the strikeoff plate of the spreader comes to rest at the end of the days work or at the point of interruption .
section numsoilcement construction num d. form a longitudinal joint as described above if the soilcement mixture is placed over a large area where it is impractical to complete the full width during one days work .
use the procedure for forming a straight transverse joint .
ensure that waste material is removed from the compacted base .
num .
prime apply bituminous prime to the finished surface of the base course at the end of each day or as soon as the engineer determines it is practical .
apply prime only to an entirely moist surface .
if weather delays prime application apply prime as soon as the surface moisture is adequate .
apply prime according to section num .
num .
opening to traffic no traffic or equipment is permitted to operate on the finished base subbase or shoulders until the prime has hardened enough so that it does not pick up under traffic .
for the first seven days after priming traffic is restricted to lightweight vehicles such as passenger cars and pickup trucks .
vehicles with an average axle load exceeding num pounds num mg will not be allowed on the finished base or subbase at any time .
correct any failures caused by traffic at no additional cost to the department .
num .
protection of course maintain the base subbase or shoulder course constructed under these specifications until the engineer determines that it has sufficiently cured and is ready to be covered with the next base or pavement course .
make repairs specified in subsection num.b repairing defects whenever defects appear .
this preservation action does not relieve the contractor of his responsibility to maintain the work until final acceptance as specified in section num .
num quality acceptance a. compaction tests test compaction as follows num .
determine the maximum dry density for central plant mix construction from representative samples of the material to be compacted according to gdtnum aashto t num .
num .
determine the maximum dry density for mixedinplace construction according to gdt num or gdt num .
num .
determine the inplace density of the cementstabilized base subbase or shoulders as soon as possible after compaction but before the cement sets .
determine inplace density according to gdt num gdt num or gdt num .
b .
finished surface tests test the finished surface as follows num .
check the finished surface of the cement stabilized base subbase or shoulder course transversely .
num .
place a num ft num m straightedge parallel to the centerline .
additionally use one of the following tools a template cut true to the required crosssection and set with a spirit level on nonsuperelevated sections a system of ordinates measured from a stringline a surveyors level num .
ensure that ordinates measured from the bottom of the template stringline or straightedge to the surface do not exceed num in num mm at any point .
rod readings shall not deviate more than num foot num mm from the required readings .
num .
correct any variations from requirements immediately as specified in subsection num.d .
c. tolerances num .
thickness measurements section numsoilcement construction num a. thickness requirements apply to shoulder construction where the plans specify a uniform thickness or where the shoulders will be surfaced .
do the following b .
determine the thickness of the base subbase or shoulder course by making as many checks as necessary to determine the average thickness .
num .
deficient thickness a .
if any measurement is deficient in thickness more than num in num mm make additional measurements to determine the deficient area .
b .
correct any area deficient by more than num in num mm to the design thickness by using one of the following methods according to these specifications apply asphaltic concrete num mm superpave .
remove material to the full depth of the course and reconstruct to the required thickness .
no payment will be made for any num mm superpave asphaltic concrete applied to correct deficiencies nor will payment be made for removing and reconstructing the deficient work .
num .
average thickness average thickness is measured as follows a .
the average thickness per linear mile kilometer is determined from all measurements within the mile kilometer increments .
b .
the average thickness shall not exceed the specified thickness by more than num in num mm .
if the unit of payment is by the ton megagram or cubic yard meter and the average thickness for any mile kilometer increment exceeds the allowable num in num mm tolerance payment for the excess quantity in that increment will be deducted .
c. the excess quantity is calculated by multiplying the average thickness that exceeds the allowable num in num mm tolerance by the surface area of the base subbase or shoulder as applicable .
num .
strength do the following a .
ensure that the strength of the soilcement base subbase or shoulder course is at least num psi num kpa as determined from testing the unconfined compressive strength of cores from the completed course in accordance with gdt num. b .
if a strength test falls below num psi num kpa do the following num isolate the affected area by securing additional cores .
num average all compressive strengths in the affected area to determine the basis for corrective work according to the table below or the engineers directions .
num .
compaction the compaction requirement for soilcement base subbase or shoulder course shall be a minimum of num percent of the specified theoretical density .
if any compaction test falls below num percent core and retest the represented area for compressive strength determination after num days .
if the strength is num psi num kpa or greater no correction will be required .
if the strength is less than num psi num kpa isolate the affected area by obtaining additional cores .
average all compressive strengths in the affected area to determine the basis for corrective work according to the following table .
section numsoilcement construction num compressive strength correction work num psi num kpa or greater none num psi num kpa to num psi num kpa num in num in num mm num mm baseadd num lbsyd² num kgm² asphaltic concrete less than num psi num kpa reconstruct affected area ensure that a corrected area requiring asphaltic concrete is at least num ft num m long .
perform corrective work requiring asphaltic concrete or reconstruction at no additional cost to the department .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. soilcement material soilcement material is measured by the cubic yard meter loose volume as specified in section num during mixedin place construction if it is necessary to add materials to the roadbed or to build up the base subbase or shoulders with new material .
b. soilcement stabilized base subbase and shoulder course soilcement stabilized base subbase and shoulder course are measured as follows num .
the surface length is measured along the centerline when payment is specified by the square yard meter .
the width is specified on the plans .
a. irregular areas such as turnouts and intersections are measured by the square yard meter .
b .
material is measured in tons megagrams as mixed and accepted when payment is specified by the ton megagram .
the actual weight is determined by weighing each loaded vehicle on a required motor truck scale as the material is hauled to the roadway .
the actual weight will be the pay weight no deduction will be made for the weight of the cement .
c. portland cement portland cement is measured by the ton megagram .
d. fly ash and slag fly ash and slag are measured by the ton megagram according to this specification .
e. prime bituminous prime is not measured for separate payment .
include the cost of furnishing and applying bituminous prime according to the provisions of section num in the unit price bid for each individual base item .
f. unsuitable material unsuitable materials that have been removed are measured and paid for according to the earthwork item in the contract .
num limits general provisions num through num .
section numsoilcement construction num num payment a. soilcement material where inplace mixing is done and when it is necessary to add other materials to those in the roadbed or to build up the base subbase and shoulders entirely with new materials the added soilcement material in place and accepted will be paid at the contract price per cubic yard meter .
payment will be full compensation for soilcement material mixing in the pit loading hauling and unloading and spreading b. soilcement stabilized base subbase and shoulder course where specified soilcement stabilized base subbase and shoulder course in place and accepted will be paid at the contract price per square yard meter .
payment will be full compensation for roadbed preparation mixing on the road shaping pulverizing watering compaction defect repair and maintenance .
c. premixed soilcement stabilized base subbase and shoulder course where specified premixed soilcement stabilized base subbase and shoulder course in place and accepted will be paid at the contract price per ton megagram or square yard meter .
payment will be full compensation for roadbed preparation all materials except portland cement loading hauling and unloading mixing spreading watering rolling and shaping and maintenance .
d. portland cement portland cement will be paid at the contract price per ton megagram .
payment is full compensation for furnishing hauling and applying the material .
only portland cement incorporated in the finished course will be paid no payment will be made for cement used to correct defects due to the contractors negligence faulty equipment or plant calibration error .
e. fly ash and slag fly ash and slag will be paid at the contract price per ton megagram according to this subsection .
payment will be full compensation for hauling and applying the materials .
only fly ash and slag incorporated into the finished course will be paid no payment will be made for fly ash and slag used to correct defects due to the contractors negligence faulty equipment or plant calibration error .
payment will be made under item no .
num soilcement materialincluding material and haul per cubic yard meter item no .
num soilcement stabilized base subbase and shoulder course ___in mm per square yard meter item no .
num premixed soilcement stabilized base subbase and shoulder courseincluding material and haul per ton megagram or per square yard meter item no .
num premixed soilcement stabilized base and shoulder courseincluding material and haul per ton megagram or per square yard meter item no .
num portland cement per ton megagram item no .
num fly ash and slag per ton megagram num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numsandbituminous stabilized base course num general description this work includes constructing a base course composed of sand or a mixture of sands that is stabilized with bituminous materials .
construct the base course according to these specifications and to the lines grades and typical crosssections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
all of the provisions of section num apply to this item .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of work section nummeasurement and payment section numgeneral specifications for base and subbase courses section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction section numbituminous prime section numsoil base materials section numcutback asphalt section numemulsified asphalt section numcutback asphalt emulsion b. referenced documents aashto t num astm d num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material specification sand for bituminous base subsection num rcnum subsection num bituminous prime subsection num section numsandbituminous stabilized base course num material specification cutback asphalt rcnum rcnum rcnum or mcnum mcnum mcnum emulsified asphalt eapnum subsection num cutback asphalt emulsion cbaenum subsection num blotter materials sand subsection num.g.num produce a sandbituminous mixture with a resistance to plastic flow of num lbs num kg minimum when tested according to astm num .
produce a sandbituminous mixture with a maximum num percent numday absorption when tested according to gdt num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements a .
general num .
methods use the central plant mixing method when the sandbituminous stabilized base course is to be paid for by the ton megagram .
mix spread and compact the material according to section num with the following exceptions no test strip is required .
the compaction acceptance schedule does not apply .
use either the central plant or traveling plant mixing method when the sandbituminous stabilized base course is to be paid for by the square yard meter .
use the central plant mixing method when the sandbituminous stabilized base course is used for widening in addition to the use of suitable special rollers for compaction .
use plow and harrow mixing only for aeration according to subsection num.d.num preparing mixture for compaction .
num .
temperature limitations do not apply bituminous materials when the air temperature is less than num of num oc in the shade nor when the temperature of either the subgrade subbase or soil to be used in the mixture is below num of num oc .
num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment provide all necessary equipment in satisfactory condition on the project before work commences .
use applicable equipment specified in subsection num equipment for bituminous prime .
num preparation when constructing the base from new materials prepare the subgrade or subbase as specified in subsection num.c preparing the subgrade .
or subsection num.d preparing the subbase prepare the subgrade or subbase by scarifying a minimum of num ft num mm on each side of the plan width and to the depth of material when the engineer determines that any existing roadbed materials are suitable for mixedinplace base construction .
blend new materials with the prepared roadbed thoroughly before adding bituminous material .
section numsandbituminous stabilized base course num num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
process num .
inplace mixing a .
the engineer will determine the suitability of existing roadbed materials for inclusion in the base course .
b .
remove all roots sod or rock more than num in num mm in diameter and all other harmful materials from the roadbed during processing .
c. place additional new soil sand on the roadbed and spread it uniformly to the proper depth to obtain the plan thickness of the compacted base course .
place materials only on dry unfrozen subgrade or subbase .
d. loosen and pulverize the material to be stabilized without disturbing or damaging the underlying subgrade or subbase .
add water as needed to assist pulverization .
num percent of material shall pass the num in num mm sieve .
a minimum of num percent of the soil exclusive of stones or gravel shall pass the no .
num num mm sieve .
e. provide moisture content between num and num percent by weight of the soil before adding the bituminous material .
the moisture content shall be adjusted under the engineers direction .
num add water at the mixer using accurate gauging devices .
num ensure that the moisture is uniformly distributed .
f. shape the material to obtain the grade and cross section required in the plans .
windrow the material uniformly only if the mixing plant operation requires .
g. uniformly apply the bituminous material after adjusting the moisture content and shaping has been completed .
h. apply the bituminous material only as temperatures allow per the following table .
minimum maximum rcnum cutback asphalt num f num c num f num c i .
mix the sandbituminous mixture in successive sections so that the roadway can be compacted full width in one operation .
ensure that a uniform mixture is produced .
num .
central plant mixing method a .
thoroughly pulverize material so that num percent will pass through a num in num mm sieve and at least num percent of the soil excluding any stone or gravel will pass through a no .
num num mm sieve .
b .
adjust the moisture content of the pulverized base material according to subsection num.a.num.d .
c. mix as follows num proportion the sandbituminous material and water separately .
num charge all materials into the mixer together and mix immediately .
d. mix until a uniform mixture is produced .
e. ensure that the temperature of the bituminous material is between num f num c and num f num c for mixing .
f. spread the sandbituminous mixture to the proper depth to obtain the thickness required on the plans of the finished base course .
use an approved spreader .
place sandbituminous material only on a dry subgrade or subbase .
section numsandbituminous stabilized base course num b .
quantity of bituminous material the engineer will determine the quantity of bituminous material required .
apply the bituminous material uniformly using an amount within num percent of the required quantity .
if bituminous material is applied at a rate more than num percent in excess of the required amount and it is considered detrimental remove and reconstruct the section .
if the application rate is more than num percent and the material is left in place no payment will be made for bituminous material in excess of the num percent tolerance .
correct any shortage of bituminous material more than num percent less than the required amount by applying additional bituminous material .
the cost of reapplying remixing and compacting will be included in this pay item at no additional cost to the department .
c. extent of application limit the application of the bituminous material so that aeration and compaction can begin immediately after mixing .
d. mixing num .
preparing mixture for compaction a .
shape the base to line grade and crosssection indicated in the plans .
b. aerate the mixture as follows num begin aeration as soon as the prepared base is long enough to permit the operation of aeration equipment .
num loosen and turn the mixture with harrows blades or the equivalent until the volatile solvents and water evaporate and the mixture is tacky .
c. if rain threatens the work roll the surface enough to exclude as much rainwater as possible .
resume aeration as soon as weather permits .
num .
thickness of courses a .
spread the base as follows num spread to a maximum compacted lift thickness of num in num mm .
num lay the maximum lift thickness for which the specified compaction is obtained otherwise lay the base in more than one course .
e. compacting and finishing compact as soon as the condition of the material and the weather permit .
bring the base to line grade and cross section .
roll until the full depth of the course is compacted to num percent of the maximum dry density of the sand without bituminous material .
num .
singlecourse construction after the base has been compacted do the following a .
shape the course to line grade and crosssection again .
b .
roll the surface with a pneumatictired roller followed by a steelwheel roller to seal the surface .
begin at the edges and work toward the center until the surface is smooth closely knit free from cracks and in conformance with the proper line grade and cross section .
c. correct any defects specified in subsection num.b repairing defects .
num .
multiplecourse construction after compacting the first course do the following a .
shape the surface again to line grade and cross section .
b .
spread and compact the second and succeeding courses as previously described .
c. finish the surface according to the procedure specified for singlecourse construction above .
num .
compact irregular areas section numsandbituminous stabilized base course num compact irregular areas inaccessible to a roller by using mechanical tampers approved by the engineer .
density requirements are unchanged from above .
f. prime coat apply bituminous prime according to section num .
g. preservation of base maintain the base in a smooth and acceptable condition until it is covered by other construction .
num .
make repairs to any defects as specified in subsection num.b repairing defects .
num .
preserving the base as specified does not relieve the contractor of the general duty to maintain the work until it is accepted as specified in section num .
num quality acceptance a. compaction tests test compaction as follows num .
determine the maximum dry density from representative samples of the material before adding the bituminous material by gdt num or gdt num .
num .
determine the inplace density of the base according to aashto t num or gdt num b .
finished surface tests check the finished surface of the base subbase or shoulder course as follows num .
check the longitudinal surface using a num ft num m straightedge parallel to the centerline .
num .
check the transverse surface by using one of the following tools a .
a template cut true to the required cross section and set with a spirit level on nonsuperelevated sections b .
a system of ordinates measured from a stringline c. a surveyors level num .
ensure that ordinates measured from the bottom of the template stringline or straightedge to the surface do not exceed num in num mm at any point .
rod readings shall not deviate more than num ft num mm from required readings .
num .
correct any variations from these requirements immediately according to subsection num.b repairing defects .
c. thickness tolerances num .
thickness measurements determine the thickness of the base subbase or shoulder course by making as many checks as necessary to determine the average thickness .
num .
deficient thickness a .
if any measurement is deficient in thickness more than num in num mm make additional measurements to determine the deficient area .
b .
correct any area deficient between num in num mm and num in num mm to the design thickness by using one of the following methods according to these specifications apply asphaltic concrete num mm superpave .
leave in place and accept payment for the materials and area if the course is mixed in place at ½ the contract unit price for the deficient area .
c. correct any area deficient in thickness by more than num inch num mm by applying asphaltic concrete num mm superpave or removing the material to the full depth of the course and reconstructing to the required thickness in accordance with these specifications .
section numsandbituminous stabilized base course num d. if payment is made by the cubic yard meter or ton megagram payment for asphaltic concrete num mm superpave to correct deficiencies will be made at the contract unit price that applies to the course needing correction .
payment for additional material used in reconstructing an area will be made at the contract unit price but the removed material removed will be deducted from payment .
e. if payment is made by the square yard meter no payment will be made for additional material required to correct deficiencies or reconstructing deficient work .
num .
average thickness average thickness is measured as follows a .
the average thickness per linear mile kilometer is determined from all measurements within the mile kilometer increments except the areas deficient by more than num in num mm and not corrected .
b .
the average thickness shall not exceed the specified thickness by more than num in num mm .
c. if the basis of payment is per cubic yard meter or ton megagram and the average thickness for any mile kilometer increment exceeds the allowable num in num mm tolerance the excess quantity in that increment will be deducted from the contractors payments .
d. the excess quantity is calculated by multiplying the average thickness that exceeds the allowable num in num mm tolerance by the surface area of the base subbase or shoulder as applicable .
e. if the basis of payment is per square yard meter no deduction will be made for excess thickness .
num contractor and warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a .
sand bituminous stabilized base course materials when a mixedinplace construction method is used any additional materials necessary to add to the roadbed will be measured by loose volume in cubic yards meters of additional material added according to section num .
b .
sand bituminous stabilized base course when payment is by the square yard meter measure length along the centerline in feet meters and use the plan width to calculate area .
use actual dimensions of irregular areas placed to calculate the number of square yards .
when payment is by the ton megagram measure the actual weight of the sandbituminous mixture on approved scales .
c. bituminous materials measure bituminous materials incorporated into the mixture according to section num .
no separate measurement will be made for bituminous prime .
d. unsuitable material measure unsuitable material removed according to the earthwork item in the contract .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a .
base course material sand bituminous stabilized base course materials in place and accepted will be paid at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter which shall be full compensation for furnishing the material where specified in the pay item mixing the pit for all loading unloading spreading as here specified and for hauling where specified in the pay item .
section numsandbituminous stabilized base course num b. sandbituminous stabilized base course sandbituminous stabilized base course complete in place and accepted will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard meter which shall be full compensation for preparation of the roadbed for mixing on the road shaping pulverizing hauling watering compaction repair of all defects and maintenance c. sandbituminous stabilized base course premixed sandbituminous stabilized base course complete in place and accepted will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton megagram or per square yard meter which shall be full compensation for preparation of the roadbed for all materials except bituminous materials and for loading unloading all hauling mixing spreading watering rolling shaping and maintenance .
d. bituminous material the number of gallons liters of bituminous material except bituminous material in excess of the num tolerance and except that used as bituminous prime will be paid at the contract unit price per gallon liter complete and in place .
payment is full compensation for providing bituminous material hauling heating and applying the material .
e. unsuitable material removal of unsuitable material will be paid for according to the earthwork item in the contract .
payment will be made under item no .
num sandbituminous stabilized base course material including material and haul per cubic yard meter item no .
num sandbituminous stabilized base course material including haul per cubic yard meter item no .
num sandbituminous stabilized base course ___ inch mm per square yard meter item no .
num premixed sandbituminous stabilized base course including material per ton megagram or per square yard meter item no .
num bituminous materials per gallon liter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numtopsoil sandclay or chert construction num general description this work includes constructing a base subbase or shoulder course using topsoil sandclay or chert stabilized with aggregate where required .
construct according to these specifications and to the lines grades and typical crosssections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
all of the provisions of section num apply to this item .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
section numtopsoil sandclay or chert construction num num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numrandom clearing and grubbing section numroadway excavation section numborrow excavation section numgeneral specifications for base and subbase courses section num bituminous prime section numstabilizer aggregate section numsoil base materials section numcutback asphalt section num cutback asphalt emulsion b. referenced documents aashto t num and num gdt num gdt num gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section topsoil or sandclay num stabilizer aggregates type as specified num chert num cutback asphalt rcnum rcnum rcnum or mcnum mcnum mcnum num cutback asphalt emulsion cbaenum num blotter material sand num.g.num if an ingredient needs to be added to those naturally present in the roadbed or in any approved source of base subbase or shoulder material obtain it from sources approved by the engineer .
select sources according to the guidelines of section num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
section numtopsoil sandclay or chert construction num num equipment provide equipment in satisfactory condition for proper construction .
use any applicable equipment specified in subsection num equipment for bituminous prime .
num preparation if creating the base subbase or shoulder construction entirely with new materials prepare the subgrade or subbase as specified in subsection num.c preparing the subgrade or subsection num.d preparing the subbase .
do not place base materials on muddy or frozen subgrade or subbase .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. roadbed materials if the engineer determines roadbed materials are unsuitable for use remove and replace them with approved new materials .
if the engineer determines that roadbed materials are satisfactory mix shape and finish them according to the specifications .
b .
placing material mix and control the materials according to subsection num.b mining and mixing in a pit .
handle and place materials carefully to prevent fine and coarse materials from separating .
if placing only one kind of material on the prepared subgrade or subbase or adding only one kind of material to the roadbed to obtain the required mixture place the material directly on the prepared roadbed and distribute uniformly .
if mixing together materials from more than one outside source spread them in separate layers to the proper depth .
do this for each separate course if placing the base in more than one course .
if creating topsoil or sandclay from artificial mixtures place the proper proportions of the required ingredients on the roadbed and distribute uniformly .
use the following steps to spread mix and stabilize a base subbase or shoulder course .
num .
spreading spread material lengthwise up to num ft num m on the roadbed .
if the material is too wet to mix place additional material as the engineer requires .
mix as soon as the moisture content reaches the proper level .
num .
mixing mix the material by one of the following methods weather and moisture conditions permitting a. plowing harrowing and blading without disturbing the underlying subgrade or subbase plow the material to its full depth then harrow with a disc harrow .
begin plowing both at the edges and the center alternating back and forth as many times as necessary to produce a thoroughly pulverized and homogeneous mixture .
b .
traveling plant a traveling plant mixer may be used instead of the method described above .
num .
stabilizing after mixing and shaping the base subbase or shoulder course spread stabilizer aggregate if specified in the contract or the plans .
the quantity of stabilizer material required will be specified in poundssquare yard kilogramssquare meter of road surface covered .
the department reserves the right to increase decrease or eliminate stabilizer material .
section numtopsoil sandclay or chert construction num spread and mix stabilizer aggregate with either the upper num in num mm or to the full depth of the course as the plans indicate .
uniformly incorporate the stabilizer aggregate into the course .
remix and reshape all sections of the course as needed .
when using stabilized subgrade as a base course either permanently or temporarily for example as detours prime according to section num .
c. compacting and finishing use the following steps to compact and finish a base subbase or shoulder course .
num .
moisture content ensure that the moisture content is uniformly distributed and within num to num percent of optimum .
the engineer will determine the percentage within this range that is appropriate for each job .
num .
compaction if the base subbase or shoulder course is more than num in num mm thick compact it in two courses of equal thickness .
after placing and mixing the material roll it until the course is uniformly compacted to num percent of the maximum dry density .
complete all courses of any section of construction started in the same day weather permitting .
a. singlecourse construction num compact the surface by rolling beginning at least num ft num mm outside of its edges .
num proceed toward the center until the finished surface is smooth closely knit and conforms to the proper line grade and crosssection .
num correct any defects according to subsection num.b repairing defects .
b. multiplecourse construction num after compacting the first course shape the surface again to line grade and cross section .
num add water as necessary to develop the proper moisture content .
num spread and compact the second and any succeeding courses including stabilizer aggregate if required without rolling the first course again .
num finish the surface according to the procedure specified for subsection num.c.num.a singlecourse construction .
c. irregular areas in places inaccessible to the roller obtain the required compaction with mechanical tampers approved by the engineer .
apply the same density requirements as stated above .
d. protecting the base subbase or shoulders maintain the course true to grade and cross section .
until the course cures to the engineers satisfaction keep it free from ruts ridges and dust caused by traffic .
roll and add water as needed and repair defects as soon as they appear as specified in subsection num.b repairing defects .
e. priming the base after completing the base apply bituminous prime according to section num .
if the base is primed before base material classification test results are known repair and reprime any resulting defective areas at no additional cost to the department .
num quality acceptance a. compaction tests a .
the maximum dry density will be determined from representative samples of compacted material according to gdt num or aashto t num method d where applicable .
section numtopsoil sandclay or chert construction num b .
the engineer will determine the inplace density of finished courses according to aashtot num gdtnum or gdt num where applicable .
b .
finished surface a .
check the finished surface of the base subbase or shoulder course transversely .
check the surface by placing a num ft num m straightedge perpendicular to the centerline and also by using one of the following tools a template cut true to the required cross section and set with a spirit level on nonsuperelevated sections a system of ordinates measured from a stringline a surveyors level b .
ensure that ordinates measured from the bottom of the template stringline or straightedge to the surface do not exceed num in num mm at any point .
rod readings shall not deviate more than num foot num mm from the required readings .
c. correct any variations that exceed the requirements immediately as specified in subsection num.b repairing defects .
c. thickness tolerances num .
thickness measurements a. thickness requirements apply to shoulder construction where the plans specify a uniform thickness or where the shoulders will be surfaced .
b .
determine the thickness of the base subbase or shoulder course by making as many checks as necessary to determine the average thickness .
num .
deficient thickness a .
if any measurement is deficient in thickness more than num in num mm make additional measurements to determine the deficient area .
b .
correct any area deficient between num in num mm and num in num mm to the design thickness by using one of the following methods according to these specifications add additional quantities of the same materials and reconstruct to the required thickness leave in place and accept payment for the materials and area if the course is mixed in place at ½ the contract unit price for the deficient area .
c. correct any area deficient in thickness by more than num inch num mm by adding additional quantities of the same material and reconstructing to the required thickness in accordance with these specifications .
f. if payment is made by the cubic yard meter payment for additional material to correct deficiencies will be made at the contract unit price with no additional cost to the department for scarification mixing or compaction .
e. if payment is made by the square yard meter no payment will be made for additional material required to correct deficiencies or reconstructing deficient work .
num .
average thickness a .
the average thickness per linear mile kilometer is determined from all measurements within the mile kilometer increments except the areas deficient by more than num in num mm and not corrected .
b .
the average thickness shall not exceed the specified thickness by more than num in num mm .
c. if the basis of payment is per cubic yard meter for base subbase or shoulder and the average thickness for any mile kilometer increment exceeds the allowable num in num mm tolerance the excess quantity in that increment will be deducted from the contractors payments .
d. the excess quantity is calculated by multiplying the average thickness that exceeds the allowable num in num mm tolerance by the surface area of the base subbase or shoulder as applicable .
e. if the basis of payment is per square yard meter no deduction will be made for excess thickness .
section numtopsoil sandclay or chert construction num num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. topsoil sandclay or chert topsoil sandclay or chert is measured by the cubic yard meter loose volume or by the square yard meter as specified in section num .
b. stabilizer aggregate stabilizer aggregate is measured by the ton megagram .
its weight is determined by certified truck scales on the job or by another certified scale approved in advance by the engineer .
c. prime bituminous prime is not measured for separate payment .
d. clearing and grubbing when clearing and grubbing is eligible for payment under the provisions of subsection num local materials sources it is measured by the acre hectare .
e. stripping excavation when stripping excavation is eligible for payment under the provisions of section num it will be measured using the average end area method as borrow excavation including material by the cubic yard meter .
f. removing unsuitable materials unsuitable materials removed are measured and paid for under the earthwork item in the contract .
g. blending and remixing blending and remixing will be measured by the square yard meter as measured on the longitudinal surface and to the width specified .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a. topsoil sandclay or chert base subbase and shoulder course this course will be paid at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter or per square yard meter as specified for base subbase and shoulders complete in place and accepted .
payment is full compensation for preparing the roadbed furnishing materials when specified in the pay item loading and unloading scarifying spreading plowing and harrowing mixing and blending in the pit in the plant and in the roadway rolling and shaping section numtopsoil sandclay or chert construction num watering maintaining hauling and priming b. stabilizer aggregate stabilizer aggregate will be paid at the contract unit price per ton megagram complete in place and accepted .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing materials loading hauling unloading handling spreading scarifying mixing watering shaping and maintenance .
c. clearing and grubbing clearing and grubbing eligible for payment under the provisions of subsection num local material sources will be paid according to section num .
d. stripping excavation stripping excavation eligible for payment under the provisions of section num will be paid according to the same section .
payment will be full compensation for the removal of all materials unsuitable for use in the base subbase or shoulder .
e. priming bituminous prime will not be measured for separate payment .
its cost is included in the price bid for base .
payment will be made under item no .
num topsoil sandclay or chert base subbase shoulder course class ___ including material per cubic yard meter or square yard meter item no .
num topsoil sandclay or chert base subbase shoulder course class___ per cubic yard meter or square yard meter item no .
num topsoil sandclay or chert base and shoulder course class ___ including material per cubic yard meter or square yard meter item no .
num topsoil sandclay or chert base and shoulder course class ___ per cubic yard meter or square yard meter item no .
num stabilizer aggregate type___ including material per ton megagram num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numsoil aggregate construction num general description this work includes constructing base subbase or shoulder courses composed of mineral aggregate and soil mortar on prepared subgrade or subbase .
construct according to these specifications and to the lines grades thickness and cross sections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
all of the provisions of section num apply to this work .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of work section nummeasurement and payment section numgeneral specifications for base and subbase courses section numbituminous prime section numsoil aggregate bases b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section soil aggregate base num soil mortar for soil aggregate base num bituminous prime num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment provide equipment in satisfactory condition for proper construction .
use any applicable equipment as specified in subsection num equipment for bituminous prime .
section numsoil stablized soil aggregate construction num num preparation prepare the subgrade or subbase as specified in subsection num.c preparing the subgrade or subsection num.d preparing the subbase .
place soil aggregate materials only on a dry thawed foundation .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
methods num .
use any of the methods of mixing material described in section num .
num .
in lieu of the methods of mixing described in section num and when approved by the engineer use one of the following methods a .
produce soil aggregate from an approved source or deposit .
num produce soil aggregate base that will meet the requirements of this specification after it has been mined crushed and processed .
num stockpile the processed material before delivery to the project .
num keep the stockpile large enough during loading operations to ensure that a uniformly blended material is delivered to the project .
num use equipment that will not segregate the material during loading .
b .
produce a soil aggregate using inplace operations num mix one material with the existing roadbed materials .
num mix two materials on a prepared subgrade .
b .
placing material use the following steps to spread and mix base subbase or shoulder course .
num .
spreading and mixing a .
when using soil aggregate base produced from an approved source uniformly spread the material with an approved mechanical spreader to obtain the desired thickness .
compact and finish according to subsection num.c compacting and finishing .
b .
when inplace operations are required use the following procedures for either mixing one material with the existing roadbed materials or mixing two materials on a prepared subgrade num uniformly spread the material with an approved mechanical spreader to obtain the desired thickness when mixing two materials on a prepared subgrade .
when mixing only one material with the existing roadbed materials the material may be dumped directly on the subgrade and spread uniformly .
num after spreading material and as soon as weather and moisture conditions permit mix it by plowing harrowing and blading .
num without disturbing the underlying subgrade or subbase plow the material to its full depth then harrow with a disc harrow .
num begin plowing alternately at the edges and the center back and forth as many times as necessary to produce a thoroughly pulverized and homogeneous mixture .
num compact and finish according to subsection num.c compacting and finishing .
c. compacting and finishing construct courses to the maximum thickness as specified in subsection num.c.num compaction .
section numsoil stablized soil aggregate construction num use the following steps to compact and finish a base subbase or shoulder course num .
moisture content ensure that the moisture content of materials is uniformly distributed and allows compaction to the specified density .
add sufficient water during the mixing operations to provide the optimum moisture content num percentage points .
num .
compaction after placing and shaping the material to line and grade compact it to num percent of the maximum dry density as determined by representative samples using gdt num .
when using the material as a base for paved shoulders num ft num m wide or less compact to at least num percent of the maximum dry density .
a. onecourse construction num after compaction shape to the required grade line and crosssection .
num add water as necessary to develop the proper moisture content .
num roll until the surface is smooth closely knit and free of cracks .
num correct all defects according to subsection num.b repairing defects .
b .
multiple course construction num after compacting the first course shape the surface again to line grade and crosssection .
num add water as necessary to develop the proper moisture content .
num spread and compact the second and any succeeding courses without rolling the first course again .
num finish the surface according to the procedure specified for onecourse construction .
c. irregular areas in places inaccessible to the roller obtain the required compaction with mechanical tampers approved by the engineer .
d. priming base after completing the base apply bituminous prime according to section num .
num quality acceptance a. compaction determine the maximum dry density from representative samples of compaction material according to gdt num .
determine the inplace density according to gdt num or gdt num .
b .
finished surface num .
transverse check check the finished surface of the base subbase or shoulder course transversely .
using one of the following tools a template cut true to the required cross section and set with a spirit level on nonsuperelevated sections a system of ordinates measured from a stringline a surveyors level num .
longitudinal check check the surface longitudinally by placing a num ft num m straightedge parallel to the centerline .
ensure that ordinates measured from the bottom of the template stringline or straightedge to the surface do not exceed num in num mm at any point .
rod readings shall not deviate more than num foot num mm from the required readings .
immediately correct any variations that exceed the requirements as specified in subsection num.b repairing defects .
c. thickness tolerances num .
thickness measurements section numsoil stablized soil aggregate construction num a. thickness requirements apply to shoulder construction where the plans specify a uniform thickness or where the shoulders will be surfaced .
b .
determine the thickness of the base subbase or shoulder course by making as many checks as necessary to determine the average thickness .
num .
deficient thickness a .
if any measurement is deficient in thickness more than num in num mm make additional measurements to determine the deficient area .
b .
correct any area deficient between num in num mm and num in num mm to the design thickness by using one of the following methods according to subsection num.b .
add additional quantities of the same materials and reconstruct to the required thickness leave in place and accept payment for the materials and area at ½ the contract unit price for the deficient area .
c. correct any area deficient in thickness by more than num inch num mm by adding additional quantities of the same material and reconstructing to the required thickness in accordance with subsection num.b .
d. no additional payment will be made for correcting deficient thickness .
num .
average thickness a .
the average thickness per linear mile kilometer is determined from all measurements within the mile kilometer increments .
b .
do not include in the measurements any areas that are deficient by more than num in num mm but less than num in num mm and left in place .
d. priming base prime the completed base according to section num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance a .
protecting the base subbase or shoulders maintain the course until the engineer determines that it has cured sufficiently and is ready to prime .
maintain by additional wetting rolling and blading as necessary .
repair any defects according to subsection num.b repairing defects .
these protection measures do not relieve the contractor of maintaining the work until final acceptance as specified in section num .
num measurement a .
soil aggregate base course soil aggregate base course is measured in square yards meters of the specified thickness as defined in section num .
the length is measured on the surface along the centerline and the width as specified on the plans .
irregular areas such as turnouts and intersections are measured to the closest square yard meter .
where specified on the plan measurements are by the ton megagram according to section num b .
soil mortar when obtained from a borrow pit soil mortar for soil aggregate base is measured by the cubic yard meter loose volume .
c. bituminous prime bituminous prime is not measured for separate payment .
section numsoil stablized soil aggregate construction num num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a .
soil aggregate base course soil aggregate base course will be paid at the contract unit price per square yard meter of the specified thickness or per ton megagram complete and accepted as defined above including bituminous prime .
b .
soil mortar when obtained from a borrow pit soil mortar for soil aggregate base will be paid at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter including materials and haul .
c. bituminous prime bituminous prime will not be paid separately include its cost in the base course bid price .
payment will be made under item no .
num soil aggregate base course including materials _____ in mm per square yard meter item no .
num soil aggregate base course including materials per ton megagram item no .
num soil mortar including materials per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numcement stabilized soil aggregate construction num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numreclaimed liquid stabilized base num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numimpermeable membrane for subgrades basins ditches and canals num general description this work includes installing materials to serve as an impermeable membrane .
the membrane prevents water seepage beneath the installation level shown on the plans .
section numimpermeable membrane for subgrades basins ditches and canals num num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numwaterproofing membrane material b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use the following materials to construct the waterproofing layer impermeable membrane crosslaminated highdensity polyethylene film flexible selfadhesive rubberized asphalt ensure that these materials meet the requirements of subsection num .
as an alternative and if approved by the engineer use another equal system that has at least a numyear serviceability record .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
installation install according to the plans .
b .
placement place the membrane on a soil blanket or cushion at least num in num mm thick that contains material fine enough to pass through a no .
num num mm sieve .
take care not to form a slip plane between the underlying soil and overlying material .
ensure that the membrane is at least num ft num m wide with seam strengths at least num percent of the membrane strength .
section numimpermeable membrane for subgrades basins ditches and canals num c. protection during construction protect the membrane from damage at all times .
remove and replace sections damaged by sunlight heat sharp objects or any other source at no cost to the department .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement impermeable membrane for subgrades basins ditches and canals is measured by the number of square yards meters of subgrade basins ditches and canals .
num limits extra overlapping material required to produce a uniform membrane is not measured .
num payment impermeable membrane for subgrades basins ditches and canals will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard meter .
this payment will be full compensation for preparing the surfaces furnishing the membrane system materials and applying the membrane system .
payment will be made under item no .
num impermeable membrane for subgrades basins ditches and canals per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numgraded aggregate construction num general description this work includes constructing a base subbase or shoulder course composed of mineral aggregates .
construct according to these specifications and to the lines grades thickness and typical crosssections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
the provisions of section num apply to this work .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of work section numgeneral specifications for base and subbase courses section numbituminous prime section numgraded aggregate section numgraded aggregate construction num section numcutback asphalt section numcutback asphalt emulsion b. referenced documents aashto t num gdt num gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section graded aggregate num cutback asphalt rcnum rcnum rcnum or mcnum mcnum mcnum num cutback asphalt emulsion cbaenum num blotter material sand num.g.num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment provide equipment in satisfactory condition for proper construction of the base subbase or shoulder course .
use any applicable equipment specified in subsection num equipment for bituminous prime .
num preparation prepare the subgrade or subbase as specified in subsection num.c preparing the subgrade or subsection num.d preparing the subbase .
place graded aggregate materials only on dry thawed subgrade or subbase .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
placing material use the central plant mix method unless producing aggregates from an approved source or deposit that conform to the requirements of section num .
use the following steps to mix base and spread subbase or shoulder course .
num .
mixing when blending two sizes of aggregate proportion the aggregate and water if needed into the central plant .
mix until producing a homogeneous and uniform mixture .
section numgraded aggregate construction num num .
spreading to obtain the specified thickness uniformly spread materials to the proper depth with a mixture spreader .
do not use materials containing frost or frozen particles .
a. onecourse construction lay one course to a maximum thickness of num in num mm compacted .
b. multiplecourse construction if the thickness of the base subbase or shoulder course exceeds num in num mm construct it in num or more courses of equal thickness .
b. compacting material use the following steps to compact and finish a base subbase or shoulder course .
num .
moisture content ensure that the moisture content of materials is uniformly distributed and allows compaction to the specified density .
unless approved by the office of materials no graded aggregate will be shipped to a project when the moisture content of the material exceeds two percent of optimum moisture .
num .
compaction after shaping the spread material to line grade and crosssection roll to uniformly compact the course .
if using group num aggregate roll to at least num percent of maximum dry density .
if using group num aggregate roll to at least num percent of the maximum dry density .
if using graded aggregate mixtures composed of either group as base for paved shoulders num ft num m wide or less compact to at least num percent of the maximum dry density .
regardless of compaction ensure that the compacted base is sufficiently stable to support construction equipment without pumping .
if the base material is unstable from too much moisture dry and rework the base material .
dry and rework the underlying subgrade if necessary .
a. onecourse construction num after compaction shape to the required grade line and cross section .
num add water as necessary to develop the proper moisture content .
num roll until the surface is smooth closely knit and free of cracks .
num correct all defects according to subsection num.b repairing defects .
b. multiplecourse construction num after compacting the first course shape the surface again to line grade and cross section .
num add water as necessary to develop the proper moisture content .
num spread and compact the second and any succeeding courses without rolling the first course again .
num finish the surface according to the procedure specified for onecourse construction .
c. irregular areas in places inaccessible to the roller obtain the required compaction with mechanical tampers approved by the engineer .
apply the same density requirements as stated above in subsection num.b .
c. finishing finish the surface of the subbase for portland cement concrete pavement or the base of asphaltic concrete pavement with automatically controlled screed equipment when required by subsection num.h fine grading machine of the specifications .
furnish install and maintain the sensing wires needed to control the finish operation as a part of the pay item .
when automatically controlled screed equipment is not required fine grading with motor graders is permitted .
finish immediately after the placing and compacting operations .
after finishing compact the subbase again according to subsection num.b compacting material .
section numgraded aggregate construction num d. protecting the base subbase or shoulders maintain the course until the engineer determines that it has cured sufficiently and is ready to prime .
maintain by additional wetting rolling and blading as necessary .
repair any defects according to subsection num.b repairing defects .
these protection measures do not relieve the contractor of maintaining the work until final acceptance as specified in section num .
e. priming the base apply bituminous prime according to section num unless using graded aggregate base under portland cement concrete pavement graded aggregate base under asphaltic concrete num in num mm or more in total thickness num quality acceptance a. compaction tests num .
determine the maximum dry density from representative samples of compacted material according to aashto tnum method d. num .
determine the inplace density of finished courses according to gdt num or gdt num where applicable .
b .
finished surface check the finished surface of the base subbase or shoulder course as follows num .
check the longitudinal surface using a num ft num m straightedge parallel to the centerline .
num .
check the transverse surface by using one of the following tools a template cut true to the required crosssection and set with a spirit level on nonsuperelevated sections a system of ordinates measured from a stringline a surveyors level num .
ensure that ordinates measured from the bottom of the template stringline or straightedge to the surface do not exceed num in num mm at any point .
rod readings shall not deviate more than num ft num mm from required readings .
num .
correct any variations from these requirements immediately according to subsection num.b repairing defects .
c. thickness tolerances num .
thickness measurements a. thickness requirements apply to shoulder construction where the plans specify a uniform thickness or where the shoulders will be surfaced .
b .
determine the thickness of the base subbase or shoulder course by making as many checks as necessary to determine the average thickness .
num .
deficient thickness a .
if any measurement is deficient in thickness more than num in num mm make additional measurements to determine the deficient area .
b .
correct any area deficient between num in num mm and num in num mm to the design thickness by using one of the following methods according to these specifications add additional quantities of the same materials and reconstruct to the required thickness leave in place and accept payment for the materials and area at ½ the contract unit price for the deficient area .
section numgraded aggregate construction num c. correct any area deficient in thickness by more than num inch num mm by adding additional quantities of the same material and reconstructing to the required thickness in accordance with these specifications .
d. if payment is made by the ton megagram payment for additional material to correct deficiencies will be made at the contract unit price with no additional cost to the department for scarification mixing or compaction .
e. if payment is made by the square yard meter no payment will be made for additional material required to correct deficiencies or for reconstructing deficient work .
num .
average thickness a .
the average thickness per linear mile kilometer is determined from all measurements within the mile kilometer increments except the areas deficient by more than num in num mm and not corrected .
b .
the average thickness shall not exceed the specified thickness by more than num in num mm .
c. if the basis of payment is per ton megagram and the average thickness for any mile kilometer increment exceeds the allowable num in num mm tolerance the excess quantity in that increment will be deducted from the contractors payments .
d. the excess quantity is calculated by multiplying the average thickness that exceeds the allowable num in num mm tolerance by the surface area of the base subbase or shoulder .
e. if the basis of payment is per square yard meter no deduction will be made for excess thickness .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. graded aggregate where specified for payment by the ton megagram graded aggregate base subbase or shoulder materials are measured in tons megagrams mixed and accepted .
when hauling material to the roadway the actual weight of each loaded vehicle is determined with an approved motor truck scale .
where specified for payment by the square yard meter for a certain thickness the surface length is measured along the centerline and the width is specified on the plans .
measure irregular areas such as turnouts and intersections by the square yard meter .
b. bituminous prime bituminous prime is not measured for separate payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a. graded aggregate graded aggregate base subbase or shoulder course will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton megagram or per square yard meter complete in place and accepted .
this payment shall be full compensation for materials shaping and compacting the existing roadbed loading hauling and unloading crushing and processing mixing spreading section numgraded aggregate construction num watering compacting and shaping maintenance priming when required all incidentals necessary to complete the work payment will be made under item no .
num graded aggregate base subbase shoulder courseincluding material per ton megagram or square yard meter item no .
num graded aggregate base and shoulder course including material per ton megagram or square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numcrushed stone base num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numcrushed rap base num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numcement stabilized graded aggregate construction num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numreconstructed base course num general description this work includes reconstructing base courses by reshaping the existing road surface section numreconstructed base course num adding the required amount of new material compacting materials to form a foundation course for other base courses surface courses or pavements construct base courses according to these specifications and to the lines grades and typical crosssections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
apply all of the provisions of section num to this item .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numgeneral specifications for base and subbase courses section numbituminous prime b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use materials shown on the plans or proposal that conform to the requirements in these specifications for each type of material .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment provide equipment in satisfactory condition for the proper reconstruction of the base course .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
methods with the following methods bring the existing road surface up to the established grade to conform to the crosssection indicated on the plans .
num .
remove unsuitable material when existing roadbed material is unsuitable for use remove and replace it with approved material .
section numreconstructed base course num num .
remove and stockpile existing base if removing roadbed materials to stockpile for further use as shown on the plans follow these steps a. scarify and pulverize the roadbed to the specified depth without removing the subgrade or shoulder material .
b .
deposit material in stockpiles on thoroughly clean surfaces .
c. minimize segregation of the separate ingredients when stockpiling the material .
num .
scarify if leaving roadbed material in place scarify below the upper surface of the finished base course to a uniform depth and to the entire width of the finished base course to a .
eliminate all depressions and irregularities b .
allow the bonding of any additional material to the old base c. reshape to the required crosssection if the surface has been treated with a bituminous material break it down sufficiently to incorporate into the existing base .
if this is impossible remove it from the base and dispose of it as the engineer directs .
num .
add new material where unsuitable material has been removed shape the subgrade or remaining material as directed to add material .
use new material that conforms to the governing specification .
num .
replace stockpiled material after shaping the subgrade place stockpiled material along with any additional new material on the roadbed .
if the existing roadbed material is satisfactory for use but deficient in thickness after scarifying bring the surface to the grade and depth indicated on the plans by a .
removing all material larger than num in num mm in diameter b .
adding new material b .
mix and shape after adding the required amount of new material thoroughly mix the old and new base course .
mix according to the requirements set out under the specifications for the type of base being constructed .
during the mixing and shaping operations add sufficient quantities of water if needed to secure proper moisture conditions .
after mixing shape the entire roadbed to the required grade and crosssection .
remix and reshape all or any part of the base as necessary to obtain the desired results .
c. compact and finish after mixing and shaping the base material compact and finish according to the specifications for the type of base being reconstructed .
d. prime after compaction preserve the base by priming according to section num .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a .
base preparation base preparation is measured along the center of the road in miles kilometers or in square yards meters .
section numreconstructed base course num b .
removed unsuitable material removed unsuitable material is measured according to the earthwork item in the contract .
c. additional material where specified for payment by the cubic yard meter the new material added to reconstruct the base is measured by the cubic yard meter loose volume as specified in section num .
where specified for payment by the ton megagram new material is measured in tons megagrams as mixed and accepted .
the actual weight is determined by weighing each loaded vehicle with an approved motor truck scale as the material is hauled to the roadway .
the actual weight will be the pay weight .
d. removed stockpiled and replaced material the removal stockpiling and replacing of material is measured by the cubic yard meter loose volume as specified in section num .
e. prime bituminous prime is not measured for separate payment include it in the price of base preparation .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a .
removed unsuitable material the removal of unsuitable material will be paid for according to the earthwork item in the contract .
b .
removed and stockpiled material the removal and stockpiling of existing base material will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter .
this payment will be full compensation for scarifying pulverizing loading hauling and unloading replacing all existing material from stockpiles c. replaced base material the replacement of existing base material from stockpiled materials will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter .
this will be full compensation for loading hauling and unloading replacing all existing material from stockpile as required d. base preparation the preparation of the base will be paid for at the contract unit price per mile kilometer or per square yard meter .
this payment will be full compensation for scarifying shaping all machining necessary to bring the existing road surface to the established grade and to the cross section shown on the plans section numreconstructed base course num priming payment will be made under item no .
num additional reconstructed base material per cubic yard meter or ton megagram item no .
num additional reconstructed base material including material per cubic yard meter or ton megagram item no .
num removing and stockpiling existing base material per cubic yard meter item no .
num replacing existing base material from stockpile per cubic yard meter item no .
num base preparation per mile kilometer or square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numselected material surface course num general description this work includes constructing a surface course with soil andor stone .
construct according to these specifications and to the lines grades and typical crosssections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
apply the requirements of section num to this item unless modified by this specification .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section num roadway excavation section numgeneral specifications for base and subbase courses section numtopsoil sandclay or chert construction section numcoarse aggregate section numstabilizer aggregate section numsoil base materials section numgraded aggregate b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals submit a request for material approval .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications section numselected material surface course num material section topsoil and sand clay num chert num graded aggregate num and notes num and num below .
num and notes num and num below .
coarse aggregate size no .
num num or num num stabilizer aggregate type as designated num note num .
use subsection num unconsolidated limerock as aggregate surface course only if the material gradation meets the requirements of subsection num graded aggregate .
note num .
when a project requires an aggregate surface course to be placed and left as a riding surface use only graded aggregate that meets the requirements of subsection num graded aggregate .
a .
satisfactory material use inplace roadbed or driveway material when determined to be acceptable by the engineer .
b. unsuitable material remove roadbed materials unsuitable for use as determined by the engineer .
c. additional material to add materials to those in the roadbed or to build up the surface course entirely use materials approved by the engineer .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation if constructing the course entirely of new materials prepare the subgrade as specified in subsection num.c preparing the subgrade .
if using inplace material ensure that the surface has been properly shaped .
do not place materials on muddy or frozen subgrade .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction spread selected material by approved method to the thickness prescribed on the plans .
scarify mix and shape the selected material to the required cross section .
roll until the surface is thoroughly compacted firm and unyielding .
add water to assist scarifying and compaction .
section numselected material surface course num where in place materials are approved for use scarify mix shape and compact according to the specifications for the applicable material .
when stabilizer aggregate is specified mix it into the surface course according to subsection num.b.num stabilizing .
where aggregate surface course is specified spread the specified aggregate or stabilizer material uniformly to the required depth at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance maintain the finished surface course to the required cross section and usable until the project is completed and accepted .
num measurement a .
selected material surface course this item furnished complete in place and accepted is measured by the cubic yard meter loose volume as specified in section num .
b. inplace selected material surface course this item is measured in place on the roadway in square yards meters .
the actual length is measured along the surface of the surface course and multiplied by the plan width .
where this item is on driveways or other irregular areas the quantity is the actual number of square yards meters completed in place and accepted .
c. stabilizer aggregate and aggregate surface course stabilizer aggregate and aggregate surface course are measured by the ton megagram .
their weights are determined with certified truck scales as specified in section num .
d. unsuitable material removed unsuitable material is measured and paid for as roadway excavationunclassified section num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a .
selected material surface course this item will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter complete in place and accepted .
this payment will be full compensation for preparing the subgrade furnishing all material loading hauling and unloading scarifying pulverizing harrowing spreading mixing compacting and shaping maintaining and watering the course section numselected material surface course num b. inplace selected material surface course this item regardless of the depth of material processed will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard meter complete in place and accepted .
this payment will be full compensation for scarifying pulverizing harrowing mixing compacting and shaping maintaining and watering the course c. stabilizer aggregate the stabilizer aggregate will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton megagram complete in place and accepted .
this payment will be full compensation for furnishing all material loading hauling and unloading scarifying spreading mixing compacting and shaping maintaining and watering the course d. aggregate surface course aggregate surface course will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton megagram complete in place and accepted .
this payment will be full compensation for furnishing all material loading hauling and unloading spreading compacting and shaping maintaining the course payment will be made under item no .
num selected materials surface course per cubic yard meter item no .
num inplace selected material surface course per square yard meter item no .
num aggregate surface course per ton megagram item no .
num stabilizer aggregate type ___ per ton megagram num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numlimefly ash soil construction num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numstabilized base material for patching num general description this work includes patching with soilcement construction cement stabilized graded aggregate construction or select material stabilized construction .
construct according to the plans the proposal or as directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numsubgrade construction section numsoilcement construction section numcement stabilized graded aggregate construction section numbituminous prime section num roadway materials b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section soilcement construction num cement stabilized graded aggregate construction num bituminous prime num subgrade construction num ensure that the subgrade stabilizerselect material meets the requirements of subsection num roadway materials class iibnum or better .
any special gradation will be specified by a special provision .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements ensure that all labor equipment and materials necessary to ensure a continuous patching operation are on hand before patching begins .
num personnel general provisions num through num .
section numstabilized base material for patching num num equipment provide all the equipment required for the type of patching used .
a concrete mixer with proper weight and moisture control will be considered as a stationary mixing plant for the production of patching material under this specification .
num preparation prepare stabilized base material areas for patching as follows num .
trim the sides of the areas to be patched and leave them vertical .
remove all loose material .
num .
remove unsatisfactory material to the depth shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer remove at least num in num mm of material .
num .
if unsatisfactory material is below a plane that is num ft num mm below the existing surface undercut the area as necessary .
num .
backfill the area with subgrade stabilizerselect material to num ft num mm below the existing surface .
use subgrade that meets the requirements of section num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction patch during traffic unless otherwise specified .
follow the requirements of section num unless otherwise stated in this specification .
patch stabilized base material areas as follows num .
thoroughly compact patches at the optimum moisture to at least num percent of the maximum laboratory dry density .
num .
compact to the required degree with a conventional steel wheel pneumatic tired roller mechanical tampers or other devices .
num .
lightly spray or mop each patch with bituminous prime .
sand primed areas subject to traffic as directed by the engineer .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance repair or replace damaged or destroyed patch at no additional cost to the department .
num measurement a .
base material base material is measured by the cubic yard meter loose volume as specified in subsection num measurement and quantities .
b. subgrade stabilizerselect material subgrade stabilizerselect material is measured by the cubic yard meter loose volume as specified in subsection num measurement and quantities .
num limits general provisions num through num .
section numstabilized base material for patching num num payment a .
base material the accepted quantity of base material will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter .
this payment will be full compensation for flagging and directing traffic preparing the patched area furnishing material including portland cement and bituminous prime loading unloading and hauling material crushing processing mixing spreading watering compacting maintaining material b. subgrade stabilizerselect material subgrade stabilizerselect material will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter complete in place and accepted .
payment will be full compensation for removing and disposing asphalt pavements base materials and unsatisfactory subgrades furnishing all material loading hauling and unloading material mixing compacting finishing watering payment will be made under item no .
num soilcement stabilized base course for patching per cubic yard meter item no .
num graded aggregate cement stabilized base for patching per cubic yard meter item no .
num subgrade stabilizerselect material for patching per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numportland cement concrete subbase num general description this work includes constructing a subbase composed of a mixture of portland cement and graded aggregate or portland cement aggregate and sand .
construct according to these specifications and to the lines grades and typical crosssections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
apply the requirements of section num to this work .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numgeneral specifications for base and subbase courses section numportland cement concrete pavement section numconcrete structures section numcoarse aggregate section numfine aggregate section numgraded aggregate section numportland cement section numadmixtures section numcuring agents b. referenced documents astm c num aashto t num aashto t num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num num submittals prior to construction submit a grade control plan for the engineers approval .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications section numportland cement concrete subbase num material specification fine aggregate num portland cement num fly ash num graded aggregate num coarse aggregate num air entraining admixture num chemical admixtures for concrete type a or d num curing compoundwhite wax base num the gradation requirements of graded aggregate are modified to require num to num percent by weight passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment provide the equipment and tools necessary to perform this work including the following .
a .
concrete batching equipment provide separate bins and weighing hoppers for aggregates and cement in the batching plant .
use separate scales to weigh cement and aggregate .
the engineer will inspect scales for weighing concrete materials and water measuring devices before their use .
ensure accuracy of scales and water measuring devices of plus or minus num percent throughout the operating range .
measure admixtures to an accuracy of plus or minus num percent .
b .
slip form paver and spreader to place the subbase mixture use a selfpropelled slip form paver equipped with tracks sufficient to prevent slippage and bogging when loaded .
use the paver to strike off consolidate and float finish the fresh mixtureall in one pass .
operate the paver from a string grade control or a combination of string control and existing pavement control .
use a selfpropelled mechanical spreader to distribute the mixture on the grade .
num preparation before placing portland cement concrete subbase prepare the roadbed as required by the plans and the specifications .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction produce portland cement concrete subbase by combining authorized proportions of approved materials in homogeneous uniform batches .
section numportland cement concrete subbase num ensure that the grade immediately under the subbase does not contribute to deficient thicknesses of either the subbase or pavement .
employ methods to ensure that subbase placement equipment does not cause deficient thickness to areas supporting the equipment .
produce the subbase as follows a. mixing the engineer will determine the design proportions of the required materials based upon mixes prepared in the laboratory or trials performed during construction .
determine the batch weights required to produce the necessary quantity .
measure the cement aggregates and water separately to the accuracy specified above .
continue mixing until producing a homogeneous and uniform mixture .
mix concrete produced in a stationary central mix plant for a minimum of num seconds after all materials have entered the drum .
a reduction of mix time may be allowed if representative tests show that the concrete meets the requirements of astm c num requirements for uniformity .
in all cases mix for at least num seconds .
ensure that transit mixed concrete meets the requirements of subsection num.e.num .
b .
placing spread the mixture on the grade with minimum rehandling .
hand spread with shovels if necessary .
do not place portland cement concrete on muddy puddled or frozen subgrade .
note do not allow workers to walk in fresh concrete with shoes coated with dirt or other foreign substances .
c. consolidating consolidate the mixture by vibrating the full length width and depth of the section .
ensure that vibration does not produce puddling or excessive grout accumulation .
if consolidation and density are not satisfactory stop placement and furnish methods or equipment to produce subbase conforming to the specifications .
d. finishing finish the mixture to the proper crosssection .
use equipment that produces a uniform surface free of irregular rough or porous areas .
use a tube float or other finishing device approved by the engineer to provide a smooth surface .
unless the engineer permits do not add water to the surface to aid finishing .
e. forming construction joints form a construction joint when mixture placement is interrupted for more than one hour .
construct joints according to subsection num unless the engineer waives the requirements concerning reinforcement .
ensure that the straightedge tolerance is num in num mm in num ft num m. f. curing cure the mixture according to subsection num.l.num .
apply compound for the impervious membrane method at the rate of num ft²gal num m²l or less .
apply a second application of curing compound just before placing the pavement to act as a bond breaker .
apply the second application at the same rate as the first application .
g. preserving the subbase maintain the subbase until it is covered by the succeeding pavement course .
num .
place the pavement course on the subbase only after the mixture has cured for num days .
section numportland cement concrete subbase num num .
operate the spreader and slip form paver on the subbase after num days but do not use the subbase as a haul road for loaded trucks equipment or other vehicles for num days .
a. construct earth ramps and barricades to move traffic across the subbase .
b .
remove and replace areas damaged by vehicles or equipment at no additional cost to the department .
h. weather limitations num .
do not place the subbase mixture when the air temperature in the shade is less than num f num c and falling .
wait until the air temperature is at least num f num c and rising .
num .
protect the subbase from rain until the surface has sufficiently hardened to prevent marring .
num .
protect the subbase from cold weather according to subsection num.l.num .
num quality acceptance check the finished surface transversely by a system of ordinates measured from a stringline .
also check the surface with a num ft num m straightedge placed parallel to the centerline .
remove or correct deviations in excess of num in num mm in num ft num m. if the engineer permits correct low areas by increasing the thickness of the surface course at no additional cost to the department .
a .
composition of subbase mixture the department will determine the required proportions based on the test results of sample material .
secure and deliver a sufficient amount of materials to the laboratory for evaluation .
an approved mixture shall conform to the following num .
aggregate use aggregate that meets the requirements of subsection num .
use aggregates manufactured at the quarry or blended at the plant site to produce the desired results .
place aggregates in one or more stockpiles if the gradation is uniform at the time of batching .
num .
cement use at least num lbsyd³ num kgm³ of portland cement for portland cement concrete subbase .
use fly ash as a partial replacement for portland cement if a .
the quantity of cement replaced is num percent or less by weight .
b .
cement is replaced by fly ash at the rate of num lbs to num lbs num kg to num kg of fly ash to each pound kilogram of cement .
do not use type ip cement in fly ash mixes .
num .
watercement ratio the maximum watercement ratio shall not exceed num .
calculate the watercement ratio based on the total cement material used including fly ash .
num .
air content maximum design air content shall be num percent .
num .
slump maximum design slump shall be num in num mm .
num .
compressive strength ensure that the mixture is capable of demonstrating a laboratory compressive strength at num days of num psi num mpa .numr .
where r the difference between the largest observed value and the smallest observed value for all compressive strength specimens at num days for a given combination of materials and mix proportions prepared together .
determine compressive strength from the results of six cylinders prepared and tested according to aashto t num and t num .
section numportland cement concrete subbase num b .
field adjustment of design proportions the engineer will determine changes in design proportions based on construction conditions and notify the contractor in writing of the effective date and time of the changes .
c. mix tolerances the engineer will verify that the mix is proportioned according to the approved mix design .
assume responsibility for determining the required batch weights .
ensure that variations in consistency and air content of the mixture are within the following limits at the time of placement .
num .
consistency slump shall not exceed num in num mm as determined by gdt num .
num .
air content air content shall not exceed num percent as determined by the applicable test method ingdt num gdt num or gdt num .
d. acceptance of subbase mixture the department will accept the mixture based upon results required in the sampling testing and inspection manual for slump air tests watercement ratio surveillance of plant operations and mix production e. thickness determine thickness by taking probe measurements in the fresh mixture every num ft num m or less .
adjust the strike off to compensate for variations in thicknesses .
obtain cores to determine the boundaries of areas subject to thickness correction .
a construction tolerance of plus or minus num in num mm from the plan depth is permitted .
num .
deficient thickness correct areas deficient in thickness by more than num in num mm but less than num in num mm by increasing the surface course depth .
remove or correct areas deficient in thickness by more than num in num mm as the engineer directs .
the engineer may base the decision to remove or correct the area on a plan submitted by the contractor detailing how to obtain the final pavement profile and grade .
num .
excessive thickness remove areas with excessive thickness when the engineer requires .
removal is not required when the excessive thickness does not result in a surface course deficient in thickness .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement portland cement concrete subbase is measured by the square yard meter as noted in section num complete in place and accepted .
num limits general provisions num through num .
section numportland cement concrete subbase num num payment portland cement concrete subbase will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard meter for each specified thickness shown on the plans .
this payment will be full compensation for providing portland cement and all other materials applying first and second applications of curing compound providing all equipment and labor mixing hauling providing other incidentals necessary to complete the item replacing subbase when required payment will be made under item no .
num portland cement concrete subbase ____ in mm thick per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section nummining crushing and stockpiling aggregates num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numfoamed asphalt stabilized base course num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numreclaiming crushing and stockpiling of concrete and asphalt pavements num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num general description this work includes constructing one or more courses of bituminous plant mixture on the prepared foundation or existing roadway surface .
the mixture shall conform with lines grades thicknesses and typical cross sections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num this section includes the requirements for all bituminous plant mixtures regardless of the gradation of the aggregates type and amount of bituminous material or pavement use .
acceptance of work is on a lottolot basis according to the requirements of this section and section num .
num definitions segregated mixture mixture lacking homogeneity in hma constituents of such a magnitude that there is a reasonable expectation of accelerated pavement distress or performance problems .
may be quantified by measurable changes in temperature gradation asphalt content air voids or surface texture .
new construction a roadway section more than num mile num m long that is not longitudinally adjacent to the existing roadway .
if one or more lanes are added longitudinally adjacent to the existing lane the lanes shall be tested under the criteria for a resurfacing project .
if work is performed on the existing roadway including leveling grade changes widening andor resurfacing then that lane shall be tested under the criteria for a resurfacing project .
trench widening widening no more than num ft. num m in width .
comparison sample opposite quarters of material sampled by the contractor .
independent sample quality assurance sample a sample taken by the department to verify an acceptance decision without regard to any other sample that may also have been taken to represent the material in question .
referee sample a sample of the material retained during the quartering process which is used for evaluation if a comparison of contractor and departmental split sample test results is outside allowable tolerances .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section nummeasurement and payment section numfield laboratory building section numbituminous tack coat section numbituminous surface treatment section numcoarse aggregate for asphaltic concrete section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num department of transportation standard operating procedure sop num department of transportation standard operating procedure sop num department of transportation standard operating procedure sop num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gsp num gsp num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num num submittals a .
invoices furnish formal written invoices from a supplier for all materials used in production of hma when requested by the department .
show the following on the bill of lading date shipped quantity in tons megagrams included with or without additives for asphalt cement purchase asphaltic cement directly from a supplier listed on qualified products list num and provide copies of bill of lading at the departments request .
b .
paving plan before starting asphaltic concrete construction submit a written paving plan to the engineer for approval .
include the following on the paving plan proposed starting date location of plants rate of production average haul distances number of haul trucks paver speed feet meterminute for each placement operation mat width for each placement operation number and type of rollers for each placement operation section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num sketch of the typical section showing the paving sequence for each placement operation electronic controls used for each placement operation temporary pavement marking plan if staged construction is designated in the plans or contract provide a paving plan for each construction stage .
if segregation is detected submit a written plan of measures and actions to prevent segregation .
work will not continue until the plan is submitted to and approved by the department .
c. job mix formula submit to the engineer a written job mix formula proposed for each mixture type to be used based on an approved mix design .
furnish the following information for each mix specific project for which the mixture will be used source and description of the materials to be used mixture i.d .
number proportions of the raw materials to be combined in the paving mixture single percentage of the combined mineral aggregates passing each specified sieve single percentage of asphalt by weight of the total mix to be incorporated in the completed mixture single temperature at which to discharge the mixture from the plant theoretical specific gravity of the mixture at the designated asphalt content name of the person or agency responsible for quality control of the mixture during production do the following to have the formulas approved in accordance with sop num approval of contractor job mix formulas and to ensure their quality num .
submit proposed job mix formulas for review at least two weeks before beginning the mixing operations .
num .
do not start hot mix asphaltic concrete work until the engineer has approved a job mix formula for the mixture to be used .
no mixture will be accepted until the engineer has given approval .
num .
provide mix designs for all sma superpave and num mm mixes to be used .
the department will provide mix design results for other mixes to be used .
num .
after a job mix formula has been approved assume responsibility for the quality control of the mixtures supplied to the department according to subsection num source of supply and quantity of materials .
d. quality control program submit a quality control plan to the office of materials for approval .
the quality control program will be included as part of the certification in the annual plant inspection report .
num materials ensure materials comply with the specifications listed in table num .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num table nummaterials specifications material subsection asphalt cement grade specified num coarse aggregates for asphaltic concrete num fine aggregates for asphaltic concrete num mineral filler num heat stable antistripping additive num hydrated lime num silicone fluid when approved by the office of materials num bituminous tack coat pg num pg num pg num num hot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures num fiber stabilizing additives num when approved by the office of materials and required in the contract provide uintaite material hereafter referred to by the common trade name gilsonite as a reinforcing agent for bituminous mixtures .
supply a manufacturers certification that the gilsonite is a granular solid which meets the following requirements softening point aashto tnum num f num c specific gravity num f num oc aashto tnum num num flash point coc aashto tnum num f num c min .
ash content aashto tnum num max .
penetration num f num oc num gm .
num sec .
aashto tnum num num delivery storage and handling storage of material is allowed in a properly sealed and insulated system for up to num hours except that stone matrix asphalt sma opengraded friction course ogfc or porous european mix pem mixtures shall not be stored more than num hours .
mixtures other than sma ogfc or pem may be stored up to num hours in a sealed and insulated system equipped with an auxiliary inert gas system with the engineers approval .
segregation lumpiness draindown or stiffness of stored mixture is cause for rejection of the mixture .
the engineer will not approve using a storage or surge bin if the mixture segregates loses excessive heat or oxidizes during storage .
the engineer may obtain mixture samples or recover asphalt cement according to gdt num .
aashto tnum aashto t num and aashto t num will be used to perform viscosity and penetration tests to determine how much asphalt hardening has occurred .
a .
vehicles for transporting and delivering mixtures ensure trucks used for hauling bituminous mixtures have tight clean smooth beds .
follow these guidelines when preparing vehicles to transport bituminous mixtures num .
use an approved releasing agent from qpl num in the transporting vehicle beds if necessary to prevent the mixture from sticking to the bed .
ensure that the releasing agent is not detrimental to the mixture .
when applying the agent drain the excess agent from the bed before loading .
remove from the project any transporting vehicles determined to contain unapproved releasing agents .
num .
protect the mixture with a waterproof cover large enough to extend over the sides and ends of the bed .
securely fasten the waterproof cover before the vehicle begins moving .
num .
insulate the front end and sides of each bed with an insulating material with the following specifications section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num consists of builders insulating board or equivalent has a minimum r value of num can withstand approximately num f num c temperatures install the insulating material so it is protected from loss and contamination .
a heat dump body may be used in lieu of insulation of the bed .
heat dump body refers to any approved transport vehicle that is capable of diverting engine exhaust and transmitting heat evenly throughout the dump body to keep asphalt at required temperature .
mark the heat dump body clearly with open and close position at the exhaust diverter .
install a padlock and lock it in the open position when the heat dump body is used to transport bituminous mixtures .
num .
mark each transporting vehicle with a clearly visible identification number .
num .
create a hole in each side of the bed so that the temperature of the loaded mixture can be checked .
the placement of these holes shall be located to assure that the thermometer is being placed in the hot mix asphaltic concrete .
ensure the mixture is delivered to the roadway at a temperature within num f num c of the temperature on the job mix formula .
if the engineer determines that a truck may be hazardous to the project or adversely affect the quality of the work remove the truck from the project .
b .
containers for transporting conveying and storing bituminous material to transport convey and store bituminous material use containers free of foreign material and equipped with sample valves .
bituminous material will not be accepted from conveying vehicles if material has leaked or spilled from the containers .
num construction requirements num .
num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment hot mix asphaltic concrete plants producing mix for department use are governed by quality assurance for asphaltic concrete plants in georgia laboratory standard operating procedure no .
num .
the engineer will approve the equipment used to transport and construct hot mix asphaltic concrete .
ensure the equipment is in satisfactory mechanical condition and can function properly during production and placement operations .
place the following equipment at the plant or project site a .
field laboratory provide a field laboratory according to section num .
b .
plant equipment num .
scales provide scales as follows a. furnish at the contractors expense scales to weigh bituminous plant mixtures regardless of the measurement method for payment .
b .
ensure the weight measuring devices that provide documentation comply with subsection num measurement and quantities .
c. provide weight devices recording the mixture net weights delivered to the truck when not using platform scales .
a net weight system will include but is not limited to hopper or batchertype weight systems delivering asphaltic mixture directly to the truck fully automatic batching equipment with a digital recording device d. use a net weight printing system only with automatic batching and mixing systems approved by the engineer .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num e. ensure the net weight scale mechanism or device manufacturer installation performance and operation meets the requirements in subsection num measurement and quantities f. provide information on the project tickets according to department of transportation sopnum .
num .
timelocking devices furnish batch type asphalt plants with automatic timelocking devices controlling the mixing time automatically .
construct these devices to ensure the operator can not shorten or eliminate any portion of the mixing cycle .
num .
surge and storagesystems provide surge and storage bins as follows a .
ensure bins for mixture storage are insulated and have a working seal top and bottom to prevent outside air infiltration and to maintain an inert atmosphere during storage .
bins not intended as storage bins may be used as surge bins to hold hot mixtures for part of the working day .
however empty these surge bins completely at the end of the working day .
b .
ensure surge and storage bins can retain a predetermined minimum level of mixture in the bin when the trucks are loaded .
c. ensure surge and storage systems do not contribute to mix segregation lumpiness draindown or stiffness .
d. ensure the scale mechanism or device manufacture installation performance and operation meets the requirements in subsection nummeasurement and quantities .
num .
controls for dust collector fines control dust collection as follows a .
when collecting airborne aggregate particles and returning them to the mixture have the return system meter all or part of the collected dust uniformly into the aggregate mixture and waste the excess .
the collected dust percentage returned to the mixture is subject to the engineers approval .
b .
when the collected dust is returned directly to the hot aggregate flow interlock the dust feeder with the hot aggregate flow and meter the flow to maintain a flow that is constant proportioned and uniform .
num .
mineral filler supply system when mineral filler is required as a mixture ingredient a .
use a separate bin and feed system to store and proportion the required quantity into the mixture with uniform distribution .
b .
control the feeder system with a proportioning device meeting these specifications is accurate to within num percent of the filler required has a convenient and accurate means of calibration interlocks with the aggregate feed or weigh system to maintain the correct proportions for all rates of production and batch sizes c. provide flow indicators or sensing devices for the mineral filler system and interlock them with the plant controls to interrupt the mixture production if mineral filler introduction fails to meet the required target value after no longer than num seconds .
d. add mineral filler to the mixture as follows according to the plant type batch type asphalt plant .
add mineral filler to the mixture in the weigh hopper .
continuous plant using pugmill mixers .
feed the mineral filler into the hot aggregate before it is introduced into the mixer to ensure dry mixing is accomplished before the bituminous material is added .
continuous plants using the drierdrum mixers .
add the mineral filler to ensure dry mixing is accomplished before the bituminous material is added and ensure the filler does not become entrained into the air stream of the drier .
num .
hydrated lime treatment system when hydrated lime is required as a mixture ingredient a .
use a separate bin and feed system to store and proportion the required quantity into the mixture .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num b .
ensure the aggregate is uniformly coated with hydrated lime aggregate before adding the bituminous material to the mixture .
ensure the addition of hydrated lime will not become entrained in the exhaust system of the drier or plant .
c. control the feeder system with a proportioning device meeting these specifications is accurate to within num percent of the amount required has a convenient and accurate means of calibration interlocks with the aggregate feed or weigh system to maintain the correct proportions for all rates of production and batch sizes and to ensure that mixture produced is properly treated with lime d. provide flow indicators or sensing devices for the hydrated lime system and interlock them with the plant controls to interrupt mixture production if hydrated lime introduction fails to meet the required target value after no longer than num seconds .
num .
net weight weighing mechanisms certify the accuracy of the net weight weighing mechanisms by an approved registered scale serviceperson at least once every num months .
check the accuracy of net weight weighing mechanisms at the beginning of project production and thereafter as directed by the engineer .
check mechanism accuracy as follows a .
weigh a load on a set of certified commercial truck scales .
ensure that the difference between the printed total net weight and that obtained from the commercial scales is no greater than num lbsnum lbs num kgmg of load .
check the accuracy of the bitumen scales as follows use standard test weights .
if the checks indicate printed weights are out of tolerance have a registered scale serviceperson check the batch scales and certify the accuracy of the printer .
while the printer system is out of tolerance and before its adjustment continue production only if using a set of certified truck scales to determine the truck weights .
b .
ensure plants using batch scales maintain ten num lb num kg standard test weights at the plant site to check batching scale accuracy .
c. ensure plant scales that are used only to proportion mixture ingredients and not to determine pay quantities are within two percent throughout the range .
num .
fiber supply system when stabilizing fiber is required as a mixture ingredient a .
use a separate feed system to store and proportion by weight the required quantity into the mixture with uniform distribution .
b .
control the feeder system with a proportioning device that meets these specifications is accurate to within num percent of the amount required .
automatically adjusts the feed rate to maintain the material within this tolerance at all times has a convenient and accurate means of calibration provide inprocess monitoring consisting of either a digital display of output or a printout of feed rate in pounds kg per minute to verify feed rate interlocks with the aggregate feed or weigh system to maintain the correct proportions for all rates of production and batch sizes c. provide flow indicators or sensing devices for the fiber system and interlock them with the plant controls to interrupt the mixture production if fiber introduction fails or if the output rate is not within the tolerances given above .
d. introduce the fiber as follows when a batch type plant is used add the fiber to the aggregate in the weigh hopper .
increase the batch dry mixing time by num to num seconds from the time the aggregate is completely emptied into the mixer to ensure the fibers are uniformly distributed prior to the injection of asphalt cement into the mixer .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num when a continuous or drierdrum type plant is used add the fiber to the aggregate and uniformly disperse prior to the injection of asphalt cement .
ensure the fibers will not become entrained in the exhaust system of the drier or plant .
num .
crumb rubber modifier supply system when specified crumb rubber modifier may be substituted at the contractors discretion to produce a pg num asphaltic cement at the production facility in accordance with section num a .
use a separate feed system to store and proportion by weight of the total asphaltic cement the required percentage of crumb rubber into the mixture .
b .
control the feeder system with a proportioning device meeting these specifications is accurate to within num percent of the amount required .
automatically adjusts the feed rate to maintain the material within this tolerance at all times .
has a convenient and accurate means of calibration .
provide inprocess monitoring consisting of either a digital display of output or a printout of feed rate in pounds per minute to verify feed rate .
the supply system shall report the feed in num lb num gr .
increments using load cells that will enable the user to monitor the depletion of the modifier .
monitoring the system volumetrically will not be allowed .
interlocks with the aggregate weigh system and asphaltic cement pump to maintain the correct proportions for all rates of production and batch sizes .
c. provide flow indicators or sensing devices for the system and interlock them with the plant controls to interrupt the mixture production if the crumb rubber introduction output rate is not within the num percent tolerance given above .
this interlock will immediately notify the operator if the targeted rate exceeds introduction tolerances .
all plant production will cease if the introduction rate is not brought back within tolerance after num seconds .
when the interlock system interrupts production and the plant has to be restarted upon restarting operations the modifier system shall run until a uniform feed can be observed on the output display .
all mix produced prior to obtaining a uniform feed shall be rejected .
d. introduce the crumb rubber modifier as follows when a batch type plant is used add the rubber to the aggregate in the weigh hopper .
increase the batch dry mixing time by num to num seconds from the time the aggregate is completely emptied into the mixer to ensure the modifiers are uniformly distributed prior to the injection of asphalt cement into the mixer .
increase the batch wet mix time by num to num seconds to ensure the crumb rubber modifier is uniformly blended with the asphaltic cement .
when a continuous or drierdrum type plant is used add the rubber to the aggregate and uniformly disperse prior to the injection of asphalt cement .
the point of introduction in the drum mixer will be approved by the engineer prior to production .
ensure the crumb rubber modifier will not become entrained in the exhaust system of the drier or plant and will not be exposed to the drier flame at any point after induction .
e. no separate measurement and payment will be made if contractor elects to utilize crumb rubber .
c. equipment at project site num .
cleaning equipment provide sufficient hand tools and power equipment to clean the roadway surface before placing the bituminous tack coat .
use power equipment that complies with subsection num.f power broom and power blower .
num .
pressure distributor to apply the bituminous tack coat use a pressure distributor complying with subsection num.b pressure distributor .
num .
bituminous pavers to place hot mix asphaltic concrete use bituminous pavers that can spread and finish courses that are as wide and deep as indicated on the plans section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num true to line grade and cross section smooth uniform in density and texture a .
continuous line and grade reference control .
furnish place and maintain the supports wires devices and materials required to provide continuous line and grade reference control to the automatic paver control system .
b .
automatic screed control system .
equip the bituminous pavers with an automatic screed control system actuated from sensordirected mechanisms or devices that will maintain the paver screed at a predetermined transverse slope and elevation to obtain the required surface .
c. transverse slope controller .
use a transverse slope controller capable of maintaining the screed at the desired slope within num percent .
do not use continuous paving setups resulting in unbalanced screed widths or off center breaks in the main screed cross section unless approved by the engineer .
d. screed control .
equip the paver to permit the following four modes of screed control .
the method used shall be approved by the engineer .
automatic grade sensing and slope control automatic dual grade sensing combination automatic and manual control total manual control ensure the controls are referenced with a taut string or wire set to grade or with a skitype device or mobile reference at least num ft num m long when using a conventional ski .
approved noncontacting laser or sonartype skis listed on qpl num georgias list of approved noncontacting laser and sonartype electronic grade and slope controls may be used in lieu of conventional num ft numm skis .
under limited conditions a short ski or shoe may be substituted for a long ski on the second paver operating in tandem or when the reference plane is a newly placed adjacent lane .
automatic screed control is required on all projects however when the engineer determines that project conditions prohibit the use of such controls the engineer may waive the grade control or slope control requirements or both .
e. paver screed extension .
when the laydown width requires a paver screed extension use bolton screed extensions to extend the screeds or use an approved mechanical screed extension device .
when the screed is extended add auger extensions to assure a length of no more than num inches num m from the auger to the end gate of the paver .
auger extensions may be omitted when paving variable widths .
ensure the paver is equipped with tunnel extensions when the screed and augers are extended .
note do not use extendible strikeoff devices instead of approved screed extensions .
only use a strikeoff device in areas that would normally be luted in by hand labor .
num .
compaction equipment ensure that the compaction equipment is in good mechanical condition and can compact the mixture to the required density .
the compaction equipment number type size operation and condition is subject to the engineers approval num .
materials transfer vehicle mtv a .
use a materials transfer vehicle mtv when placing asphaltic concrete mixtures on projects on the state route system with the following conditions .
if a project fails to meet any one of the following conditions the mtvs use is not required .
num when to use the adt is equal to or greater than num the project length is equal to or greater than num linear feet num linear meters section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num the total tonnnage megagrams of all asphaltic concrete mixtures is greater than num tons num mg. num where to use mainline of the traveled way collectordistributor cd lanes on interstates and limited access roadways leveling courses at the engineers discretion num do not use the mtv for the following conditions a resurfacing project that only num mm mix is required .
a project with lane width that is equal or less than num feet num m. a passing lane only project .
when noted on the plans .
b .
ensure the mtv and conventional paving equipment meet the following requirements num mtv has a truck unloading system which receives mixture from the hauling equipment and independently deliver mixtures from the hauling equipment to the paving equipment .
has mixture remixing capability approved by the office of materials and is listed on qpl num georgias list of approved materials transfer vehicles .
provides to the paver a homogeneous nonsegregated mixture of uniform temperature with no more than num f num oc difference between the highest and lowest temperatures when measured transversely across the width of the mat in a straight line at a distance of one foot to twentyfive feet num m to num m from the screed while the paver is operating .
ensure that the mtv is capable of providing the paver a consistent material flow that is sufficient to prevent the paver from stopping between truck exchanges .
num conventional paving equipment has a paver hopper insert with a minimum capacity of num tons num mg installed in the hopper of conventional paving equipment when an mtv is used .
c. if the mtv malfunctions during spreading operations discontinue placement of hot mix asphaltic concrete after there is sufficient hot mix placed to maintain traffic in a safe manner .
however placement of hot mix asphaltic concrete in a lift not exceeding num in .
num mm may continue until any additional hot mix in transit at the time of the malfunction has been placed .
cease spreading operations thereafter until the mtv is operational .
d. ensure the mtv is empty when crossing a bridge and is moved across without any other contractor vehicles or equipment on the bridge .
move the mtv across a bridge in a travel lane and not on the shoulder .
ensure the speed of the mtv is no greater than num mph num kph without any acceleration or deceleration while crossing a bridge .
num preparation a .
prepare existing surface prepare the existing surface as follows num .
clean the existing surface .
before applying hot mix asphaltic concrete pavement clean the existing surface to the engineers satisfaction .
num .
patch and repair minor defects before placing leveling course a .
correct potholes and broken areas requiring patching in the existing surface and base as directed by the engineer .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num b .
cut out trim to vertical sides and remove loose material from the areas to be patched .
c. prime or tack coat the area after being cleaned .
compact patches to the engineers satisfaction .
material for patches does not require a job mix formula but shall meet the gradation range shown in section num .
the engineer must approve the asphalt content to be used .
num .
apply bituminous tack coat apply the tack coat according to section num .
the engineer will determine the application rate which must be within the limitations table num .
table numapplication rates for bituminous tack galyd² lm² minimum maximum under ogfc and pem mixes num num num num all other mixes num num num on thin leveling courses and freshly placed asphaltic concrete mixes reduce the application rate to num to num galyd² num to num lm² .
b .
place patching and leveling course num .
when the existing surface is irregular bring the surface area to the proper cross section and grade with a leveling course of hot mix asphaltic concrete materials .
num .
place leveling at the locations and in the amounts directed by the engineer .
num .
use leveling course mixtures meeting the requirements of the job mix formulas defined in subsection num.a observe composition of mixtures section num leveling acceptance schedules in subsection num.a acceptance plans for gradation and asphalt cement content num .
if the leveling and patching mix type is undesignated determine the mix type by the thickness or spread rate according to table num but do not use num mm mix on interstate projects .
table numleveling and patching mix types thickness rate of spread type of mix up to num in num mm up to num lbsyd² num kgm² num mm mix or num mm superpave type num num to num in num to num mm num to num lbsyd²num to num kgm² num mm superpave type num num to num in num to num mm num to num lbsyd² num to num kgm² num mm superpave num to num in num to num mm num to num lbsyd² num to num kgm² num mm superpave over num in num mm over num lbsyd² num kgm² num mm superpave these mixtures may be used for isolated patches no more than num in .
num mm deep and no more than num ft. num m in diameter or length .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction provide the engineer at least one days notice prior to beginning construction or prior to resuming production if operations have been temporarily suspended .
a .
observe composition of mixtures num .
calibration of plant equipment section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num if the material changes or if a component affecting the ingredient proportions has been repaired replaced or adjusted check and recalibrate the proportions .
calibrate as follows a .
before producing mixture for the project calibrate by scale weight the electronic sensors or settings for proportioning mixture ingredients .
b. calibrate ingredient proportioning for all rates of production .
num .
mixture control compose hot mix asphaltic concrete from a uniform mixture of aggregates bituminous material and if required hydrated lime mineral filler or other approved additive .
ensure the constituents proportional to produce mixtures meeting the requirements in section num .
the general composition limits prescribed are extreme ranges within which the job mix formula must be established .
base mixtures on a design analysis that meets the requirements of section num .
ensure the field performance of the inplace mixtures meet the requirements of subsection numb for permeability moisture susceptibility rutting susceptibility and fatigue .
inplace mix may be evaluated for compliance with subsection num.b at the discretion of the state bituminous construction engineer under the following conditions deviates greater than num percent on gradation for mixture control sieves from the approved job mix formula based on acceptance or independent samples .
deviates greater than num percent in asphalt cement content from the approved job mix formula based on acceptance or independent samples .
the calculated mean pavement air voids result in an adjusted pay factor less than num or any single sub lot result in mean pavement air voids exceeding num percent .
mix produced not using an approved mix design andor job mix formula .
remove and replace any material determined to not meet the requirements established in section num.b at the contractors expense .
if control test results show the characteristic tested does not conform to the job mix formula control tolerances given in section num take immediate action to ensure that the quality control methods are effective .
control the materials to ensure extreme variations do not occur .
maintain the gradation within the composition limits in section num .
b .
prepare bituminous material uniformly heat the bituminous material to the temperature specified in the job mix formula with a tolerance of num f num c. c. prepare the aggregate prepare the aggregate as follows num .
heat the aggregate for the mixture and ensure a mix temperature within the limits of the job mix formula .
num .
do not contaminate the aggregate with fuel during heating .
num .
reduce the absorbed moisture in the aggregate until the asphalt does not separate from the aggregate in the prepared mixture .
if this problem occurs the engineer will establish a maximum limit for moisture content in the aggregates .
when this limit is established maintain the moisture content below this limit .
d. prepare the mixture proportion the mixture ingredients as necessary to meet the required job mix formula .
mix until a homogenous mixture is produced .
num .
add mineral filler section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num when mineral filler is used introduce it in the proper proportions and as specified in subsection num.b.num mineral filler supply system .
num .
add hydrated lime when hydrated lime is included in the mixture add it at a rate specified in section num and the job mix formula .
use methods and equipment for adding hydrated lime according to subsection num.b.num hydrated lime treatment system .
add hydrated lime to the aggregate by using method a or b as follows method adry formadd hydrated lime in its dry form to the mixture as follows according to the type of plant a. batch type asphalt plant add hydrated lime to the mixture in the weigh hopper or as approved and directed by the engineer .
b .
continuous plant using pugmill mixer feed hydrated lime into the hot aggregate before it is introduced into the mixer to ensure dry mixing is complete before the bituminous material is added .
c. continuous plant using drierdrum mixer add hydrated lime so to ensure the lime will not become entrained into the air stream of the drier and to ensure thorough dry mixing will be complete before the bituminous material is added .
method blimewater slurryadd the required quantity of hydrated lime based on dry weight in limewater slurry form to the aggregate .
this solution consists of lime and water in concentrations as directed by the engineer .
equip the plant to blend and maintain the hydrated lime in suspension and to mix the hydrated lime with the aggregates uniformly in the proportions specified .
num .
add stabilizing fiber when stabilizing fiber is included in the mixture add stabilizing fiber at a rate specified in section num and the job mix formula .
introduce it as specified in subsection num.b.num fiber supply system .
num .
add gilsonite modifier when approved by the office of materials and required by the contract add the gilsonite modifier to the mixture at a rate to ensure eight percent by weight of the asphalt cement is replaced by gilsonite .
use either pg num or pg num asphalt cement as specified in subsection num .
provide suitable means to calibrate and check the rate of gilsonite being added .
introduce gilsonite modifier by either of the following methods .
a .
for batch type plants incorporate gilsonite into the pugmill at the beginning of the dry mixing cycle .
increase the dry mix cycle by a minimum of num seconds after the gilsonite is added and prior to introduction of the asphalt cement .
for this method supply gilsonite in plastic bags to protect the material during shipment and handling and store the modifier in a waterproof environment .
the bags shall be capable of being completely melted and uniformly blended into the combined mixture .
gilsonite may also be added through a mineral filler supply system as described in subsection num.b.num mineral filler supply system .
the system shall be capable of injecting the modifier into the weigh hopper near the center of the aggregate batching cycle so the material can be accurately weighed .
b .
for drum drier plants add gilsonite through the recycle ring or through an acceptable means which will introduce the gilsonite prior to the asphalt cement injection point .
the modifier shall be proportionately fed into the drum mixer at the required rate by a proportioning device which shall be accurate within num percent of the amount required .
the entry point shall be away from flames and ensure the gilsonite will not be caught up in the air stream and exhaust system .
num .
materials from different sources do not use mixtures prepared from aggregates from different sources intermittently .
this will cause the color of the finished pavement to vary .
e. observe weather limitations do not mix and place asphaltic concrete if the existing surface is wet or frozen .
do not lay asphaltic concrete ogfc mix or pem at air temperatures below num ºf num ºc .
when using a mtv ogfc mix or pem may be placed at num ºf num ºc when approved by the engineer .
for other courses follow the temperature guidelines in the following table section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num table numlift thickness table lift thickness minimum temperature num in num mm or less num f num c num to num in num mm to num mm num f num c num to num in num mm to num mm num f num c num to num in num mm to num mm num f num c num to num in num mm to num mm num f num c and rising .
base material must not be frozen .
f. perform spreading and finishing spread and finish the course as follows num .
determine the courses maximum compacted layer thickness by the type mix being used according to table num .
table nummaximum layer thickness mix type minimum layer thickness maximum layer thickness maximum total thickness num mm superpave num num in num mm num in num mm num mm superpave num num in num mm num in num mm num mm superpave num num in num mm num num in num mm num in num mm num mm superpave type num num num in.num mm num num in num mm num in num mm num mm superpave type num num in num mm num num in num mm num in num mm num mm mix num in num mm num num in num mm num in num mm num mm ogfc num lbsyd² num kgm² num lbsyd² num kgm² num mm ogfc num lbsyd² num kgm² num lbsyd² num kgm² num mm pem num lbsyd² num kgm² num lbsyd² num kgm² num mm sma num num in num mm num num in num mm num in num mm num mm sma num num in num mm num in num mm num in num mm num mm sma num num in num mm num in num mm allow up to num in num mm per lift on trench widening .
place num mm superpave and num mm superpave up to num in num mm thick for driveway and side road transition .
num .
unload the mixture into the paver hopper or into a device designed to receive the mixture from delivery vehicles .
num .
except for leveling courses spread the mixture to the loose depth for the compacted thickness or the spread rate .
use a mechanical spreader true to the line grade and cross section specified .
num .
for leveling courses use a motor grader equipped with a spreader box and smooth tires to spread the material or use a mechanical spreader meeting the requirements in subsection num.c equipment at project site .
num .
obtain the engineers approval for the sequence of paving operations including paving the adjoining lanes .
minimize tracking tack onto surrounding surfaces .
num .
ensure the outside edges of the pavement being laid are aligned and parallel to the roadway center line .
num .
for new construction or resurfacing contracts containing multiple lifts or courses arrange the width of the individual lifts so the longitudinal joints of each successive lift are offset from the previous lift at least num ft num mm .
this requirement does not apply to the lift immediately over thin lift leveling courses .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num ensure the longitudinal joints in the surface course and the mix immediately underneath asphaltic concrete ogfc or pem are at the lane lines .
note perform night work with artificial light provided by the contractor and approved by the engineer .
num .
where mechanical equipment can not be used spread and rake the mixture by hand .
obtain the engineers approval of the operation sequence including compactive methods in these areas .
num .
keep small hand raking tools clean and free from asphalt build up .
do not use fuel oil or other harmful solvents to clean tools during the work .
num .
do not use mixture with any of these characteristics segregated nonconforming temperature deficient or excessive asphalt cement content otherwise unsuitable to place on the roadway in the work num .
remove and replace mixture placed on the roadway that the engineer determines has unacceptable blemish levels from segregation raveling streaking pulling and tearing or other deficient characteristics .
replace with acceptable mixture at the contractors expense .
do not continually place mixtures with deficiencies .
do not place subsequent course lifts over another lift or course placed on the same day while the temperature of the previously placed mix is num f num c or greater .
num .
obtain the engineers approval of the material compaction equipment .
perform the rolling as follows a .
begin the rolling as close behind the spreader as possible without causing excessive distortion of the asphaltic concrete surface .
b .
continue rolling until roller marks are no longer visible .
c. use pneumatictired rollers with breakdown rollers on all courses except asphaltic concrete ogfc pem and sma or other mixes designated by the engineer .
num .
if applicable taper or feather asphaltic concrete from full depth to a depth no greater than num in num mm along curbs gutters raised pavement edges and areas where drainage characteristics of the road must be retained .
the engineer will determine the location and extent of tapering .
g. maintain continuity of operations coordinate plant production transportation and paving operations to maintain a continuous operation .
if the spreading operations are interrupted construct a transverse joint if the mixture immediately behind the paver screed cools to less than num ºf num ºc .
h. construct the joints num .
construct transverse joints a. construct transverse joints to facilitate full depth exposure of the course before resuming placement of the affected course .
b .
properly clean and tack the vertical face of the transverse joint before placing additional material .
note never burn or heat the joint by applying fuel oil or other volatile materials .
c. straightedge transverse joints immediately after forming the joint .
d. immediately correct any irregularity that exceeds num in .
in num ft num mm in num m. num .
construct longitudinal joints clean and tack the vertical face of the longitudinal joint before placing adjoining material .
construct longitudinal joints so that the joint is smooth well sealed and bonded .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num num .
construction joint detail for ogfc and pem mixtures in addition to meeting joint requirements described above construct joints and transition areas for num mm ogfc and num mm pem mixtures as follows a .
for projects which do not have milling included as a pay item num place ogfc mixture meeting gradation requirements of num mm ogfc as specified in section num on entrance and exit ramp gore areas and end of project construction joints .
taper mixture from num in num mm at end of project to full plan depth within maximum distance of spread for one load of mixture taper mixture placed on gore areas from thickness of the edge of the mainline to num in num mm at the point of the ramp transverse joint .
num .
construct the ramp transverse joint at the point specified in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num .
mixture placed in the transition and gore areas will be paid for at the contract unit price for num mm ogfc or num mm pem as applicable .
b .
for projects which have milling included as a pay item num taper milling for a distance of no less than num ft num m to a depth of num num in num mm at the point of the transverse joint num taper thickness if needed of the densegraded surface mix within the num ft num m distance to num num in num mm at the point of the transverse joint num taper thickness of the num mm ogfc or num mm pem to num in num mm to ensure the material ties in at grade level with the existing surface at the point of the transverse joint i .
protect the pavement protect sections of the newly finished pavement from traffic until the traffic will not mar the surface or alter the surface texture .
if directed by the engineer use artificial methods to cool the newly finished pavement to open the pavement to traffic more quickly .
j .
modify the job mix formula if the engineer determines that undesirable mixture or mat characteristics are being obtained the job mix formula may require immediate adjustment .
num quality acceptance a .
acceptance plans for gradation and asphalt cement content the contractor will randomly sample and test mixtures for acceptance on a lot basis .
the department will monitor the contractor testing program and perform comparison and quality assurance testing .
the contractors quality control technicians shall participate in the departments independent assurance systems basis program .
num .
determine lot amount a lot consists of the tons megagrams of asphaltic concrete produced and placed each production day .
if this production is less than num tons num mg or its square yard meter equivalent production may be incorporated into the next working day .
the engineer may terminate a lot when a pay adjustment is imminent if a plant or materials adjustment resulting in a probable correction has been made .
terminate all open lots at the end of the month except for materials produced and placed during the adjustment period .
the lot will be terminated as described in subsection numadjustments .
if the final days production does not constitute a lot the production may be included in the lot for the previous days run or the engineer may treat the production as a separate lot with a corresponding lower number of tests .
num .
determine lot acceptance determine lot acceptance as found in subsection num adjustments .
the department will perform the following task section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num determine the pay factor by using the mean of the deviations from the job mix formula of the tests in each lot and apply it to table nummixture acceptance schedule for surface mixes or table nummixture acceptance schedule for subsurface mixes whichever is appropriate .
this mean will be determined by averaging the actual numeric value of the individual deviations from the job mix formula disregarding whether the deviations are positive or negative amounts .
do not calculate lot acceptance using test results for materials not used in the work .
determine the pay factor for each lot by multiplying the contract unit price by the appropriate pay factor from the mixture acceptance schedule table num or table num .
when two or more pay factors for a specific lot are less than num determine the adjusted payment by multiplying the contract unit price by the lowest pay factor .
if the mean of the deviations from the job mix formula of the lot acceptance tests for a control sieve or for asphalt cement content exceeds the tolerances established in the appropriate mixture acceptance schedule and if the engineer determines that the material need not be removed and replaced the lot may be accepted at an adjusted unit price as determined by the engineer .
if the engineer determines that the material is not acceptable to leave in place the materials shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
num .
provide quality control program provide a quality control program as established in sop num which includes assignment of quality control responsibilities to specifically named individuals who have been certified by the office of materials provisions for prompt implementation of control and corrective measures provisions for communication with project manager bituminous technical services engineer and testing management operations supervisor at all times provisions for reporting all test results daily through the office of materials computerized field data collection system other checks calibrations and records will be reported on a form developed by the contractor and will be included as part of the project records notification in writing of any change in quality control personnel a .
certification requirements use laboratory and testing equipment certified by the department .
laboratories which participate in and maintain aashto accreditation for testing asphaltic concrete mixtures will be acceptable in lieu of departmental certification .
provide certified quality control personnel to perform the sampling and testing .
a quality control technician qct may be certified at three levels num temporary certification must be a technician trainee who shall be given direct oversight by a certified level num or level num qct while performing acceptance testing duties during the first num days of training .
the trainee must complete qualification requirements within num georgia department of transportation funded production days after being granted temporary certification .
a trainee who does not become qualified within num georgia department of transportation funded production days will not be reeligible for temporary certification .
a certified level num or level num qct shall be at the plant at all times during production and shipment of mixture to monitor work of the temporarily certified technician .
num level num must demonstrate they are competent in performing the process control and acceptance tests and procedures related to hot mix asphalt production and successfully pass a written exam .
num level num must meet level num requirements and must be capable of and responsible for making process control adjustments and successfully pass a written exam .
technician certification is valid for num years from the date on the technicians certificate unless revoked or suspended .
eligible technicians may become certified through special training and testing approved by the office of materials .
technicians who lose their certification due to falsification of test data will not be eligible for recertification in the future unless approved by the state materials engineer .
b .
quality control management num designate at least one level num qct as manager of the quality control operation .
the quality control manager shall meet the following requirements be accountable for actions of other qct personnel section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num ensure all applicable sampling requirements and frequencies test procedures and standard operating procedures are adhered to ensure all reports charts and other documentation is completed as required num provide qct personnel at the plant as follows if daily production for all mix types is to be greater than num tons megagrams have a qct person at the plant at all times during production and shipment of mixture until all required acceptance tests have been completed if daily production for all mix types will not be greater than num tons megagrams a qct may be responsible for conducting tests at up to two plants subject to random number sample selection have available at the plant or within immediate contact by phone or radio a level num qct responsible for making prompt process control adjustments as necessary to correct the mix num sampling testing and inspection requirements .
provide all sample containers extractants forms diaries and other supplies subject to approval of the engineer .
perform daily sampling testing and inspection of mixture production that meets the following requirements a randomly sample mixtures according to gsp num and gdt num method c and test on a lot basis .
in the event less than the specified number of samples are taken obtain representative num in num mm cores from the roadway at a location where the load not sampled was placed .
take enough cores to ensure minimum sample size requirements are met for each sample needed .
b maintain a printed copy of the computer generated random sampling data as a part of the project records .
c perform sampling testing and inspection duties of gsp num. d perform extraction or ignition test gdt num or gdt num and extraction analysis gdt num .
if the ignition oven is used a printout of sample data including weights shall become a part of the project records .
for asphalt cement content only digital printouts of liquid asphalt cement weights may be substituted in lieu of an extraction test for plants with digital recorders .
calculate the asphalt content from the ticket representing the mixture tested for gradation .
e save extracted aggregate opposite quarters and remaining material for possible referee testing of each sample as follows store in properly labeled suitable containers secure in a protected environment store for three working days .
if not obtained by the department within three days they may be discarded in accordance with gsp num. f add the following information on load tickets from which a sample or temperature check is taken mixture temperature signature of the qct person performing the testing g calibrate the lime system when hydrated lime is included in the mixture perform a minimum of twice weekly during production post results at the plant for review provide records of materials invoices upon request including asphalt cement aggregate hydrated lime etc .
h take action if acceptance test results are outside mixture control tolerances of section num .
one sample out of tolerance num contact level num qct to determine if a plant adjustment is needed num immediately run a process control sample .
make immediate plant adjustments if this sample is also out of tolerance section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num note determine mixture temperature at least once per hour of production for ogfc and pem mixes .
ogfc a num test additional process control samples as needed to ensure corrective action taken appropriately controls the mixture two consecutive acceptance samples of the same mix type out of tolerance regardless of lot or mix design level or three consecutive acceptance samples out of tolerance regardless of mix type num stop plant production immediately num reject any mixture in storage deviating more than num percent in gradation from the job mix formula based on the acceptance sample deviating more than num percent in asphalt content from the job mix formula based on the acceptance sample num make a plant correction to any mix type out of tolerance prior to resuming production do not send any mixture to the project before test results of a process control sample meets mixture control tolerances reject any mixture produced at initial restarting that does not meet mixture control tolerances num comparison testing and quality assurance program periodic comparison testing by the department will be required of each qct to monitor consistency of equipment and test procedures .
the department will take independent samples to monitor the contractors quality control program .
a comparison sampling and testing retain samples for comparison testing and referee testing if needed as described in subsection num.a.num.b.num .
discard these samples only if the contractors acceptance test results meet a num pay factor and the department does not procure the samples within three working days .
the department will test comparison samples on a random basis .
results will be compared to the respective contractor acceptance tests and the maximum difference shall be as follows table numallowable percent difference between department and contractor acceptance tests sieve size surface subsurface num in .
num mm num num in .
num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no .
num num m num num a.c. num num note pavement courses to be overlaid with ogfc or pem mixes are considered surface mixes .
num if test comparisons are within these tolerances continue production use the contractors tests for acceptance of the lot section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num num if test comparisons are not within these tolerances another departmental technician will test the corresponding referee sample results of the referee sample will be compared to the respective contractor and departmental tests using the tolerance for comparison samples given above .
a .
if referee test results are within the above tolerances when compared to the contractor acceptance test use the contractors test for acceptance of the effected lot .
b .
if referee test results are not within the above tolerances when compared to the contractor acceptance test the department will review the contractors quality control methods and determine if a thorough investigation is needed .
b independent verification sampling and testing num randomly take a minimum of two independent samples from the lesser of five days or five lots of production regardless of mix type or number of projects .
num compare test deviation from job mix formula to mixture control tolerances in section num .
if results are outside these tolerances another sample from the respective mix may be taken .
if test results of the additional sample are not within mixture control tolerances the department will take the following action take random samples from throughout the subject lots as established in subsection num.a.num.b.num and use these test results for acceptance and in calculations for the monthly plant rating .
applicable pay factors will apply and the contractor qct test results will not be included in pay factor calculations nor in the monthly plant rating .
determine if the contractors quality control program is satisfactory and require prompt corrective action by the contractor if specification requirements are not being met .
determine if the qct has not followed departmental procedures or has provided erroneous information .
take samples of any inplace mixture represented by unacceptable qct tests and use the additional sample results for acceptance and in calculations for the monthly plant rating and apply applicable pay factors .
the contractor qct tests will not be included in the pay factor calculations nor in the monthly plant rating .
b. compaction determine the mixture compaction using either gdt num gdt num or aashto t num .
the method of gdt num for uncoated specimens dense graded mixtures only shall not apply when the water absorption of a sample exceeds num percent as measured according to aashto t num .
in this case either aashto t num or the paraffin method of gdt num shall apply .
the compaction is accepted in lots defined in subsection num .
a acceptance plans for gradation and asphalt cement content and is within the same lot boundaries as the mixture acceptance .
num .
calculate pavement mean air voids the department will calculate the pavement air voids placed within each lot as follows a .
one test per sublot .
lots num ton num mg of mix shall be divided into num sublots of equal distance lots num tons num mg of mix shall be divided into a sublot or equal sublots consisting up to num tons num mg mix each .
there may be less than num sublots .
b .
average the results of all tests run on randomly selected sites in that lot .
note for leveling courses less than num lbyd² num kgm² having quality assurance test results outside the mixture control tolerances of section num use the departments test results only and applicable pay factors will apply .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num c. select the random sites using gdt num .
density tests are not required for asphaltic concrete placed at num lbsydnum num kgmnum or less num mm mix and asphaltic concrete ogfc pem and mixes placed as variable depth or width leveling .
compact these courses to the engineers satisfaction .
density tests will not be performed on turnouts and driveways .
the targeted maximum pavement mean air void content for all superpave and stone matrix asphalt mixtures is num percent .
ensure that the maximum pavement mean air voids for all superpave and stone matrix asphalt mixtures does not exceed num percent .
the maximum pavement mean air voids for num foot shoulder widening is num percent .
the adjustment period for density shall be four lots or four production days whichever is less in order for the contractor to ensure maximum compactive effort has been achieved which will yield no more than the specified maximum allowed mean air voids .
if the contractor needs to adjust the mixture to improve density results a change in the job mix formula may be requested for approval during the adjustment period so long as the following values are not exceeded coarse pay sieve num no .
num num mm sieve num no .
num num m sieve num asphalt content num all value changes must still be within specification limits if the office of materials is satisfied that the contractor has exerted the maximum compactive effort and is not able to maintain pavement mean air voids at no more than num the engineer may establish a maximum target for pavement mean air voids .
mixture placed during the adjustment period for density shall meet the requirements for a num pay factor in table num of subsection num.c calculate mean pavement air voids .
mixture not meetng these density requirements shall be paid for using the applicable pay factor .
if the mean air voids of the pavement placed within a lot exceeds num of the maximum target air voids if established and the engineer determines that the material need not be removed and replaced the lot may be accepted at an adjusted unit price as determined by the engineer .
num .
obtain uniform compaction for a lot to receive a pay factor of num for compaction acceptance the air void range can not exceed num percent for new construction or num percent for resurfacing projects .
the range is the difference between the highest and lowest acceptance test results within the affected lot .
if the air void range exceeds these tolerances apply a pay factor of num .
the num reduced pay factor for the compaction range does not apply in these instances the mixture is placed during the adjustment period as defined in subsection num.a materials produced and placed during the adjustment period .
all air void results within a given lot are less than num .
a lot containing two sublot or less .
on two foot trench widening .
c. surface tolerance in this specification pavement courses to be overlaid with an opengraded friction course or pem are considered surface courses .
all opengraded friction courses or pem are to be evaluated after the roadway has been opened to traffic for a minimum of num days and a maximum of num days .
asphalt paving is subject to straightedge and visual inspection and irregularity correction as shown below num .
visual and straightedge inspection paving is subject to visual and straightedge inspection during and after construction operations until final acceptance .
locate surface irregularities as follows a .
keep a num ft num m straightedge near the paving operation to measure surface irregularities on courses .
provide the straightedge and the labor for its use .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num b .
inspect the base intermediate and surface course surfaces with the straightedge to detect irregularities .
c. correct irregularities that exceed num in .
in num ft num mm in num m for base and intermediate courses and num in .
in num ft num mm in num m for surface courses .
mixture or operating techniques will be stopped if irregularities such as rippling tearing or pulling occur and the engineer suspects a continuing equipment problem .
stop the paving operation and correct the problem .
correct surface course evaluations on individual laser road profiler test sections normally nummile num km long .
num .
target surface smoothness the department will use the laser road profiler method to conduct acceptance testing for surface course tolerance according to gdt num .
this testing will be performed only on surface courses on projects with mainline traveled way measuring a minimum distance of num mile num m ramps more than num mile num m long combine partial sections measuring less than num mile num m with the previous full mile for acceptance .
achieve the smoothest possible ride during construction .
do not exceed the target laser road profiler smoothness index as shown below table num pavement smoothness target requirements construction description smoothness index all asphaltic concrete ogfc and pem on interstate resurfacing and new construction .
asphaltic concrete ogfc and pem placed on state route new construction .
num asphaltic concrete sma and other resurfacing on interstates .
asphaltic concrete ogfc and pem placed on state route resurfacing .
all new construction on state routes with exception of ogfc and pem as stated above .
num all other resurfacing on state routes excluding larp pr airports etc .
num all urban new construction and resurfacing on state routes within curb and gutter sections located in posted num miles per hour mph or less speed zones .
num if the target values are not achieved immediately adjust the operations to meet the target values .
placement operations may be suspended until a remedial plan to comply with target smoothness requirements is submitted and approved by the engineer if adjustments do not satisfy target smoothness values .
table num pavement smoothness corrective work requirement construction description smoothness index all asphaltic concrete ogfc and pem placed on interstate resurfacing and new construction .
asphaltic concrete ogfc and pem placed on state route new construction .
num asphaltic concrete sma and other resurfacing on interstates .
asphaltic concrete ogfc and pem placed on state route resurfacing .
all new construction on state routes with exception of ogfc and pem as stated above .
num all other resurfacing on state routes excluding larp pr airports etc .
num all urban new construction and resurfacing on state routes within curb and gutter sections located in posted num miles per hour mph or less speed zones .
num if surface tolerance deficiencies need correction obtain the engineers approval of the methods and type mix used .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num num .
bridge approach ride quality the following are subject to a ride quality test by the department for num ft. num m of roadway approaching each end of a bridge using the lightweight profiler a state road with num lanes or more a numlane state road with a current traffic count of num vpd or more locations designated on the plans all other bridge approaches not meeting the above criteria shall meet the num in .
in num ft num mm in num m straightedge requirement .
when the distance between the ends of two bridges is less than num ft num m the bridge approaches will meet the straightedge requirements .
test ride quality as follows a .
the department will determine a profile index value according to test method gdt num. b .
the department will average the profile index value from the right and left wheelpath for each num ft num m section for each lane resurfacing projects keep the profile index value under num inmile num mmkm correct individual bumps or depression exceeding num in .
num mm from the blanking band on the profilograph trace .
all other projects keep the profile index value under num inmile num mmkm correct individual bumps or depressions exceeding num in .
num mm from blanking band on the profilograph trace .
c. meet the profile index value for the num ft num m section of roadway up to the joint with the approach slab .
d. schedule the ride quality testing num days before needed by contacting the office of materials .
clean and clear obstructions from the test area .
e. correct the sections that do not meet the ride quality criteria of this specification .
after correction these sections are subject to retesting with the lightweight profiler .
the engineer shall direct the type of correction method which may include milling grinding removing and replacing the roadway no additional compensation will be made .
the department will perform ride quality testing up to two times on the bridge approaches at no cost to the contractor .
additional profilograph testing will cost the contractor num per test .
num .
surface smoothness acceptance when recommended by the office of materials a pay reduction may be accepted in lieu of correction for roadways and bridge approaches that fail to achieve specified smoothness indexes .
d. reevaluation of lots when lots are reevaluated as shown in subsection num samples tests cited specifications sampling and testing is according to gdt num .
request for reevaluation shall be made within num working days of notification of the lot results .
the following procedures apply num .
mixture acceptance the department will take the same number of new tests on cores taken at the locations where the loads sampled were placed and will use only those cores results for acceptance .
if the location of the sampled loads can not be isolated and documented to the approval of the engineer the lot will not be reevaluated and the original test results will be used for acceptance .
the department will use the absolute average deviations from the job mix formula for these tests to determine acceptance based on the appropriate column in the asphalt cement content and aggregate gradation of asphalt concrete mixture acceptance scheduletable num or num .
num .
compaction acceptance the department will reevaluate the lot through additional testing by cutting the same number of cores originally obtained and averaging these results with the results from the original density tests .
the department will use the section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num average to determine acceptance according to the compaction acceptance schedule in subsection num.c calculate pavement mean air voids .
num table nummixture acceptance schedulesurface mixes mixture characteristics pay factor mean of the deviations from the job mix formula num test num tests num tests num tests num tests num tests num tests num tests asphalt cement content extraction ignition num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num in .
num mm sieve num mm ogfc num mm pem num mm superpave num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num in .
num mm sieve num mm sma num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num mm ogfc num mm superpave num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num mixture characteristics pay factor mean of the deviations from the job mix formula num test num tests num tests num tests num tests num tests num tests num tests num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num mm sma num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm sieve ogfc pem superpave and num mm mixes num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num mm sma num mm sma num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm sieve for ogfc and pem mixes when the mean of the deviations from the job mix formula for a particular lot exceeds the tolerance for a num pay factor in the appropriate column the lot will be paid for at num of the contract price .
num table nummixture acceptance schedulesubsurface mixes mixture characteristics pay factor mean of the deviations from the job mix formula num test num tests num tests num tests num tests num tests num tests num tests asphalt cement content extraction ignition num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num in .
num mm sieve num mm superpave num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num in .
num mm sieve num mm sma num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num in .
num mm sieve num mm superpave num mm superpave num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num mixture characteristics pay factor mean of the deviations from the job mix formula num test num tests num tests num tests num tests num tests num tests num tests num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num mm superpave num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm sieve all mixes except sma num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num mm sma num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .. num num e. segregated mixture prevent mixture placement yielding a segregated mat by following production storage loading placing and handling procedures .
ensure needed plant modifications and provide necessary auxiliary equipment .
see subsection num definitions .
if the mixture is segregated in the finished mat the department will take actions based on the degree of segregation .
the actions are described below .
num .
unquestionably unacceptable segregation when the engineer determines the segregation in the finished mat is unquestionably unacceptable follow these measures a .
suspend work and require the contractor to take positive corrective action .
the department will evaluate the segregated areas to determine the extent of the corrective work to the inplace mat as follows perform extraction and gradation analysis by taking num in num mm cores from typical visually unacceptable segregated areas .
determine the corrective work according to subsection num.e.num .
b .
require the contractor to submit a written plan of measures and actions to prevent further segregation .
work will not continue until the plan is submitted to and approved by the department .
c. when work resumes place a test section not to exceed num tons num mg of the affected mixture for the department to evaluate .
if a few loads show that corrective actions were not adequate follow the measures above beginning with step num.a .
above .
if the problem is solved work may continue .
num .
unacceptable segregation suspected when the engineer observes segregation in the finished mat and the work may be unacceptable follow these measures a .
allow work to continue at contractors risk .
b .
require contractor to immediately and continually adjust operation until the visually apparent segregated areas are eliminated from the finished mat .
the department will immediately investigate to determine the severity of the apparent segregation as follows take num in num mm cores from typical areas of suspect segregation .
test the cores for compliance with the mixture control tolerances in section num .
when these tolerances are exceeded suspend work for corrective action as outlined in subsection num.e.num .
num .
corrective work a .
remove and replace at the contractors expense any segregated area where the gradation on the control sieves is found to vary num percent or more from the approved job mix formula the asphalt cement varies num or more from the approved job mix formula or if inplace air voids exceed num based on gdt num .
the control sieves for each mix type are shown in subsection num.b determine lot acceptance .
b. subsurface mixes .
for subsurface mixes limit removal and replacement to the full lane width and no less than num ft. num m long and as approved by the engineer .
c. surface mixes .
for surface mixes ensure that removal and replacement is not less than the full width of the affected lane and no less than the length of the affected areas as determined by the engineer .
surface tolerance requirements apply to the corrected areas for both subsurface and surface mixes .
num contractor warranty and maintenance a .
contractors record maintain a dated written record of the most recent plant calibration .
keep this record available for the engineers inspection at all times .
maintain records in the form of graphs tables section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num charts mechanically prepared data num measurement thickness and spread rate tolerances for the various mixtures are specified in subsection num.a.num.b table num thickness and spread rate tolerance at any given location .
these tolerances are applied as outlined below a .
hot mix asphaltic concrete paid for by weight num .
plans designate a spread rate a. thickness determinations .
thickness determinations are not required when the plans designate a spread rate per square yard meter .
if the spread rate exceeds the upper limits outlined in the subsection num.a.num.b table num thickness and spread rate tolerance at any given location the mix in excess will not be paid for .
if the rate of spread is less than the lower limit correct the deficient course by overlaying the entire lot .
the mixture used for correcting deficient areas is paid for at the contract unit price of the course being corrected and is subject to the mixture acceptance scheduletable num or num. b. recalculate the total spread rate .
after the deficient hot mix course has been corrected the total spread rate for that lot is recalculated and mix in excess of the upper tolerance limit as outlined in the subsection num.a.num.b table num thickness and spread rate tolerance at any given location is not paid for .
the quantity of material placed on irregular areas such as driveways turnouts intersections feather edge section etc .
is deducted from the final spread determination for each lot .
num .
plans designate thickness if the average thickness exceeds the tolerances specified in the subsection num.a.num.b table num thickness and spread rate tolerance at any given location the engineer shall take cores to determine the area of excess thickness .
excess quantity will not be paid for .
if the average thickness is deficient by more than the tolerances specified in the thickness and spread rate tolerance at any given location table below the engineer shall take additional cores to determine the area of deficient thickness .
correct areas with thickness deficiencies as follows a. overlay the deficient area with the same mixture type being corrected or with an approved surface mixture .
the overlay shall extend for a minimum of num ft num m for the full width of the course .
b .
ensure that the corrected surface course complies with subsection num.c.num visual and straightedge inspection .
the mixture required to correct a deficient area is paid for at the contract unit price of the course being corrected .
the mixture is subject to the mixture acceptance scheduletable num or num .
the quantity of the additional mixture shall not exceed the required calculated quantity used to increase the average thickness of the overlaid section to the maximum tolerance allowed under the following table .
table numthickness and spread rate tolerance at any given location course thickness specified spread rate specified asphaltic concrete base course num in num mm num lbs num lbs num kg num kg intermediate andor wearing course num in num mm num lbs num lbs num kg num kg overall of any combination of num and num num in num mm num lbs num lbs num kg num kg note num for asphaltic concrete num mm ogfc and num mm ogfc control the spread rate per lot within num lbsydnum num kgmnum of the designated spread rate .
for asphaltic concrete num mm pem control the spread rate per lot within num lbsydnum num kgmnum of the designated spread rate .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num note num thickness and spread rate tolerances are provided to allow normal variations within a given lot .
do not continuously operate at a thickness of spread rate not specified .
when the plans specify a thickness the engineer may take as many cores as necessary to determine the average thickness of the intermediate or surface course .
the engineer shall take a minimum of one core per num ft num m per two lanes of roadway .
thickness will be determined by average measurements of each core according to gdt num .
if the average exceeds the tolerances specified in the subsection num.a.num.b table num thickness and spread rate tolerance at any given location additional cores will be taken to determine the area of excess thickness and excess tonnage will not be paid for .
b .
hot mix asphaltic concrete paid for by square yard meter num .
the thickness of the base course or the intermediate or surface course will be determined by the department by cutting cores and the thickness will be determined by averaging the measurements of each core .
num .
if any measurement is deficient in thickness more than the tolerances given in the table above additional cores will be taken by the department to determine the area of thickness deficiency .
correct thickness deficiency areas as follows a. overlay the deficient area with the same type mixtures being corrected or with surface mixture .
extend the overlay at least num ft num m for the full width of the course .
b .
ensure the corrected surface course complies with subsection num.c.num visual and straightedge inspection c. the mixture is subject to the mixture acceptance scheduletable num or num .
num .
no extra payment is made for mixtures used for correction .
num .
no extra payment is made for thickness in excess of that specified .
note thickness tolerances are provided to allow normal variations within a given lot .
do not continuously operate at a thickness not specified .
c. asphaltic concrete hot mix asphaltic concrete complete in place and accepted is measured in tons megagrams or square yards meters as indicated in the proposal .
if payment is by the ton megagram the actual weight is determined by weighing each loaded vehicle on the required motor truck scale as the material is hauled to the roadway or by using recorded weights if a digital recording device is used .
the weight measured includes all materials .
no deductions are made for the weight of the individual ingredients .
the actual weight is the pay weight except when the aggregates used have a combined bulk specific gravity greater than num .
in this case the pay weight is determined according to the following formula where tnum pay weight tonnage mg t actual weight tnum t x ac aggregate x num combined bulk specific gravity num y section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num ac percent asphalt cement by weight of total mixture aggregate percent aggregate by weight of total mixture combined bulk sp .
gr .
calculated combined bulk specific gravity of various mineral aggregates used in the mixture y percent hydrated lime by weight of mineral aggregate d. bituminous material bituminous material is not measured for separate payment .
e. hydrated lime when hydrated lime is used as an antistripping additive it is not measured for separate payment .
f. field laboratory the field laboratory required in this specification is not measured for separate payment .
g. asphaltic concrete leveling payment of hot mix asphaltic concrete leveling regardless of the type mix is full compensation for furnishing materials bituminous materials and hydrated lime when required for patching and repair of minor defects surface preparation cleaning hauling mixing spreading and rolling .
mixture for leveling courses is subject to the acceptance schedule as stated in subsection num.a and subsection num.b .
h. asphaltic concrete patching hot mix asphaltic concrete patching regardless of the type mix is paid for at the contract unit price per ton megagram complete in place and accepted .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials such as bituminous material and hydrated lime when required preparing surface to be patched cutting areas to be patched trimmed and cleaned hauling mixing placing and compacting the materials num limits when the asphaltic concrete is paid for by the square yard meter and multiple lifts are used the number and thickness of the lifts are subject to the engineers approval and are used to prorate the pay factor for the affected roadway section .
num payment when materials or construction are not within the tolerances in this specification the contract price will be adjusted according to subsection num samples tests cited specifications and subsection num quality acceptance .
hot mix asphaltic concrete of the various types are paid for at the contract unit price per ton megagram or per square yard meter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and placing materials including asphalt cement hydrated lime when required approved additives and for cleaning and repairing preparing surfaces hauling mixing spreading rolling and performing other operations to complete the contract item .
payment will be made under section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num item no .
num asphaltic concrete type superpave groupblend including polymermodified bituminous materials and hydrated lime per ton megagram item no .
num asphaltic concrete type superpave groupblend including bituminous materials and hydrated lime per ton megagram item no .
num asphaltic concrete type superpave groupblend including bituminous materials gilsonite modifier and hydrated lime per ton megagram item no .
num _______ inches asphaltic concrete type superpave groupblend including bituminous materials gilsonite modifier and hydrated lime per square yard meter item no .
num asphaltic concrete type stone matrix asphalt groupblend including polymer modified bituminous materials and hydrated lime per ton megagram item no .
num asphaltic concrete type ogfc group num only including bituminous materials and hydrated lime per ton megagram item no .
num asphaltic concrete type ogfc group num only including polymermodified bituminous materials and hydrated lime per ton megagram item no .
num asphaltic concrete type porous european mix group num only including polymermodified bituminous materials and hydrated lime per ton megagram num adjustments a .
materials produced and placed during the adjustment period an adjustment period is allowed at the start of mixing operations for each type of mix placed on the contract .
asphaltic concrete ogfc or pem shall be granted an adjustment period for the first num tons num mg produced for the contract .
a new adjustment period shall not be granted for a change of producer mix design or asphalt plant location .
the adjustment period is provided to adjust or correct the mix and to establish the construction procedures and sequence of operations .
the adjustment period consists of the tons megagrams of the affected mix produced and placed on the first day of operation .
if this quantity is less than num tons num mg the engineer may combine the tons megagrams produced and placed on the first day of operation with the tons megagrams produced and placed on the next production day of the affected mix for the adjustment period .
the material produced and placed during the mixture adjustment period is one lot .
if the mix is adjusted during this period a new lot may be necessary but a new adjustment period will not be permitted .
this material shall be paid for at num percent of the contract unit price provided it meets the minimum requirements for a num pay factor for asphalt cement content and a num pay factor for gradation in the mixture acceptance schedule table num or num .
if the material placed during the adjustment period fails to meet the above requirements it will be paid for using the applicable acceptance schedule .
however when mixture used for leveling at a spread rate of num lbsyd² num kgm² or less is also used for the surface mix at a spread rate greater than num lbsyd² num kgm² an additional adjustment period will be allowed for compaction only .
this material will be paid for at a num pay factor provided it meets the minimum requirements for a num pay factor in the mixture acceptance scheduletable num or num for both asphalt content and gradation .
meets the minimum requirements for a num pay factor in table num of subsection numc calculate mean pavement air voids .
mixture which does not meet these requirements shall be paid for using the applicable acceptance schedule .
b .
determine lot acceptance pay factor adjustments are based on control sieves and asphalt cement content .
the control sieves used in the mixture acceptance schedule for the various types of mix are indicated below section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num control sieves used in the mixture acceptance schedule asphaltic concrete num mm superpave num in .
no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm sma num in .
no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm superpave num in .
no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm superpave num in .
no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm sma num in .
no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm pem num in .
no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm ogfc num in .
no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm superpave no .
num no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm sma no .
num no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm ogfc no .
num no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm mix no .
num num mm sieve and asphalt cement for projects which do not have milling quantities established as a pay item the department will pay for num mm ogfc and pem placed on ramps and end of project transitions under the appropriate mixture pay item but the mix shall be subject to the same gradation and control sieve requirements as asphaltic concrete num mm ogfc .
add polymermodified bituminous material hydrated lime and stabilizing fiber to this mix .
the department will perform the following tasks num .
using the mixture acceptance scheduletable num or num determine the mean of the deviations from the job mix formula per test results per lot .
num .
determine this mean by averaging the actual numeric value of the individual deviations from the job mix formula disregard whether the deviations are positive or negative amounts .
num .
use the asphalt cement content and aggregate gradation of asphalt concrete mixture acceptance schedule table num to determine acceptance of surface mixes and the mixture acceptance scheduletable num to determine acceptance of subsurface mixes .
on contracts involving num tons num mg or less of asphaltic concrete the mixture is accepted for num percent payment of the asphaltic concrete unit price provided it meets the following num .
minimum requirements for a num pay factor for asphalt cement content and a num pay factor for gradation in the applicable mixture acceptance scheduletable num or num .
num .
minimum requirements for a num pay factor in table num of subsection numc calculate pavement mean air voids .
if the material placed on contracts involving num tons num mg or less of asphaltic concrete does not meet the above requirements the material will be paid for using the applicable acceptance schedule .
c. calculate pavement mean air voids the department will determine the percent of maximum air voids for each lot by dividing the pavement mean air voids by the maximum pavement mean air voids acceptable .
the department will determine the payment for each lot by multiplying the contract unit price by the adjusted pay factor shown in the following air voids acceptance schedule section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction num table num air voids acceptance schedule pay factor percent of maximum air voids lot average of tests percent of maximum air voids lot average all tests for reevaluations num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num when recommended by the office of materials lots receiving less than num pay factor shall be removed and replaced at the contractors expense .
when the range tolerance is exceeded the department will apply a pay factor of num as described in subsection num.b.num .
d. asphaltic concrete for temporary detours hot mix asphaltic concrete placed on temporary detours not to remain in place as part of the permanent pavement does not require hydrated lime .
hot mix used for this purpose is paid for at an adjusted contract price .
the payment for this item shall cover all cost of construction maintenance and removal of all temporary mix .
hot mix asphaltic concrete placed as temporary mix shall meet requirements established in subsection num.f .
where the contract price of the asphaltic concrete for permanent pavement is let by the ton megagram the contract price for the asphaltic concrete placed on temporary detours is adjusted by subtracting numton nummg of mix used .
where the contract price of the mix in the permanent pavement is based on the square yard meter obtain the adjusted price for the same mix used on the temporary detour by subtracting numyd² num m² per numin nummm plan depth .
further price adjustments required in subsection num quality acceptance which are based on the appropriate adjusted contract price for mix used in the temporary detour work shall apply should temporary mix be left in place .
hot mix asphalt produced as temporary mix containing no hydrated lime shall be removed and replaced with permanent mix containing hydrated lime .
e. determine lot payment determine the lot payment as follows num .
when one of the pay factors for a specific acceptance lot is less than num determine the payment for the lot by multiplying the contract unit price by the adjusted pay factor .
num .
when two or more pay factors for a specific acceptance lot are less than num determine the adjusted payment by multiplying the contract unit price by the lowest pay factor .
if the mean of the deviations from the job mix formula of the tests for a sieve or asphalt cement content exceeds the tolerances established in the mixture acceptance scheduletable num or num and if the engineer determines that the material need not be removed and replaced the lot may be accepted at an adjusted unit price as determined by the engineer .
if the pavement mean air voids exceed the tolerances established in the air voids acceptance schedule table num remove and replace the materials at the contractors expense .
if the engineer determines the material is not acceptable to leave in place remove and replace the materials at the contractors expense .
num section numcold mix for patching num general description this specification contains requirements for a mixture of mineral aggregates and cutback asphalt suitable for short periods of stockpiling .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcoarse aggregate section numaggregates for asphaltic concrete section numasphalt cement section numcutback asphalt section numcationic asphalt emulsion b. referenced documents astm d num astm d num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the following specifications material section cationic asphalt emulsion cmsnum num cutback asphalt grade mcnum num asphalt cement pg num num liquifier no .
num fuel oil astm d num liquifier no .
num diesel fuel oil astmd num fine aggregate for asphaltic concrete num coarse aggregate for asphaltic concrete num for a list of sources see qpl num .
a. substitutions instead of using mcnum as a bituminous material a mixture of pg num and either no .
num heating fuel oil or no .
num diesel fuel oil may be used in a blend of num percent pg num and num percent fuel oil .
blend these materials before mixing or add them separately when mixing .
section numcold mix for patching num b .
composition of mixtures ensure that bituminous cold mixtures are uniform mixtures of aggregate asphaltic material and if required mineral filler .
ensure that the constituents are proportioned to produce mixtures that meet the requirements given in the composition table .
group i aggregate group ii aggregate or a blend of both may be used .
aggregate meeting gradation the requirement for size num aggregate in section num may be used instead of composite blends at the engineers discretion .
composition table for cold mixes for bituminous plant mixtures for patching cold mix type num mm superpave num mm superpave level b num mm superpave level a gradation requirements percent passing by weight num in num mm sieve num num in num mm sieve num to num num num num in num mm sieve num to num num to num num to num no .
num num mm sieve num to num num to num no .
num num mm sieve num to num num to num num to num no .
num num µm sieve num to num num to num num to num no .
num num µm sieve num to num num to num num to num percent residual ac by weight of total mixture num to num num to num num to num c. mixing temperature the recommended temperatures for aggregate and bituminous materials to ensure proper mixing are as follows cmsnum num f num c pg num num f num c mcnum num f num c aggregates num f num c num delivery storage and handling a. stockpiling the mixture num .
place the finished mixture in small stockpiles to allow the mixture to cure properly .
num .
after curing stockpile the mixture in one large stockpile if possible .
num .
ensure that the stockpiling area is clean and well drained .
num construction requirements general provisions num through num .
num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
section numcold mix for patching num num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction general provisions num through num .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement cold mix will be measured by weight in tons megagrams according at subsection num measurement and quantities and no deductions will be made for the asphalt cement or liquifier .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment cold mix will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton megagram .
payment is full compensation for materials costs production costs and shall be fob the stockpile at the plant .
payment will be made under item no .
num cold mix per ton megagram num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numhot mix recycled asphaltic concrete num general description this work includes producing and placing hot mix recycled asphaltic concrete that incorporates reclaimed asphalt pavement rap reclaimed asphalt shingles ras virgin aggregate hydrated lime and neat asphalt cement .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction section numcoarse aggregate section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures section numhot mix recycled asphaltic concrete num b. referenced documents sop num guidelines for rap stockpile approval num submittals a .
certified weight tickets notify the engineer before removing rap from a stockpile that belongs to the department .
submit to the engineer the certified weight tickets of materials removed from the stockpile .
b. affidavit submit to the laboratory an affidavit stating the sources of stockpiled materials to be used on a state project .
include the following information in the letter state project number location from which the material was removed approximate removal dates mix types removed and the estimated quantity of each type in the stockpiles other available information about the stockpiled material such as percentage of local sand in the rap obtain specific approval from the laboratory to use rap or ras stockpiles .
adhere to guidelines for rap stockpile approval .
num materials a. rap material composition use rap materials from any of the following existing roadway contractors rap stockpile that has been approved by the department department stockpile note the location of department rap material stockpiles will be given on the plans .
do not use rap materials that contain alluvial gravel or local sand in any mixture placed on interstate projects except for mixtures used in shoulder construction .
when used in shoulder construction limit rap containing local sand or alluvial gravel so that the sand or gravel contributes no more than num of the total aggregate portion of the mix .
num .
rap percentage for noninterstate projects limit the percentage of rap allowed in recycled mixes so that the overall amount of alluvial gravel does not exceed num percent of the total mix .
the percentage of alluvial gravel local sand and group i material in the rap will be determined through petrographic analysis or available records .
num .
rap furnished to the contractor but not used in the work remains the contractors property .
rap used in the recycled mixtures for mainline or ramps if applicable may make up from num to num percent of the mixture depending on the amount of rap available the production facilities and whether the mixture meets the requirements in section num .
the maximum ratio of rap material to the recycled mixtures other than sma is num percent for continuous mix type plants and num percent for batch type plants .
the maximum ratio of rap material to the recycled mixture is num percent for stone matrix asphalt sma mixes .
num .
process rap material section numhot mix recycled asphaltic concrete num process rap material to be used in the recycled mixture so that num percent will pass the num in num mm sieve .
additional crushing and sizing may be required if the rap aggregate exceeds the maximum sieve size for the mix type as shown in section num .
obtain representative materials from the rap stockpile for the mix design .
b. ras material ras materials are produced as a byproduct of manufacturing roofing shingles andor discarded shingle scrap from the reroofing of buildings .
num .
limit the amount of ras material used in the recycled mixture to no greater than num percent of the total mixture weight .
num .
shred the ras material before incorporating it into the mix to ensure that num percent of the shredded pieces are less than num in num mm in any dimension .
num .
remove all foreign materials such as paper roofing nails wood or metal flashing .
num .
provide test results for bulk sample analysis known as polarized light microscopy if postconsumer shingles are used to certify the ras material is free of asbestos .
test stockpiles at the rate of one test per num tons megagrams prior to processing .
other than as specifically stated in this subsection ensure that ras material is used according to the same requirements as described for rap material .
c. asphaltic concrete removed from an existing roadway asphaltic concrete removed from an existing roadway becomes the contractors property unless specified otherwise on the plans .
rap material retained by the department is designated on the plans and the rap shall be stockpiled at the location specified on the plans .
d. local sand and group i material in rap use of local sand in recycled mixes is restricted as stipulated in section num for the project .
however rap which contains local sand may be used in surface and intermediate layers of noninterstate projects so long as the rap percentage used does not contribute more than num local sand to the total aggregate portion of the mix .
the amount of local sand in the rap material shall be considered when determining the percentage of local sand in the total mix .
where pay items specify that group ii only aggregate is to be used rap which consists primarily of group ii aggregate but contains some group i aggregate shall be limited such that the group i aggregate makes up no more than num of the total aggregate portion of the mix .
when a blend i mix is specified any group i materials in the rap will be considered when determining the group i portion allowed in the total mix as specified in subsection num.a.num .
e. asphalt cement using laboratory evaluations the department will determine the asphalt cement grade to be used in the recycled mixture .
the asphalt cement shall meet the requirements of section num .
when the asphalt cement is blended with asphalt cement recovered from the rap material and after tests on residue from thin film oven tests the asphalt cement shall have a viscosity of num to num poises num to num pa or as approved by the engineer .
recover asphalt cement from the recycled mixture to verify that the specified viscosity is being met .
if the engineer determines during construction that the selected asphalt cement grade is not performing satisfactorily the department may change the asphalt cement grade in the mixture with no change in the contract unit price .
f. recycled mixture the recycled mixture shall be a homogenous mixture of rap or ras material virgin aggregate hydrated lime and neat asphalt cement .
ensure that the mixture conforms to an approved mixture design outlined in section num .
section numhot mix recycled asphaltic concrete num num delivery storage and handling separate the stockpiles by project sources and by group i and group ii aggregate types .
erect a sign on each stockpile to identify the sources .
if rap material from different project sources becomes intermixed in a stockpile only use those materials when approved by the laboratory .
the department may reject by visual inspection stockpiles that are not clean and free of foreign materials .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a .
hot mix plant use a hot mix plant for the recycling process with necessary modifications approved by the engineer to process recycled material .
design equip and operate the plant so that the proportioning heating and mixing yields a uniform final mixture within the job mix formula tolerances .
b .
cold feed bin proportion the rap or ras material using a separate cold feed bin .
ensure that the material meets the size requirements in subsection num materials .
the ratio of the rap or ras to virgin aggregate shall be controlled gravimetrically .
c. electronic belt weighing devices use electronic belt weighing devices to monitor the flow of rap or ras and the flow of virgin aggregate .
for batchtype plants the rap or ras portion of the mix may be weighed in a weigh hopper before incorporating it into the pugmill .
the rap shall be screened through a numinch maximum sized screen prior to crossing the cold feed weigh .
ensure the amount of rap material incorporated into the asphalt plant does not change after this final measurement is processed by the asphalt plant computer .
d. feeders and conveyors equip plants with an interlocking system of feeders and conveyors that synchronize the rap or ras material flow with the virgin aggregate flow .
ensure that the electronic controls track the flow rates indicated by the belt weighing devices and develop the signal to automatically maintain the desired ratio at varying production rates .
design the rap or ras feeder bins conveyor system and auxiliary bins if used to prevent rap material from segregating and sticking .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction follow the requirements in section num for hot mix recycled asphaltic concrete production and placement materials equipment and acceptance plans except as noted or modified in this specification .
num quality acceptance the department may require additional quality control tests to determine the rap stockpile consistency and the rap aggregate quality .
in this case conduct at least three extractiongradation tests from each individual source .
ensure that aggregate meets the quality standards in section num .
section numhot mix recycled asphaltic concrete num num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement recycled asphaltic concrete mixture complete in place and accepted is measured in tons megagrams .
the weight is determined by recorded weights if an approved recording device is used .
or the weight is determined by weighing each loaded vehicle on an approved motor truck scale as the material is hauled to the roadway .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the work performed and the materials furnished as described in this specification will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton megagram .
payment is full compensation for providing materials hauling and necessary crushing processing placing rolling and finishing the recycled mixture and providing labor tools equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work including hauling and stockpiling rap or ras material .
payment will be made under item no .
num recycled asphaltic concrete ___ mm superpave groupblend including bituminous materials per ton megagram item no .
num recycled asphaltic concrete ___ mm superpave groupblend including bituminous materials and hydrated lime per ton megagram item no .
num recycled asphaltic concrete ___ mm superpave groupblend including polymermodified bituminous materials and hydrated lime per ton megagram item no .
num recycled asphaltic concrete ___ mm superpave type__ groupblend including bituminous materials and hydrated lime per ton megagram item no .
num recycled asphaltic concrete _______mm mix groupblend including bituminous materials and hydrated lime per ton megagram item no .
num __________in mm recycled asphaltic concrete type superpave groupblend including bituminous materials per square yard meter item no .
num __________in mm recycled asphaltic concrete type superpave groupblend including bituminous materials and hydrated lime per square yard meter item no .
num __________in mm recycled asphaltic concrete type superpave groupblend including polymermodified bituminous materials and hydrated lime per square yard meter item no .
num __________in mm recycled asphaltic concrete ______ mm mix groupblend including bituminous materials and hydrated lime per square yard meter item no .
num recycled asphaltic concrete patching including bituminous materials per ton megagram item no .
num recycled asphaltic concrete patching including bituminous materials and hydrated lime per ton megagram item no .
num recycled asphaltic concrete leveling including bituminous materials per ton megagram section numhot mix recycled asphaltic concrete num item no .
num recycled asphaltic concrete leveling including bituminous materials and hydrated lime per ton megagram item no .
num recycled asphaltic concrete type stone matrix asphalt group blend including polymermodified bituminous materials and hydrated lime per ton megagram a .
materials produced and placed during the adjustment period an adjustment period is allowed at the start of mixing operations for each type of mix placed on the contract .
a new adjustment period shall not be granted for a change of producer mix design or asphalt plant location .
the adjustment period is provided to adjust or correct the mix and to establish the construction procedures and sequence of operations .
the adjustment period consists of the tons megagrams of the affected mix produced and placed on the first day of operation .
if this quantity is less than num tons num mg the engineer may combine the tons megagrams produced and placed on the first day of operation with the tons megagrams produced and placed on the next production day of the affected mix for the adjustment period .
the material produced and placed during the mixture adjustment period is one lot .
if the mix is adjusted during this period a new lot may be necessary but a new adjustment period will not be permitted .
this material shall be paid for at num percent of the contract unit price provided it meets the minimum requirements for a num pay factor for asphalt cement content and a num pay factor for gradation in the mixture acceptance schedule table num or num .
if the material placed during the adjustment period fails to meet the above requirements it will be paid for using the applicable acceptance schedule .
however when mixture used for leveling at a spread rate of num lbsyd² num kgm² or less is also used for the surface mix at a spread rate greater than num lbsyd² num kgm² an additional adjustment period will be allowed for compaction only .
this material will be paid for at a num pay factor provided it meets the minimum requirements for a num pay factor in the mixture acceptance scheduletable num or num for both asphalt content and gradation .
meets the minimum requirements for a num pay factor in table num of subsection numc calculate mean pavement air voids .
mixture which does not meet these requirements shall be paid for using the applicable acceptance schedule .
b .
determine lot acceptance pay factor adjustments are based on control sieves and asphalt cement content .
the control sieves used in the mixture acceptance schedule for the various types of mix are indicated below control sieves used in the mixture acceptance schedule asphaltic concrete num mm superpave num in .
no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm sma num in .
no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm superpave num in .
no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm superpave num in .
no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm sma num in .
no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm superpave no .
num no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm sma no .
num no .
num num mm num mm sieves and asphalt cement asphaltic concrete num mm mix no .
num num mm sieve and asphalt cement the department will perform the following tasks section numhot mix recycled asphaltic concrete num num .
using the mixture acceptance scheduletable num or num of subsection num to determine the mean of the deviations from the job mix formula per test results per lot .
num .
determine this mean by averaging the actual numeric value of the individual deviations from the job mix formula disregard whether the deviations are positive or negative amounts .
num .
use the asphalt cement content and aggregate gradation of asphalt concrete mixture acceptance schedule table num or num of subsection num to determine acceptance of surface mixes and the mixture acceptance scheduletable num of subsection num to determine acceptance of subsurface mixes .
on contracts involving num tons num mg or less of asphaltic concrete the mixture is accepted for num percent payment of the asphaltic concrete unit price provided it meets the following num .
minimum requirements for a num pay factor for asphalt cement content and a num pay factor for gradation in the applicable mixture acceptance scheduletable num or num ofsubsection num .
num .
minimum requirements for a num pay factor in table num of subsection num.c calculate pavement mean air voids .
if the material placed on contracts involving num tons num mg or less of asphaltic concrete does not meet the above requirements the material will be paid for using the applicable acceptance schedule .
c. calculate pavement mean air voids the department will determine the percent of maximum air voids for each lot by dividing the pavement mean air voids by the maximum pavement mean air voids acceptable .
the department will determine the payment for each lot by multiplying the contract unit price by the adjusted pay factor shown in the following air voids acceptance schedule table num air voids acceptance schedule pay factor percent of maximum air voids lot average of tests percent of maximum air voids lot average all tests for reevaluations num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num when the range tolerance is exceeded the department will apply a pay factor of num as described in subsection num.b.num .
d. asphaltic concrete for temporary detours hot mix asphaltic concrete placed on temporary detours that will not remain in place as part of the permanent pavement does not require hydrated lime .
hot mix used for this purpose is paid for at an adjusted contract price .
the payment for this item shall cover all cost of construction maintenance and removal of all temporary mix .
hot mix asphaltic concrete placed as temporary mix shall meet requirements established in subsection num.f .
where the contract price of the asphaltic concrete for permanent pavement is let by the ton megagram the contract price for the asphaltic concrete placed on temporary detours is adjusted by subtracting numton nummg of mix used .
section numhot mix recycled asphaltic concrete num where the contract price of the mix in the permanent pavement is based on the square yard meter obtain the adjusted price for the same mix used on the temporary detour by subtracting numyd² num m² per numin nummm plan depth .
further price adjustments required in subsection num quality acceptance which are based on the appropriate adjusted contract price for mix used in the temporary detour work shall apply should temporary mix be left in place .
hot mix asphalt produced as temporary mix containing no hydrated lime shall be removed and replaced with permanent mix containing hydrated lime .
e. determine lot payment determine the lot payment as follows num .
when one of the pay factors for a specific acceptance lot is less than num determine the payment for the lot by multiplying the contract unit price by the adjusted pay factor .
num .
when two or more pay factors for a specific acceptance lot are less than num determine the adjusted payment by multiplying the contract unit price by the lowest pay factor .
if the mean of the deviations from the job mix formula of the tests for a sieve or asphalt cement content exceeds the tolerances established in the mixture acceptance scheduletable num or num and if the engineer determines that the material need not be removed and replaced the lot may be accepted at an adjusted unit price as determined by the engineer .
if the pavement mean air voids exceed the tolerances established in the air voids acceptance schedule table num remove and replace the materials at the contractors expense .
if the engineer determines that the material is not acceptable to leave in place remove and replace the materials at the contractors expense .
num section numhot inplace recycled asphaltic concrete num description this section covers the hot inplace recycling of the existing surface in a continuous multistep process which includes softening the existing surface with heat hot milling to obtain the depth shown in the plan typical section or stated in the contract general notes applying a tack coat applying a rejuvenating agent adding plant produced asphaltic concrete and virgin aggregate if needed prior to remixing thoroughly remixing leveling and relaying the recycled mixture num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section num section num section num section num section num section num b. referenced documents aashto tnum aashto tnum aashto tp num aashto tp num astm dnum astm dnum astm dnum astm dnum gdt num gdt num error reference source not found.gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num section numhot inplace recycled asphaltic concrete num gdt num gsp num num submittals submit the proposed mix design for approval .
as a minimum the design shall include the following the proportional blend of inplace materials and rejuvenating agent the proportional percentage of virgin aggregate and plantproduced hot mix asphalt if required the sources of all materials to be used in the mixture the theoretical maximum specific gravity of the final mixture determined by aashto tnum the air void volume of the mixture after compacting for num gyrations with a gyratory compactor according to aashto tp num use an approved qualified laboratory to perform the mixture design analysis .
ensure the final design mixture has an air void volume within num .
submit to the office of materials om representative samples of each ingredient to be used in the final inplace mixture for design verification and additional testing as needed .
the department will perform testing for moisture and rutting susceptibility .
adjust mixture proportions as needed to ensure the final mixture meets the following requirements average rut depth not to exceed num in num mm when tested using gdt num .
minimum tensile splitting ratio of num and minimum individual stress results of num psi num kpa when tested using gdt num .
exception a tensile splitting ratio of no less than num is acceptable so long as all individual test values exceed num psi num kpa .
allow the department two weeks to verify the mix design after receiving the proposed mix design and material .
do not begin recycling operations until the department has approved the design and accepted the mixture .
num materials the materials to be used and their specifications are listed below a .
aggregate add virgin aggregate if required which is from an approved source and which meets requirements of section num .
use the stone size and spread rate specified in the plans additional virgin aggregate from approved sources may be added based on the mixture design analysis at no additional cost to the department .
b. plantproduced hot mix asphaltic concrete add the type and amount of plantproduced asphaltic concrete if required as specified in the plans .
additional asphaltic concrete may be added based on the mixture design analysis at no additional cost to the department .
ensure the hot mix asphaltic concrete is produced according to section num and section num .
c. asphalt cement rejuvenating agent obtain approval by the office of materials for the source amount and type of rejuvenating agent to be used .
the department reserves the right to changewithout a change in the contract unit price the agent and amount being used in the mixture if it is determined by the engineer that the rejuvenating agent is not performing satisfactorily .
section numhot inplace recycled asphaltic concrete num d. bituminous tack coat use a cationic asphalt emulsion crsnumh cssnumh or cqsnumh for the bituminous tack coat that meets section num .
apply the tack coat with a system equipped with positive stopstart capabilities that will prevent tack puddles and which will uniformly distribute the tack across the full width of the surface being recycled .
apply tack after the existing surface has been heated milled and removed from the roadway and prior to replacing the material onto the roadway .
e. asphalt modifier provide asphalt modifier as specified in the plans .
it shall be added at a dosage rate that will yield at least num solid polymer by weight of the asphalt cement of the inplace material .
asphalt modifiers shall be approved by the office of materials prior to use in the work .
the department reserves the right to change the type modifier and amount to be used without a change in the contract unit price if the engineer determines that the asphalt modifier is not performing satisfactorily .
num delivery storage and handling a .
aggregate storage store or stockpile mineral aggregates in a manner that will prevent segregation mixing of the various sizes and contamination with foreign materials .
b .
storage of bituminous material always keep clean all equipment used to store and handle bituminous material and operate it in such a manner to prevent contamination with foreign matter .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment the engineer shall approve all equipment tools and machines used to perform this work .
do not attempt work with malfunctioning equipment .
the engineer may stop the work if equipment and tools are not sufficient to place the materials satisfactorily .
a .
heating and milling units ensure the heating unit meets the following requirements capable of heating the asphaltic concrete pavement to a temperature high enough to remove excess moisture and allow hot milling of the material to the designated plan depth without breaking aggregate particles controls the heating process to prevent charring the existing surface avoid producing undesirable pollutants and prevent differential softening of the pavement confine the heat application under a shielded or enclosed hood make all efforts to protect adjacent landscape from heat damage .
rebuild repair restore and make good all injuries or damages to adjacent landscape at the contractors expense .
equip the unit which contains milling heads with longitudinal grade controls as described in subsectin num.c which will consistently control the depth of the milling operation .
milling heads shall remove the heated existing pavement to the depth specified in the plans for the full transverse width even if additional virgin aggregate or asphaltic concrete mixture is added at no cost to the department .
use a portable milling unit to remove heated material from around utility structures to the full plan depth just prior to placement of the recycled material .
do not attempt to remove heated material from utility structures with hand tools only and do not damage the structures .
repair any damage to structures at no cost to the department .
section numhot inplace recycled asphaltic concrete num b. blending unit provide a blending unit which meets the following requirements capable of blending the removed material and rejuvenating agent as well as virgin aggregate asphalt modifier and plantproduced hot mix asphaltic concrete if required into a homogeneous mixture synchronizes application of all materials based on the volume of material being recycled to provide a proportional application at the predetermined application rate add the rejuvenator after milling has taken place and before or during the blending process with a positive startstop mechanism that is automatically controlled by the volume of recycled material to be rejuvenated .
do not add rejuvenator based on linear distance travelled .
add asphalt modifier if required at locations specified in the plans or directed by the engineer .
add modifiers during the blending process through a distribution system that will uniformly control the rate of application based on the volume of material being recycled and which contains a measuring system to verify the dosage rate .
c. screed ensure the screed meets the following requirements capable of collecting and distributing the recycled mixture over variable widths for the entire width being processed capable of controlling transverse crossslope as directed by the engineer provides a uniform crosssection without streaks or blemishes controls longitudinal grade electronically in conjunction with a mobile reference or by a noncontacting laser or sonar type ski with at least four referencing stations mounted at a minimum length of num feet num m d. auxiliary equipment provide suitable surface cleaning equipment hand tools rollers and other support equipment necessary to perform the work .
ensure all other equipment meets requirements of section num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
surface preparation thoroughly clean the surface to be recycled of all dirt vegetation and other objectionable materials immediately prior to the affected area being recycled .
remove all metal raised pavement markers and thermoplastic paint markings prior to recycling .
b .
heat remove and blend materials evenly heat the pavement at full lane width plus a minimum num in num mm overlap onto adjacent pavement materials .
control the heating to ensure uniform penetration without differential softening of the surface and so that the heated material has a temperature in the range of num num f num num c measured immediately behind the heating unit .
if virgin aggregate is added distribute the aggregate across the entire width being recycled prior to the last heat application .
hot mill and rework the pavement to the width and depth shown in the plan typical section .
control the width of each pass to provide proper placement of longitudinal joints .
control the depth of loosened pavement to within num in num mm of the depth specified .
ensure the milled material is heated sufficiently so that it is free of lumps .
milled particles shall section numhot inplace recycled asphaltic concrete num not be greater than num in num mm in size .
accomplish the recycling by using milling heads capable of gathering the loose material and conveying it to a mixing chamber .
the mixing chamber should blend the material uniformly and create a windrow with the final mix .
do not use scrappers scarifiers or any mechanical means of removing the softened pavement other than milling heads .
ensure the final blended mix in the windrow is uniform .
all aggregate shall be consistently coated .
there shall be no evidence of broken or fractured aggregate in the windrowed material .
inconsistency and or nonuniformity of the windrowed material prior to placement will result in the immediate cessation of recycling until a plan of corrective action is approved by the engineer .
after modifications to the equipment or adjustment to the additives proportions have been made and approved the contractor should be allowed to resume work in a num ft num m test section to be evaluated by the engineer prior to continuing recycling blend the removed material with a rejuvenating agent and virgin aggregate asphalt modifier or plantproduced hot mix asphaltic concrete if needed to produce a homogeneous mixture .
control the rate of application of the rejuvenator to ensure compliance with the mix design and dynamic shear rheometer dsr values specified in subsection num.a .
apply other materials as specified in the contract or as determined by the mix design analysis .
c. tack coat apply tack coat uniformly over the milled area prior to placement of the blended materials .
control the application rate within num num galydnum num num lmnum .
at any time during the recycling process it is observed that an adequate bond is not being achieved three sixinch nummm cores may be obtained for testing .
these cores will be evaluated for adequate bond strength using ncats bond shear device inconjunction with the marshall apaparatus .
a minimum shear strength of num psi shall be required .
d. application control placement of the mixture to produce a surface true to line grade and crossslope with a uniform surface texture free of segregation lumps or other unacceptable streaks or blemishes as determined by the engineer .
ensure the mixture meets the acceptance requirements for mixture quality compaction smoothness and thickness as specified in subsection num .
e. overlay overlay the recycled mixture if required by the contract by producing and placing a mixture that meets requirements of section num and section num .
smoothness requirements for the hot inplace recycled mixture do not apply if the mixture is overlaid .
num quality acceptance a .
mixture base acceptance of the materials used in the work on section num and section num except that pay factors for gradation and asphalt content will not apply .
take a minimum of one sample of mixture for each day of operation to determine quality acceptance of the mixture .
take samples directly behind the paver according to gsp num at the location determined by the engineer .
perform extraction and gradation testing according to gdt num and gdt num or other suitable method approved by the office of materials .
determine the laboratory density stability and flow of the mixture using the num blow marshal proceedure in aashto tnum .
recover the extracted asphalt cement using gdt num and test for dynamic shear according to aashto tp num method for determining the rheological properties of asphalt binder using dynamic shear rheometer dsr .
adjust the amount of rejuvenator as necessary to maintain dsr results within a range of num poises num pas when tested at num f num c. do not continue the work until corrective adjustments are made if two consecutive samples exceed the range for dsr values .
submit test results electronically to the engineer and office of materials within num hours after samples are taken .
section numhot inplace recycled asphaltic concrete num b. compaction compact the recycled mixture immediately after placement so that the maximum pavement mean air voids is num percent or less based on the theoretical specific gravity measured daily using the tnum method performed on mixture sampled directly behind the paver .
determine the mixture compaction using either gdt num or gdt num .
the compaction is accepted in lots defined in subsection num.a acceptance plans for gradation and asphalt cement content and is within the same lot boundaries as the mixture acceptance .
meet the compaction requirements of subsection num.b .
and subsection num.c .
the department will perform all compaction testing .
c. smoothness the department will perform acceptance testing for surface course smoothness tolerance using the laser road profiler according to gdt num .
smoothness testing will be performed on the mainline traveled way and on ramps more than one half mile kilometer in length .
clean the roadway of any debris and obstructions and provide traffic control to conduct the testing when requested by the engineer .
ensure the pavement does not exceed a target smoothness index of num .
do not continue the work until corrective adjustments have been made if the target value is exceeded .
perform corrective work at no expense to the department by repeating the hot inplace recycling process according to this section if the smoothness index exceeds num .
maintain a num ft. num m straightedge in the vicinity of the paving operation at all times to use in measuring minor surface irregularities and provide the labor for its use .
correct all irregularities in excess of num in num mm in num ft. num m. stop the operation until corrective measures are taken when irregularities such as rippling tearing or pulling indicate a continuing problem in equipment mixture or operating techniques .
d. mill depth mill heated material to the thickness specified in the plan typical section or contract general notes .
take cores at locations determined by the engineer at a minimum frequency of one core per num ft num m per two lanes of roadway or five cores per day whichever is less to verify mill depth .
the department will determine the average mill depth based on roadway core measurements according to gdt num .
mill depth will be determined based on total rejuvenated thickness less any thickness contributed by added virgin materials .
to receive full payment for mill depth ensure the average milled depth is no less than num in num mm of that specified in the plan typical section or contract general notes .
apply a pay reduction of num to the total square yards meters applied that day if the average depth is less than that specified by more than num in num mm but no more than num in num mm of that specified .
take additional cores to determine the area of deficient depth if the average depth is less than that specified by more than num in num mm .
e. corrections correct any areas deficient in depth by more than num in num mm by repeating the hot inplace recycling process at no expense to the department .
stop the work until corrective measures are made if the average mill depth for two consecutive days is less than num in num mm of that specified .
no individual location shall be recycled more than num times .
if after the second recycling process the deficiency is still apparent mill and inlay this location with plant produced asphaltic concrete .
the plant produced asphaltic concrete shall be equivalent to the recycled design properties .
f. test section and acceptance the contractor shall be granted a num lane mile num m test section at the beginning of construction to be evaluated by the office of materials for acceptance prior to continuing recycling .
if any specified requirement is not obtained work shall be immediately stopped .
if at any time during construction it is determined that the contractors equipment and recycling techniques can not consistently meet requirements the recycling operation shall be stopped until the office of materials section numhot inplace recycled asphaltic concrete num reviews and approves all modifications in equipment and recycling techniques .
the contractor shall place a num ft num m test section to be evaluated and accepted by the office of materials prior to resuming recycling .
g. rutting susceptibility test .
cores taken each day for depth verification shall be tested according to gdt num .
maximum deformation shall be num mm num in .
num measurement hot inplace recycled asphaltic concrete mixture is measured by the square yard meter of the surface area completed and to the depth specified .
in computing square yards meters the lengths and widths used shall be as specified in section num measurement and payment .
rejuvenating agent virgin aggregate and plantproduced asphaltic concrete shall be added as individual components of the recycled mixture as required in the mix design analysis .
include this cost in the unit bid price per square yard meter .
bituminous materials for tack coat applied and accepted will be measured as outlined in section num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment hot inplace recycled asphaltic concrete is paid for at the contract unit price per square yard meter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials all equipment work and labor .
payment also includes removal of raised pavement markers and thermoplastic striping if applicable heating and hotmilling adding rejuvenator performing the mix design performing project sampling and testing and other incidentals necessary to complete the work .
aggregate and hot mix asphaltic concrete which may be added to meet requirements of the mix design analysis shall be included in the contract unit price .
bituminous tack coat is paid for per gallon liter under separate payment .
hot mix asphaltic concrete specified for overlaying if any will be paid for under separate payment .
aggregate specified in the contract if any excluding that required based on the mix design analysis will be paid for under separate payment .
payment will be made under item no .
num hot inplace recycled asphaltic concrete per square yard meter item no .
num hot inplace recycled asphaltic concrete including polymer modifier per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numpaverlaid surface treatment num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numhot asphaltvulcanized rubber seal treatment num general description this work includes placing a hot asphaltvulcanized rubber seal treatment on an existing pavement surface according to the specifications .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numbituminous tack coat section numbituminous surface treatment section numcoarse aggregate section numasphalt cement b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials a. asphalt cement before adding rubber and diluent ensure that the asphalt cement conforms to section num pg num .
b .
ground vulcanized tire rubber ensure that the ground vulcanized tire rubber meets the following requirements sieve size maximum percent passing by weight no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num µm num ensure that the granulated rubber has the following characteristics a specific gravity of num num no more than a trace of fabric free of wire or other contaminating materials an exception is that up to four percent of calcium carbonate may be included to prevent the particles from sticking together .
fully vulcanized c. diluent for diluent use kerosene with a boiling point above num ºf num ºc .
section numhot asphaltvulcanized rubber seal treatment num d. cover aggregate ensure that cover aggregate conforms to section num class a group ii .
ensure that gradation of the cover aggregate meets section num for no .
num stone .
preheat the cover aggregate to num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc and precoat with a maximum of num percent of performance grade pg num described in section num .
see subsection num.a mixing .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment ensure that equipment conforms to section num and the following a. canvas cover if directed by the engineer cover exposed material with canvas to help prevent the temperature of exposed material from dropping .
see subsection num.a mixing .
b .
aggregate spreader use an adjustable selfpropelled aggregate spreader to accurately spread the amounts given in the plans per square yard meter .
c. rubber tire rollers use at least three rubber tire rollers loaded to num lbs num kg per tire .
inflate tires to num psi num kpa .
num preparation a .
spread the asphaltrubber composition before applying the hot asphaltrubber composition clean and patch the existing pavement surface and treat with a bituminous tack coat as specified in section num .
b .
test the distributor trucks before spreading the asphaltrubber composition test distributor trucks for transverse spread within the previous num months .
prove to the engineer that each transverse spread was as uniform as possible and variance was never greater than num percent .
note a transverse spread for other asphalt products will not be accepted .
the rate of transverse spread will be determined according to the requirements of the georgia tentative test method .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. mixing mix asphalt and rubber as follows section numhot asphaltvulcanized rubber seal treatment num num .
before adding the rubber ensure that the temperature of the asphalt is no higher than num f num c for pg num .
num .
rapidly combine the rubber with the asphalt .
mix the rubber until the material approaches a semifluid consistency .
ensure that the weight proportions of the two materials are as follows asphalt num num rubber num num num .
mix the hot asphalt and rubber for at least num minutes .
note num design the rubber and asphalt combination method to ensure that the engineer can determine the percentages by weight of each component to be mixed .
ensure that the mixing equipment can produce a homogenous mixture of rubber and asphalt to prevent separation .
note num preheating precoating and covering aggregate with canvas may be waived if proper facilities are not available and if application conditions are favorable .
precoating is often used for dust control .
num .
after the asphalt and rubber have reacted fully add a diluent to temporarily reduce the viscosity of the mixture improve the spraying action from the distributor provide a better coating of cover aggregate the diluent amount is num percent to num percent by volume of the hot asphaltrubber composition .
when adding the diluent ensure that the temperature of the hot asphaltrubber composition does not exceed num f num c. b .
spreading spread the asphaltrubber mixture as follows num .
when the proper consistency is reached immediately begin application .
never hold the mixture at temperatures over num f num c for more than num hours after reaching application consistency .
num .
use the following application rates a .
in areas where temperatures remain above num f num c during the winter season apply the hot asphaltrubber mixture at num gallonsyd² num gallonsyd² num litersm² num litersm² .
b .
in areas where temperatures drop below num f num c apply the mixture at num galyd² num galyd² numlitersm² num litersm² unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
application rates are based on num lbsgal num kgl hot and conversions to the standard num f num c are not necessary .
note place the hot asphaltrubber mixture only when the ambient temperature is num f num c or above and rising .
num .
apply the cover aggregate at num to num lbsyd² num to num kgm² which is num to num lbs num to num kg for no .
num stone and num to num lbsnum to num kg for no .
num stone or as directed by the engineer .
num .
perform at least four complete coverages with the pneumatic rollers .
roll the cover aggregate immediately after application to ensure maximum aggregate embedment .
do not permit traffic on the completed surface until approved by the engineer .
num .
if heavy or highspeed traffic may displace the cover aggregate apply num to num lbsyd² num to num kgm² of sand after rolling and before opening the lane to traffic as directed .
num .
sweep the joint edges clean of overlapping cover aggregate before applying the adjacent asphaltrubber material .
section numhot asphaltvulcanized rubber seal treatment num num .
avoid skips and overlaps at joints and protect the surfaces of adjacent structures from being spattered or marred .
these defects will be corrected at the contractors expense .
num .
make transverse joints as follows a .
place building paper over the ends of the previous applications .
b .
start the adjoining application on the building paper .
c. remove and dispose of the paper to the engineers satisfaction .
num .
in urban areas remove excess chips within num hours after placing .
do not use gutter brooms or steeltined brooms and do not disturb the loose chips from parkways sidewalks and intersecting streets .
continue this operation until excess or loose rock is removed from the roadway surface and abutting rightsofway .
num .
if needed apply a flush coat to areas without substantial traffic at the engineers direction .
apply light sanding after flushing to prevent pickup if required .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the quantity to be measured is the number of square yards meters of seal treatment completed and accepted .
the length is measured along the surface .
the width is specified on the plans plus or minus any authorized changes .
irregular areas are measured by the surface square yards meters within the lines shown on the plans or authorized changes .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the accepted quantity of seal treatment is paid for at the contract unit price per square yard meter .
payment is full compensation for providing materials hauling mixing spreading rolling and performing any other work to complete the item .
payment will be made under item no .
num hot asphalt vulcanized rubber seal treatment per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numcoal tar emulsion seal coat num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numasphaltrubber joint and crack seal num general description this work includes filling type m or sealing type s joints and cracks in existing pavements with rubber asphalt mixtures .
a polymermodified asphalt rubber pmar blend may be used in lieu of both type m and type s. num definitions type m used to fill joints and cracks in portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete pavements when required by the plans before placing an overlay .
type s used to seal joints and cracks in portland cement concrete and asphaltic concrete pavements and shoulders when not placing an overlay .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numasphalt cement b. referenced documents aashto ppnum astm d num astm dnum astm dnum astm d num num submittals certify that each lot of premixed material meets the requirements of this specification and shall submit the test results of each lot for each project .
ensure that each sealant lot is delivered in containers with the manufacturers name or trademark and lot number plainly marked .
furnish samples of the individual components of premixed material as follows at least num lbs num kg of rubber representative of each lot at least num gal num l of asphalt containing additives as proportioned proportional quantities of mixing aids or additives not included above num materials ensure that the sealant material is a premixed asphaltrubber sealant mixture .
ensure that the mixture is a blend of asphalt cement aromatic extender oils and recycled or reclaimed tire crumb rubber num num percent and num num percent by weight for type s and type m respectively based on weight in a closely controlled manufacturing process .
the dosage rates of tire crumb rubber may be reduced if a polymer modifier is added to the mixture .
produce a mixture with the following properties a. workability the mixture pours readily and penetrates a num in num mm pavement joint or crack to a depth of at least num in num mm when the application temperature of the fully reacted mixture is num ºf num ºc and the air temperature is num ºf num ºc or higher .
the mixture when placed in conventional field installation equipment readily melts to a pumping consistency after being heated to num f num c for num hours maximum .
the mixture remains in a pumping consistency when the temperature of section numasphaltrubber joint and crack seal num the field installation equipment is reduced to the normal operating temperature range of num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc .
b. curing the mixture contains no water or volatile solvents and cures immediately when cooled to a sufficient viscosity to prevent tracking caused by traffic .
c. softening point and flexibility when a fully reacted mixture sample of asphaltrubber has been heated at num ºf num ºc for one hour or when a pmar blend has been heated at num ºf num ºc for one hour it shall passthe following laboratory tests num .
softening point the minimum softening point by ring and ball described in astm d num is as follows pmar num ºf num ºc type s num ºf num ºc type m num ºf num ºc num .
flexibility bend a num in num mm thick x num in num mm wide x num in num mm long mixture specimen after conditioning to num ºf num ºc at a minimum bending rate of num degrees per secondnum seconds maximum for a numº bend over a num in num mm diameter mandrel without cracking .
d. separation test the pmar blend for phase separation by pouring a representative sample of the mixture into aluminum tubes num in num mm in diameter and num in num mm long as described in aashto ppnum .
cure the samples at num ºf num ºc for num hours .
take samples from the top and bottom of the tube and determine softening point as described in astm d num .
average the test results from the top and bottom samples .
if there is num or more difference between the average test result and either of the top or bottom test results reject the mixture due to separation .
e. adhesion when cooled the mixture bonds strongly to both asphalt and concrete pavement surfaces .
the mixture contains no materials that chemically react with these surfaces to reduce the shortterm and longterm adhesion bonds .
f. acceptable recycled or reclaimed tire crumb rubber before the rubber is added ensure the asphalt cement used in the mixture conforms to the requirements of section num pg num or pg num .
ensure that the recycled reclaimed tire crumb rubber used in the mixture meets the following requirements was obtained from used pneumatic tires such as automobile truck bus etc.not solid tires and nontire rubber sources was produced from an ambient grinding process crushes tears grinds or wears the used rubber tires at or above ordinary room temperature that produces rubber particles with a ragged spongelike surface .
cryogenically ground rubber or tire buffings are prohibited .
contains recycled vulcanized crumb rubber andor reclaimed devulcanized rubber contains at least num percent natural rubber by weight of the total rubber portion of the mixture contains no more than a trace of fabric is free of wire and other contaminating materials except up to four percent calcium carbonate or talc to prevent rubber particles from sticking contains no rubber particles greater than num in num mm long section numasphaltrubber joint and crack seal num meets the following gradation requirements sieve size percent passing no .
num num mm num no .
num num mm num to num no .
num num µm num to num no .
num num µm num to num g. polymodified asphalt rubber if a pmar blend is used ensure it meets the following additional requirements property specification limits cone penetration num ºf num ºc num num dmm resilience num ºf num ºc recovery num minimum ductility num ºf num ºc num mmminute num mm minimum asphalt compatibility astm d num pass bitumen content astm d num num minimum tensile adhesion astm d num num minimum rotational viscosity brookfield no .
num spindle num rpm num ºf num ºc num num cp num delivery storage and handling package the premixed sealant material in units weighing no more than num lbs num kg with a maximum of two num lbs num kg units per shipping container .
ensure that the plastic film used to package the units melts at normal application temperatures when placed in the installation equipment .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a .
field installation equipment use field installation equipment that produces or maintains specified temperatures even if filled to capacity .
ensure that the equipment produces or maintains a homogenous mixture of asphalt and rubber at a uniform temperature without hot or cool spots or rubber and asphalt segregation in the mixture .
b .
crack filling equipment ensure that the equipment for filling the joints and cracks directs the sealant into the crack .
seal large cracks from the bottom up .
provide squeegees as necessary .
c. air compressors ensure that the air compressors are satisfactory to the engineer .
section numasphaltrubber joint and crack seal num num preparation a .
joint and crack preparation use compressed air to thoroughly clean the joints and cracks to be sealed .
clean the pavement surface and check the joints and cracks to ensure that they are free of vegetation dirt dust moisture and other foreign material .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
restrictions do not seal joints and cracks if the joint or crack surface to be treated is not thoroughly dry .
rain is imminent .
the air temperature is below num ºf num ºc .
b .
procedure follow this procedure to seal joints and cracks num .
place the prepackaged sealant mixture in the field installation equipment .
num .
heat the sealant mixture for the proper time and temperature to provide a full reaction between the asphalt and rubber .
num .
apply the mixture at the specified application temperature according to the manufacturers recommendations or the laboratorys approval .
num .
carefully fill the joint or cracks slightly overfull .
strike off the excess with a vshaped squeegee to feather the sealant out to a width of approximately num in num mm .
num quality acceptance if the packaged units are bonded or stuck together or to the shipping container or if packaging staples or fasteners cause sealant contamination the material may be rejected as determined by the engineer .
the manufacturer must meet the requirements of this specification and furnish evidence of successful field installation and performance under similar environmental and project conditions .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement joints and cracks will be measured by the linear foot meter by surface measure .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment joints and cracks sealed according to the plans and this specification will be paid for at the contract unit price bid .
payment is full compensation for furnishing all materials and performing the work .
payment will be made under section numasphaltrubber joint and crack seal num item no .
num polymermodified asphalt rubber joint and crack seal per linear foot meter item no .
num asphaltrubber joint and crack seal type s per linear foot meter item no .
num asphaltrubber joint and crack seal type m per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numjoint and crack cleaning and seal num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numlatex modified asphalt concrete num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numwarm mix recycled asphaltic concrete num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numasphaltic concrete pavement partial removal num general description this work includes removing portions of existing asphaltic concrete pavement removing base and subgrade as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer and sawing joints in the existing asphaltic concrete pavement .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numroadway excavation section numsawed joints in existing portland cement concrete pavements b .
related documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
section numasphaltic concrete pavement partial removal num num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
saw joints saw joints as follows num .
saw joints true to the lines shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num .
saw joints the full depth of the existing asphaltic concrete unless otherwise shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
num .
leave a neat vertical face for the full depth of the retained portion .
the engineer may approve sawing less than full depth if the contractor demonstrates that the requirements can be met .
b .
remove pavement after sawing the joints begin removing the isolated pavement .
use removal methods that will not damage the pavement edges that will remain in place or impede the proposed construction .
pavement base or subgrade removed becomes the contractors property unless otherwise specified in the contract .
c. protect remaining edges after removing the pavement protect the pavement edges that will remain in place .
num .
do not allow traffic or equipment to cross the remaining edges .
num .
repair or restore the damaged edges to the engineers satisfaction at no additional cost to the department .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
section numasphaltic concrete pavement partial removal num num measurement this work will not be measured separately for payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment no separate payment will be made for the work described in this section .
when item num is included in the proposal as a pay item payment for this work is included in payment for unclassified excavation by the cubic yard meter as described in subsection num measurement .
otherwise payment is included in the overall price bid for other contract items .
payment is full compensation for providing labor and equipment sawing removing and disposing and providing other incidentals to accomplish the work described in this specification .
sawing portland cement concrete overlaid with asphaltic concrete will be measured and paid for according to section num .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numbituminous prime num general description this work includes preparing and treating an existing surface with bituminous material and blotter material if required .
treat the surface according to these specifications and conform to the lines shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numbituminous surface treatment section numcutback asphalt b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials unless otherwise specified select the types of bituminous materials .
the engineer will determine the grade of materials to be used .
the specifications for the bituminous materials include material section cutback asphalt rcnum rcnum rcnum or mcnum mcnum or mcnum num blotter material sand num.g.num section numbituminous prime num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment provide equipment that is in good repair including at least the following units that meet the requirements of subsection num equipment .
pressure distributor power broom and blower aggregate spreader if required pneumatictired roller num preparation see subsection num.b condition of surface .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction prime the following bases and other areas cement or lime stabilized bases or subbases regardless of pavement thickness soil or aggregate bases or subbases on which bituminous surface treatment will be placed soil or aggregate bases or subbases on which less than num in num mm total thickness of hot mix asphaltic concrete will be placed prime is not required on driveway construction and paved shoulders .
a .
weather limitations do not apply bituminous prime under any of these conditions surface is wet .
air temperature is below num ºf num ºc in the shade .
rain is imminent .
weather conditions may prevent proper prime coat construction .
b .
condition of surface ensure that the surface to which the prime is to be applied has been finished to the line grade and cross section specified .
ensure that the surface is uniformly compacted and bonded .
correct surface irregularities according to the specifications for the construction being primed .
section numbituminous prime num c. cleaning remove from the road loose material dust caked clay and other material that may prevent bonding of the prime with the surface .
use power sweepers or blowers the full width of the prime and num ft num mm more on each side .
where necessary sweep by hand .
d. moisture ensure that the surface is only slightly damp .
if the surface is too wet allow it to dry .
if it is too dry the engineer may require that it be sprinkled lightly just before priming .
e. temperature and surface texture the surface texture and condition of the surface determine the bituminous material grades to be used .
the following table shows the bituminous material grades and application temperatures as they are applied to various surface textures .
base texture tight average open materials and grade mcnum rcnum rcnum or mcnum rcnum or mcnum application temperature f c num num num num num num the engineer will determine the temperature for applying bituminous prime within the limits shown above .
heat and apply bituminous materials as specified in subsection num.d heating bituminous material and subsection num.e applying bituminous material .
f. amount and extent of prime the engineer will determine the exact amount of bituminous material to be used within minimum and maximum rates of num to num galyd² num to num litersm² .
apply the specified amount as follows num .
apply the determined amount uniformly and accurately .
ensure that the amount applied to any nummile num m section is within num percent of the amount specified .
num .
apply the prime the full width of the proposed wearing surface that will be superimposed plus num in num mm more on each side .
g. protection curing and maintenance do the following after priming the surface num .
close to traffic do not allow traffic on the primed surface .
leave the surface undisturbed until the prime thoroughly cures and does not pick up under traffic .
num .
roll if the surface becomes soft after it is primed roll the surface longitudinally with a pneumatictired roller at no more than num mph num kph until the surface is firmly set .
num .
blot if necessary to prevent the prime from being picked up spread clean dry sharp sand over the surface by hand or mechanically .
apply sand only to places that are tacky and use the least amount needed to prevent pick up .
no extra payment for this work or material will be made .
num .
open to traffic section numbituminous prime num after rolling and sanding if required open the primed surface to ordinary traffic subject to the conditions in subsection num.g.num close to traffic .
num .
curing and maintenance the primed surface is properly cured when it has penetrated the base sufficiently to not be picked up or displaced by traffic .
temperature and weather conditions may increase curing time .
insure the primed surface has cured to the satisfaction of the engineer prior to its being covered by other construction .
maintain the prime coat and the primed surface course until it is covered by other construction .
repair potholes scabs and soft spots prior to covering with other construction .
remove excess bituminous material .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement bituminous material for prime is not measured for separate payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment bituminous material for prime is not paid for separately .
the cost to clean the surface furnish haul and apply materials including water and sand roll and perform repairs and maintenance is included in the unit price bid for each individual base item .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numbituminous tack coat num general description this work includes furnishing and applying a bituminous tack coat on a prepared road surface including cleaning the road surface .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction section numbituminous surface treatment section numemulsified asphalt slurry seal section numasphalt cement section num emulsified asphalt section numcationic asphalt emulsion b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure materials meet the following specifications material section asphalt cement performance grade pg num pg num or pg num num anionic emulsion asphalt ntssnumhm num cationic emulsified asphalt crsnumh or crsnum num asphalt cement of performance grade pg num pg num or pg num is used for bituminous tack coat in work performed in section num .
use anionic emulsified asphalt as an option with the approval of the engineer .
use cationic emulsified asphalt as a special application material only if directed by the engineer .
the department may change the grade or type of bituminous materials without a change in the contract unit price if the engineer determines the grade or type selected is not performing satisfactorily .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section numbituminous tack coat num emulsified asphalt maintain all equipment used for the delivery storage and handling of anionic emulsified asphalt or cationic emulsified asphalt to prevent contamination of the emulsion .
transfer anionic emulsified asphalt or cationic emulsified asphalt directly to the pressure distributor from the transport tanker .
provide and maintain temperature measuring devices to continuously monitor the temperature of anionic emulsified asphalt or cationic emulsified asphalt in storage and in the pressure distributor .
do not allow anionic emulsified asphalt or cationic emulsified asphalt to freeze .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment provide equipment in good repair including the following units that meet the requirements of subsection num equipment .
power broom and blower pressure distributor provide a dedicated pressure distributor for anionic emulsified asphalt ntssnumhm to avoid contamination with incompatible materials .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
seasonal and weather limitation do not apply tack coat if the existing surface is wet or frozen .
do not place emulsified asphalt if the air temperature in the shade is less than num f num c. b .
application coat the entire areas to be paved with the tack coat unless directed otherwise by the engineer .
apply tack coat with distributor spray bars instead of hand hoses except in small areas inaccessible to spray bars .
note num do not store anionic emulsified asphalt or cationic emulsified asphalt for a period longer than num days from the time of initial loading .
note num do not use anionic emulsified asphalt or cationic emulsified asphalt on gdot funded off system projects after num days of initial loading .
section numbituminous tack coat num application rates for anionic emulsified asphalt or cationic emulsified asphalt galydnum lmnum type mix minimum maximum all mixes except ogfc and pem num num num num on thin leveling courses and freshly placed asphaltic concrete mixes reduce the application rate to num to num galyd² num to num lm² .
allow anionic emulsified asphalt or cationic emulsified asphalt to break for a minimum of num minutes after initial application .
proceed with paving only after the anionic emulsified asphalt ntssnumhm has cured to the satisfaction of the engineer .
do not use anionic emulsified asphalt or cationic emulsified asphalt under ogfc or pem .
c. temperature of material apply bituminous materials within the temperature ranges specified below .
bituminous materials temperature of application f c asphalt cement num num num num anionic emulsified asphalt ntssnumhm num num num num cationic emulsified asphalt crsnumh crsnum num num num num d. cleaning immediately before applying the tack coat clean the entire area free of loose dirt clay and other foreign materials .
e. application rate the engineer will determine the application rate of the bituminous tack coat .
f. limitations and areas coated apply only enough tack coat to the prepared road surface that can be covered with the new pavement course the same working day the tack coat is applied .
g. maintenance and protection after applying the tack coat material allow it to break until it is tacky enough to receive the surface course .
do not allow traffic on the tack .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement bituminous materials for tack coat applied and accepted are measured as outlined in subsection num measurement of bituminous materials .
diluting emulsified tack coat is not ordinarily allowed except when used underneath slurry seal and approved by the engineer .
the composition of diluted emulsified tack coat defined in subsection num construction is measured by the gallon liter of diluted mix .
num limits general provisions num through num .
section numbituminous tack coat num num payment the accepted volume of bituminous material will be paid for at the contract unit price per gallon liter for bituminous tack coat of the type and grade approved by the engineer complete in place .
payment is full compensation for preparing cleaning furnishing hauling applying material and providing incidentals to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num bituminous tack coat per gallon liter item no .
num diluted emulsified asphalt tack coat per gallon liter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numhot asphaltrubber seal treatment for stress relieving interlayer num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numasphalt concrete open graded interlayer num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numintelligent compaction for asphalt concrete num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numpaver mounted temperature equipment num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numbituminous surface treatment num general description this work includes placing one or more applications of bituminous material and aggregate on a previously prepared base or pavement .
num definitions single surface treatment one application of bituminous material that is covered with aggregate .
double surface treatment a bituminous material application that is covered with aggregate of the size specified in the proposal followed by a second bituminous material application that is covered with a second specified size aggregate .
triple surface treatment a bituminous material application that is covered with a specified size aggregate followed by subsequent applications of bituminous material that are covered with successively smaller size nominal aggregates .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of work section numcoarse aggregate section numaggregates for asphaltic concrete section numasphalt cement section numcationic asphalt emulsion b. referenced documents qpl num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials a. bituminous material select the bituminous material from any type and grade listed in the materials table below .
notify the engineer at least num days before ordering the bituminous material .
the engineer must approve the bituminous material choice .
for a list of latex sources see qpl num .
ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section asphalt cement performance grade pg num or pg num num cationic asphalt emulsion grade crsnumh or crsnum num latexmodified cationic asphalt emulsion grade crsnuml num use pg num or crsnum only at the engineers direction .
see subsection num.b .
section numbituminous surface treatment num b .
aggregates the size and group of aggregates used in the surface treatment are specified in the proposal under the appropriate line item .
do not use unconsolidated limerock unless provided for in the plans or proposal .
use class b aggregates only where the surface treatment is used for shoulder construction or where it is to be overlaid with asphaltic concrete .
material section coarse aggregate class a crushed stone or crushed slag group i or ii num fine aggregate for asphaltic concrete num for sand seal application use wa num washed screenings made from group ii aggregates .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment have the engineer approve equipment types and quantities before using equipment on the project .
ensure that the equipment used to construct the surface treatment produces work that complies with the standards in this section is on the project and in proper working order before construction begins and during construction .
a .
aggregate spreader the department will inspect annually the aggregate spreader before it is used in the work .
if the spreader is approved the department will attach an equipment certification sticker to the spreader .
use a selfpropelled aggregate spreader that can apply aggregate at the desired rate uniformly and accurately without corrugation overlaps or excess deficient areas .
ensure that the spreader can spread courses to the required widths .
provide spreaders to promptly cover the full width of the asphalt application .
b .
pressure distributor the department will inspect annually the pressure distributor before it is used in the work .
if the distributor is approved the department will attach an equipment certification sticker to the distributor .
the pressure distributor should be equipped as follows num .
mount the pressure distributor on pneumatic tires wide enough to prevent damage to the road surface .
num .
design equip maintain and operate the distributor so that the bituminous material will be heated and applied evenly throughout the length of the spray bars .
ensure that it maintains a constant uniform pressure on the nozzles .
num .
install screens between the tank and the nozzles and clean them frequently to prevent clogging .
section numbituminous surface treatment num num .
use an adjustable distributor that can deliver controlled amounts of bituminous material from num to num galyd² num galyd² num to num lm² num lm² up to num ft num m wide without atomization streaking or pulsation in the flow .
num .
use a distributor equipped with the following a tachometer and thermometers to indicate the application rate and the temperature of the tank contents measuring devices to accurately indicate the amount of bituminous material in gallons liters in the distributor before and after each application full circulating spray bars that can be adjusted laterally to conform to a stringline and capable of vertical and horizontal adjustment .
a positive shutoff control to prevent dripping bituminous material on the roadway a distributor tank equipped with a sample valve in a safe and convenient location to obtain bituminous material samples c. heating equipment ensure that heating equipment will heat and maintain the bituminous material uniformly at the temperature required .
provide an accurate thermometer .
d. steelwheeled rollers use selfpropelled tandemtype steelwheeled rollers .
the rollers shall weigh from num to num tons num to num mg .
ensure that the roller weights within these limits can properly seat the aggregate without fracturing the aggregate particles .
equip the roller drums with scrapers to prevent pick up of material .
combination rollers with pneumatictired wheels that can be alternated with a steel drum are permitted as a substitute for steelwheeled rollers .
e. pneumatictired rollers use selfpropelled two axles pneumatictired rollers with smoothtread rubber tires aligned such that gaps between the tires on one axle are covered by the tires of the other axle .
equip the roller tires with scrapers and scrubbers to prevent pick up of material .
ensure that all tires are of the same size and ply rating and inflated to a minimum of num psi num kpa .
maintain tire pressure such that the difference in pressure between any two tires does not exceed num psi num kpa .
provide ballast as directed by the engineer .
f. power broom and power blower provide at least one power broom and one power blower or a combination power broom and blower that can remove dust or loose materials from the road surface .
num preparation firmly compact finish and prime new bases .
ensure that the bases conform to the lines grades and cross sections within the tolerances specified .
a .
removing foreign material use power brooms power blowers hand brooms or other means to remove loose material dust dirt clay and other materials that prevent bituminous materials from adhering to the base .
take special care to clean the outer edges thoroughly .
where necessary use a motor grader blade to remove excess material off the paving edge .
b .
condition of prime check the condition of prime as follows num .
ensure the prime is cured before placing the mat course .
num .
repair the prime if it is loose soft unbonded removed or damaged .
section numbituminous surface treatment num num .
remove concentrations of excess prime .
num .
perform additional rolling with a pneumatictired roller before surface treatment when directed by the engineer .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
observing seasonal and weather limitations apply bituminous surface treatment only between april num and october num and only when ambient temperature has not been less than num ºf num ºc for num hours immediately prior to application .
no forecast of ambient temperature less than num ºf num ºc for num hours immediately following application .
ambient temperature and road surface temperature is at least num ºf num ºc and stable at the time of application .
no exceptions are permitted except as authorized by the engineer .
do not apply asphalt cement to a wet surface .
note num when the relative humidity exceeds num the ambient temperature exceeds num ºf num ºc the pavement temperature exceeds num ºf num ºc or the weather is windy or overcast application of bituminous surface treatment will be at the discretion of the engineer .
note num if hot mix asphaltic concrete will be applied over the surface treatment the engineer may waive the seasonal limitations providing that traffic is not permitted on the surface treatment until it is covered with hot mix asphaltic concrete .
b .
using pg num or crsnum only use pg num or crsnum when directed by the engineer due to a problem with excessive aggregate pickup during high ambient temperature .
c. observing sequence of operations and quantities of materials the sequence of operations and quantities of materials are shown in table num table num and table num table numametric table numametric and table numametric .
the engineer will determine the material quantities to be used during construction and may change the minimum or maximum application rate of any course during construction if the total quantities are within the amounts shown in the tables .
any deviation from the table quantities will require a negotiated adjustment of the contract price authorized by an approved supplemental agreement .
when a single application of bituminous surface treatment is used as a crackrelief interlayer use the quantities of materials shown in table num table numametric .
when a sand seal application is specified use the quantities of materials shown in table num table numametric .
section numbituminous surface treatment num section numbituminous surface treatment table num application type construction single double triple stone sizes numst application num num num num num num num numnd application num num num num numrd application num num control tolerance control tolerance control tolerance numst application bituminous materials galyd² pgnum or pgnum .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num crsnumh crsnum .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num numst application stone ft³yd² .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num numnd application bituminous materials galyd² pgnum or pgnum .num .num .num .num .num .num crsnumh crsnum .num .num .num .num .num .num numnd application stone ft³yd² .num .num .num .num .num .num numrd application bituminous materials galyd² pgnum or pgnum .num .num .num crsnumh crsnum .num .num .num numrd application stone ft³yd² .num .num .num total bituminous materials galyd² pgnum or pgnum .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num crsnumh crsnum .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num total stone ft³yd² .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num notes num .
target application rates for bituminous material coarse aggregate and seal sand will be established by the engineer within the limits shown in table num based on roadway and traffic conditions .
num .
do not apply bituminous material or aggregate outside the specified minimum and maximum application rates regardless of the control tolerances shown for each application unless directed by the engineer in accordance with no .
num below .
num .
at the engineers direction application rates for bituminous materials and aggregate may be varied outside the specified limits for each course at no additional cost provided the combined total of materials is within the specified total minimum and total maximum application rates for the combined total of all courses .
num .
maintain the control tolerances shown above or stop the work until the necessary corrections are made .
num .
apply at least one seal coat to the mat course on the same day when multiple applications are specified .
section numbituminous surface treatment num section numbituminous surface treatment crackrelief interlayer table num bituminous material application galydnum application rate control tolerance pg num or pg num .num .num .num crsnumh crsnuml or crs num .num .num .num aggregate application ftnumydnum application rate control tolerance num .num .num .num num .num .num .num notes target application rates for bituminous material and aggregate will be established by the engineer within the limits shown in table num .
when single surface treatment stone size no .
num or no .
num is applied over a milled surface the minimum application rate for crsnumh crsnuml or crs num shall be num galydnum and for pg num or pg num shall be num galydnum .
do not apply bituminous material or aggregate outside the specified minimum and maximum application rates regardless of the control tolerances shown for each application .
maintain the control tolerances shown above or stop the work until the necessary corrections are made .
cover the single surface treatment crackrelief interlayer with hma leveling on the same day .
section numbituminous surface treatment sand seal table num aggregates application rate ftnumydnum control tolerance bituminous material application rate galydnum control tolerance num .num .num .num crsnumh crsnuml or crs num .num .num .num pg num or pg num .num .num .num num .num .num .num crsnumh crsnuml or crs num .num .num .num pg num or pg num .num .num .num num .num .num .num crsnumh crsnuml or crs num .num .num .num pg num or pg num .num .num .num wa num washed screenings .num .num .num crsnumh crsnuml or crs num .num .num .num pg num or pg num .num .num .num notes num .
target application rates for bituminous material coarse aggregate and seal sand will be established by the engineer within the limits shown in table num based on roadway and traffic conditions .
num .
do not apply bituminous material or aggregate outside the specified minimum and maximum application rates regardless of the control tolerances shown for each application unless directed by the engineer in accordance with no .
num below .
num .
at the engineers direction application rates for bituminous materials and aggregate may be varied outside the specified limits for each course at no additional cost provided the combined total of materials is within the specified total minimum and total maximum application rates for the combined total of all courses .
num .
maintain the control tolerances shown above or stop the work until the necessary corrections are made .
num .
cover the coarse aggregate seal stone with seal sand on the same day .
section numbituminous surface treatment num section numbituminous surface treatment table numa metric application type construction single double triple stone sizes numst application num num num num num num num numnd application num num num num numrd application num num control tolerance control tolerance control tolerance numst application bituminous materials lm² pgnum or pgnum .num .num .num num .num .num num .num .num num crsnumh crsnum .num .num .num num .num num num .num num num numst application stone m³m² .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num numnd application bituminous materials lm² pgnum or pgnum .num .num num .num .num .num crsnumh crsnum .num .num num .num num num numnd application stone m³m² .num .num .num .num .num .num numrd application bituminous materials lm² pgnum or pgnum .num .num .num crsnumh crsnum .num .num .num numrd application stone m³m² .num .num .num total bituminous materials lm² pgnum or pgnum .num .num .num num .num num num .num num num crsnumh crsnum .num .num .num num .num num num .num num num total stone m³m² .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num notes num .
target application rates for bituminous material coarse aggregate and seal sand will be established by the engineer within the limits shown in table numa based on roadway and traffic conditions .
num .
do not apply bituminous material or aggregate outside the specified minimum and maximum application rates regardless of the control tolerances shown for each application unless directed by the engineer in accordance with no .
num below .
num .
at the engineers direction application rates for bituminous materials and aggregate may be varied outside the specified limits for each course at no additional cost provided the combined total of materials is within the specified total minimum and total maximum application rates for the combined total of all courses .
num .
maintain the control tolerances shown above or stop the work until the necessary corrections are made .
num .
apply at least one seal coat to the mat course on the same day when multiple applications are specified .
section numbituminous surface treatment num section numbituminous surface treatment crackrelief interlayer table numa metric bituminous material application lmnum application rate control tolerance pg num or pg num .num num .num crsnumh crsnuml or crs num num num .num aggregate application mnummnum application rate control tolerance num num num .num num .num .num .num notes target application rates for bituminous material and aggregate will be established by the engineer within the limits shown in table numa .
when single surface treatment stone size no .
num or no .
num is applied over a milled surface the minimum application rate for crsnumh crsnuml or crs num shall be num lmnum and for pg num or pg num shall be num lmnum .
do not apply bituminous material or aggregate outside the specified minimum and maximum application rates regardless of the control tolerances shown for each application .
maintain the control tolerances shown above or stop the work until the necessary corrections are made .
cover the single surface treatment crackrelief interlayer with hma leveling on the same day .
section numbituminous surface treatment sand seal table numa metric aggregates application rate mnummnum control tolerance bituminous material application rate lmnum control tolerance num num num .num crsnumh crsnuml or crs num num num .num pg num or pg num num num .num num num num .num crsnumh crsnuml or crs num num num .num pg num or pg num num num .num num num num .num crsnumh crsnuml or crs num num num .num pg num or pg num num num .num wa num washed screenings num num .num crsnumh crsnuml or crs num num num .num pg num or pg num num num .num notes num .
target application rates for bituminous material coarse aggregate and seal sand will be established by the engineer within the limits shown in table numa based on roadway and traffic conditions .
num .
do not apply bituminous material or aggregate outside the specified minimum and maximum application rates regardless of the control tolerances shown for each application unless directed by the engineer in accordance with no .
num below .
num .
at the engineers direction application rates for bituminous materials and aggregate may be varied outside the specified limits for each course at no additional cost provided the combined total of materials is within the specified total minimum and total maximum application rates for the combined total of all courses .
num .
maintain the control tolerances shown above or stop the work until the necessary corrections are made .
num .
cover the coarse aggregate seal stone with seal sand on the same day .
d. heating bituminous material evenly heat the entire mass of bituminous material for each application under positive control .
while the material is being applied maintain it within the specified temperature range .
section numbituminous surface treatment num e. applying bituminous material the following are temperatures at which bituminous material shall be applied .
bituminous material asphalt cement crsnumh crsnum crsnuml application temperature f c num num num num num num num num note num do not store emulsified asphalts at temperatures exceeding num f num c for any extended time .
note num do not place bituminous surface treatment on fresh asphaltic concrete except for paved shoulders until the asphaltic concrete has been in place at least num days .
the engineer will designate the maximum area to which bituminous material may be applied at one time .
apply the material as follows num .
after applying the bituminous material to the section immediately cover it with the correct application rate of aggregate before beginning the next section .
do not apply the bituminous material to the full width of the pavement unless the aggregate spreader can immediately cover the full width of the applied material .
note never allow bituminous material to chill set up dry or reach a condition that impairs the retention of cover aggregate before the aggregate is applied .
num .
when a longitudinal joint is necessary do not overlap the applications more than num in num mm .
do not leave any area uncovered .
never allow excess quantities of bituminous materials to build up .
num .
on curves that require widening a .
shoot the extra width on the outside first .
b .
shoot the normal width with the distributor and follow the inside paving edge .
num .
ensure that the spray of bituminous material is uniform at all times .
if the spray is not uniform a .
stop the work .
b .
change equipment personnel or methods to attain the required uniformity .
c. apply bituminous material at onehalf the width of the roadway if necessary .
num .
if streaking develops a .
stop the distributor and correct the problem before proceeding .
b .
use a hand hose or a hand pouring pot to cover the streaked areas at approximately the same application rate of bituminous material .
num .
if a part of the work can not be reached by the distributor treat it by hand hoses with nozzles .
num .
protect curbs gutters handrails and other structures from discoloration by the bituminous material .
remove bituminous material that is sprayed or spilled on these structures .
num .
ensure that the bituminous material joins neatly in place by beginning and ending the asphalt application from a heavy paper or tight trough that is longer than the width of the treatment being applied .
place it to catch and hold the surplus material .
num .
when cleaning and emptying the distributor empty it where the bituminous material can be covered with dirt and completely disposed of without damaging the rightsofway .
f. spreading aggregates spread the aggregates as follows section numbituminous surface treatment num num .
ensure that aggregates do not contain free moisture when spread .
num .
apply aggregate immediately after applying bituminous materials .
num .
uniformly spread the aggregate at the specified rate without corrugations overlaps excess or deficient areas .
num .
move the spreader at a uniform speed regardless of the grade .
num .
ensure that the distance that the aggregate free falls remains constant during spreading .
num .
remove corrugations .
operate the spreader to prevent overlap of aggregates .
if overlap occurs remove the excess aggregate before rolling .
num .
ensure a uniform aggregate spread by hand spotting and brooming as necessary .
g. rolling observe the following guidelines for rolling bituminous surface treatment num .
synchronize the speed of the distributor and aggregate spreader with that of the rolling operation .
num .
use a minimum of two num individual rollers one of which must be a pneumatictired roller meeting the requirements of subsection num.e .
num .
if a steelwheeled roller will fracture the aggregate use pneumatictired rollers only .
num .
begin rolling within one minute after spreading the aggregate .
num .
operate rollers at speeds not exceeding num mph .
num .
proceed in a longitudinal direction beginning at the outside edge of the aggregate application .
num .
a roller pass is defined as one trip in a single direction .
num .
overlap each roller pass by approximately num the roller width .
num .
provide a minimum of three num roller passes per roller for each layer of aggregate to properly embed the aggregate particles .
note unless a sufficient number of rollers are in operation to complete the above requirements do not make subsequent applications of bituminous material until rolling of the previous application is completed .
h. brooming use a revolving broom as necessary supplemented by hand brooming to remove or redistribute excess stone .
sweep the completed surface treatment within the first three hours of the next available workday following placement .
take care not to unseat bonded stone when sweeping .
i .
controlling traffic do not allow traffic on the surface treatment until the bituminous material has cured sufficiently to ensure that the aggregate will not be loosened dislodged or whipped off by slow moving traffic .
control traffic to speeds not exceeding num mph for a minimum of two hours after application of the seal stone and until the engineer permits the road to be opened to normal traffic speeds .
use pilot vehicles to control traffic speeds .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance maintain and protect the surface course as specified in section num until the project has been accepted .
make repairs as the engineer directs .
the cost of maintenance protection and repair is included in the unit prices bid for the item for which they apply .
section numbituminous surface treatment num num measurement the area to be measured is the number of square yards meters of each type surface treatment completed and accepted .
num limits the length is measured along the surface .
the width is specified on the plans plus or minus any authorized changes .
irregular areas are measured by the surface square yard meter within the lines shown on the plans or authorized changes .
num payment the accepted area of surface treatment will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard meter complete for each type and stone size specified .
payment will be made under item no .
num single surface treatment stone size __ group__ per square yard meter item no .
num double surface treatment stone size __ and __ group __ per square yard meter item no .
num double surface treatment stone size __ and __ group __ with seal sand __ and latexmodified emulsion per square yard meter item no .
num double surface treatment stone size __ and __ group __ with seal sand____ per square yard meter item no .
num triple surface treatment stone sizes __ __ and __ group __ per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numsprinkle overlay treatment num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numemulsified asphalt slurry seal num general description this work includes placing slurry seal .
emulsified asphalt slurry seal is a thin application of a mixture of fine nonplastic aggregate emulsified asphalt mineral filler and water .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numbituminous tack coat section numaggregates for asphaltic concrete section numemulsified asphalt section numcationic asphalt emulsion section numemulsified asphalt slurry seal num section numportland cement section numlime section nummineral filler b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num num submittals a. slurry seal design at least two weeks before beginning the work submit to the office of materials om design samples of each ingredient to be used in the slurry seal mix .
include in the samples information concerning sources type of materials and project number .
do not begin slurry seal work until the omr has approved the slurry mix design .
submit the slurry seal mix design that will be used on the project to the engineer .
b .
equipment calibration before placing slurry seal furnish the engineer with a calibration of the slurry mixing equipment .
num materials ensure that the materials to be used meet the following specifications a .
aggregate ensure that the aggregate used in emulsified asphalt slurry seal meets the requirements of subsection num .
except use aggregate manufactured from group ii class a or b crushed stone or slag with a sand equivalent value of at least num .
ensure that the aggregates shipped to the project are uniform and do not require blending or premixing at the storage area before use .
b .
mineral filler material section portland cement num and num hydrated lime num and num c. emulsified asphalt material section emulsified asphalt ssnumh num cationic asphalt emulsion cssnumh num d. water ensure that water for slurry seal mixtures is clear and free of oil salt acid alkali organic and other harmful substances .
the engineer may require a water sample be sent to the omr for evaluation before work begins on the project .
e. mixture composition use an emulsified asphalt slurry seal that is a uniform mixture of aggregate emulsified asphalt mineral filler and water .
section numemulsified asphalt slurry seal num the engineer may require any element to be adjusted or replaced to produce an acceptable slurry seal .
proportion the elements to produce a uniform mixture that meets the requirements of the table below emulsified asphalt slurry seal mixture mixture control tolerances sieve size passing num num in num mm num num no .
num num mm num to num num no .
num num mm num to num num no .
num num µm num to num num no .
num numµm num to num design requirements num range for percent residual asphalt num tonum num num flow inch mm gdt num num num na wear lbft² gm²gdt num maximum num num percent residual asphalt is based on weight of the dry aggregate .
emulsified asphalt slurry seal is used to seal small cracks and correct moderate surface condition .
apply this type at a rate of num to num lbsyd² num to num kgm² based on dry aggregate weight .
if more than num lbsyd² num kgm² of emulsified asphalt slurry seal is required apply additional lifts of the same mixture .
maintain the gradation and percent residual asphalt as shown on the slurry seal design or as established by the engineer within the mixture control tolerances listed .
num delivery storage and handling a. transporting and storing asphalt emulsions transport asphalt emulsions using containers free of foreign material .
asphalt emulsion will not be accepted if a transporting vehicle has leaked or spilled during transit .
store the asphalt emulsion in stationary rail or truck tanks that can be used to fill the slurry seal truck tanks .
equip the storage and truck tanks to prevent water from entering the emulsion .
provide heat if necessary to prevent freezing .
b. stockpiling aggregates stockpile the aggregate in an area that drains readily .
take precautions to prevent stockpile contaminations such as soil vegetation or oversize rock .
load the aggregate on to the slurry seal trucks without segregating it .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment equipment tools and machines used to perform this work are subject to the engineers approval .
the engineer may discontinue the work if more equipment and tools are needed to place the materials .
do not use malfunctioning equipment to perform the work .
a. slurry mixing equipment before slurry seal placement begins furnish the engineer with a calibration of the slurry mixing equipment .
ensure that the mixing machine is equipped with the following section numemulsified asphalt slurry seal num revolution counter to count the feeder belt revolutions continuously or intermittently as desired by the engineer water pressure system and a fogtype spray bar to fog the surface prior to spreading the slurry mix continuous flow mixing unit that can deliver a predetermined proportion of aggregate water mineral filler and asphalt emulsion to the mixing chamber and discharge the thoroughly mixed product continuously prewet the aggregate and mineral filler in the machine immediately before mixing it with the emulsion .
note use caution when mixing to ensure that the emulsion does not set up prematurely .
b. slurry spreading equipment use a mechanical squeegee spreader with a flexible strikeoff that contacts the surface ensure that the spreader is adjustable to spread evenly and to prevent loss of slurry on varying grades and crowns use a spreader equipped with augers a steering device a flexible strikeoff and a device to adjust the coverage width .
keep the spreader box clean and free of asphalt and aggregate buildup .
the type of flexible strikeoff and the burlap drags or other drags are subject to the engineers approval .
c. cleaning equipment ensure that power brooms power blowers air compressors water flushing equipment and hand brooms can thoroughly clean cracks and the old surface .
d. auxiliary equipment provide hand squeegees hand brooms shovels and other equipment needed to perform the work .
num preparation immediately before applying the slurry num .
remove loose material silt spots vegetation and other objectionable material from the pavement .
if the pavement has considerable cracks do not flush it with water .
num .
prepare the surface as specified in the standard specifications for slurry seal .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
observe weather limitations do not apply slurry seal if the pavement or ambient temperature is num f num c or below and falling .
if both the ambient and pavement temperatures are num f num c or above and rising the slurry seal may be applied .
if the relative humidity exceeds num percent or the weather is overcast the engineer will determine when to apply the slurry seal .
b .
apply tack coat before placing the slurry seal apply a bituminous tack coat consisting of one part emulsion and three parts water to the old surface as follows num .
apply a tack coat with the same asphalt emulsion type and grade as used in the slurry seal .
num .
apply the tack coat according to section num .
num .
apply the tack coat with an asphalt distributor .
num .
apply the tack coat at a rate of num to num galyd² num to num lm² of the diluted emulsion .
the engineer will determine the exact application rate .
section numemulsified asphalt slurry seal num c. prepare the mix prepare the mix as follows num .
thoroughly mix the material proportions approved for use .
do not mix for more than four minutes .
num .
adjust the amount of water or mineral filler to reach the desired consistency .
num .
if the proper slurry consistency can not be maintained stop the work and correct the problem by changing the proportions or material sources .
d. apply the slurry seal place the slurry seal uniformly across the width of the traffic lane unless otherwise specified or directed by a special provision in the proposal or the engineer .
carry enough slurry seal in the spreader to completely cover the surface .
apply the slurry seal as follows num .
adjust the squeegee action to permit the mix to flow freely and leave a smooth surface .
num .
if local conditions require prewet the surface with water by fogging ahead of the slurry box .
closely control pre wetting to prevent water runoff or puddling .
num .
do not deposit slurry mixture that is not the desired consistency .
num .
after depositing the slurry do not add additional elements .
num .
prevent the following lumping balling or unmixed aggregate segregation of the emulsion and aggregate fines from the coarse aggregate excessive buildup or unsightly appearance on longitudinal or transverse joints num .
if the coarse aggregate settles to the bottom of the mix remove the slurry from the pavement .
num .
place longitudinal joints on twolane roadways as close to the center of the pavement as possible .
if the roadway has more than two lanes of traffic place the longitudinal joints as close as possible to where traffic stripes will be placed .
e. apply by hand use approved squeegees to spread slurry in areas that are not accessible to the slurry spreader .
do not leave unsightly marks from the hand work .
f. control traffic do not allow traffic on the slurry seal until it has cured enough to withstand marring and tearing and until no water will be pumped to the surface .
control traffic as necessary to prevent damage to the slurry .
repair any traffic damage to the slurry seal at the contractors expense .
g. observe seasonal limitations apply slurry seal between the dates given in the table below .
the dates are given by zones shown on the georgia geographic map below .
the engineer shall authorize any exceptions .
zones dates num april num october num num april num october num num april num october num num april num october num section numemulsified asphalt slurry seal num georgia department of transportation geographical map for slurry seal num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement emulsified asphalt slurry seal is measured by the square yard meter complete in place and accepted .
the lengths and widths to compute square yards meters are specified in section num .
diluted emulsified tack coat is measured and paid for according to section num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment emulsified asphalt slurry seal is paid for at the full contract price per square yard meter and is full compensation for furnishing materials including bituminous materials equipment work and labor .
section numemulsified asphalt slurry seal num payment will be made under item no .
num emulsified asphalt slurry seal type ___ stone group ii per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section nummicro surfacing num description this work covers the materials equipment construction and application procedures for placing microsurfacing material for filling ruts and surfacing existing paved surfaces .
properly proportion mix and spread all ingredients on the paved surface according to this specification and as directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numbituminous prime section numbituminous surface treatment section numcationic asphalt emulsion b. referenced documents gdt num num submittals a .
invoices when the department requests furnish formal written invoices from a supplier for all materials used in production of micro surfacing .
show the following on the invoices date shipped quantity in tons megagrams purchase lramodified emulsion from a supplier who will provide copies of invoices upon the departments request .
b .
mix design submit the proposed mix design for approval at least two weeks before beginning the mixing operations .
as a minimum the design shall include the following aggregate test properties aggregate target gradation results of table num mixture design properties design percent asphalt residue based on dry weight of the aggregate mineral filler percentages based on dry weight of the aggregate quantitative effects of moisture content on the unit weight of the aggregate bulking effect section nummicro surfacing num submit to the office of materials om representative samples of each ingredient to be used in the microsurfacing mixture for design verification at least two weeks before beginning mixing operations.include information about sources type of materials and project number .
do not begin microsurfacing work until the omr has approved the microsurfacing design and accepted the mixture .
the engineers acceptance of the design is solely for quality control and does not release the contractor from performing acceptable work under this specification .
ensure the mixture has sufficient working life to allow for proper placement at the existing ambient temperature and humidity .
redesign the mixture if a constituent must be replaced or gradation changed in order to produce an acceptable mixture .
proportion the constituents to produce a uniform mixture meeting the requirements of table num .
table nummixture design properties microsurfacing type i type ii mixture control tolerances grading requirements percent passing percent passing num numinch num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num mm num num num no .
num num m num num num no .
num num m num num design requirements range range num residual ac num num na mineral filler num num design requirements micro surfacing type i and type ii test no .
description specification aashto tnum modified flow num aashto tnum modified min .
stability lb kg num blow marshall num num issa tbnum wet track abrasion loss maximum numday soak num lbyd² num gm² numhour soak num lbyd² num gm² issa tbnuma or numc vertical displacement maximum num issa tbnum excess asphalt by lwt maximum num lbyd² num gm² issa tbnum mixing time test num f num c minimum num seconds issa tbnum set time test minimum num minutes num kgcm num minutes num kgcm issa tbnum water resistance test num minutes no discoloration issa tbnum wet stripping test minimum retained num issa tbnum system compatibility pass note num base percent residual asphalt and percent mineral filler on weight of the dry aggregate .
section nummicro surfacing num note num maintain the gradation and percent residual asphalt as shown on the microsurfacing design or as established by the engineer within the listed mixture control tolerances .
meet mix control tolerances or make immediate adjustments to bring the gradation and percent residual asphalt back within tolerances or the work will not be allowed to continue .
note num modify procedures stated in aashto tnum for determining flow and marshall stability to permit air drying of the mixture at num num f num num c for num days before reheating and fabricating marshall specimens .
num materials the materials to be used and their specifications are listed below a .
aggregate use aggregate in microsurfacing that meets the requirements of subsection num .
exception aggregate shall be manufactured from group ii class a or b crushed stone or slag and the sand equivalent value shall not be less than num when tested according to aashto tnum .
ensure that aggregates shipped to the project are uniform and do not require blending or premixing at the storage area before use .
aggregates must meet the appropriate gradation as shown in table num .
b .
mineral filler use mineral filler that is portland cement or hydrated lime which meets the following requirements portland cement section num and num hydrated lime section num and num c. cationic asphalt emulsion ensure that the emulsified asphalt is a cationic type csslhlra or cssnump that meets the requirements for cssnumh of section num modified to waive the cementmixing test .
d. latex rubber additive lra ensure the lra is a natural latex or an unvulcanized styrenebutadine rubber in an emulsified latex form .
provide certification from the lra manufacturer that the lra meets the following requirements rubber solids content minimum astm d num num by weight brookfield viscosity cps maximum astm d num num total ash maximum astm d num num comill the lra and the special emulsifiers with the asphalt cement while manufacturing the emulsified asphalt to produce a homogeneous mixture .
add the lra in the necessary proportions to result in num neat latex by weight of residual asphalt cement in the emulsion .
ensure the lra modified emulsified asphalt when left undisturbed for num hours shows no separation of emulsion and lra and no color striations but has a uniform color throughout .
ensure that the residue from the lra modified emulsified asphalt has a minimum softening point of num f num c when tested according to aashto tnum .
exception the maximum test temperature shall not exceed num f num c and the duration shall not exceed num minutes .
section nummicro surfacing num formulate the emulsified asphalt to allow the paving mixture to cure at a rate that will permit traffic on the pavement within num hour after application without damaging the pavement surface .
e. bituminous tack coat use a cationic asphalt emulsion csslh or cqslh for the bituminous tack coat that meets section num and is diluted according to subsection num.d .
f. water use water for the microsurfacing mixture that is potable and free of contaminants detrimental to the mixture .
g. other additives provide other additives as required to control the set time of the mixture in the field .
num delivery storage and handling a .
aggregate storage store or stockpile mineral aggregates in a manner that will prevent segregation mixing of the various materials or sizes and contamination with foreign materials .
do not use construction equipment on or to ramp the stockpiled aggregate .
pass the aggregate over a scalping screen immediately before transferring it to the microsurfacing mixing machine to remove oversized material .
b .
storage of bituminous material ensure that the bituminous storage is adequate to meet the requirements of the production rate .
always keep clean all equipment used to store and handle bituminous material and operate it in such a manner to prevent contamination with foreign matter .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment obtain the engineers approval for all equipment tools and machines used to perform this work .
do not attempt work with malfunctioning equipment .
the engineer may stop the work if equipment and tools are not sufficient to place the materials satisfactorily .
a. mixing equipment blend the paving mixture using a selfpropelled microsurfacing mixing machine that is a continuous flow mixing unit able to accurately deliver and proportion the aggregate lramodified emulsion mineral filler field control additives and water to a revolving multiblade twin shafted mixer able to discharge the mixed product on a continuous flow .
exception blending the paving mixture may be accomplished with a truck mounted micro surfacing mixing machine that meets the above specification except for continuous flow when placing the mixture on short streets or projects that are less than onehalf mile num m in length .
section nummicro surfacing num for streets or projects less than onehalf mile num m in length individual truckmounted units may be used for placement of microsurfacing .
for streets or projects onehalf mile num m or greater in length place microsurfacing mixture with a machine that is equipped as follows has selfloading devices that load raw materials while continuing to lay microsurfacing thereby minimizing construction joints has opposite side driving stations to optimize longitudinal alignment allows the operator to have full hydrostatic control of the forward and reverse speed while applying micro surfacing material thoroughly blend the mixture so that no uncoated aggregate is visible upon discharge from the mixing unit or in samples taken from the roadway .
num .
water pressure system use a mixing machine equipped with a water pressure system and nozzletype spray bar to provide a water spray ahead of and outside the spreader box when required .
num .
proportioning devices use a machine equipped with individual volume or mass controls or other gauging devices for measuring and proportioning each material added to the mix .
properly calibrate mark and positively interlock each material control device .
ensure that the aggregate feed to the mixer is equipped with a revolution counter or similar device to determine the amount of emulsion used at any time .
before beginning the work calibrate each mixing unit and provide a copy of the calibration worksheet to the engineer .
once calibrated do not change the aggregate and emulsion flows without the engineers approval .
the water and additive may be adjusted in the field to control the mix properties to produce an acceptable mix .
num .
emulsion pump the emulsion pump shall be a heated positive displacement type pump .
num .
spreading equipment uniformly spread the microsurfacing mixture using a mechanicaltype spreader box attached to the mixer equipped with paddles or other devices to agitate and spread the materials throughout the box .
use paddles that are designed to maintain sufficient turbulence in the mixture to prevent the material from settingup in the box or causing side buildup and lumps .
provide a front seal to prevent loss of the mixture at the road contact surface .
provide an adjustable rear seal to act as a strikeoff .
maintain the spreader to prevent the loss of the paving mixture during surfacing superelevated curves .
design and operate the spreader box and rear strikeoff to achieve a uniform consistency and produce a free flow of material to the rear strikeoff without causing skips lumps or tears in the finished surface .
use a spreader box capable of lateral movement or with sideshift abilities to ensure proper alignment with the roadway .
b. auxiliary equipment provide a pressure distributor powerbroom and power blower which meets requirements of subsection num .
provide suitable crack and surface cleaning equipment barricading equipment hand tools and other support equipment necessary to perform the work .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
section nummicro surfacing num num construction a .
general produce transport and place the specified materials according to these specifications and as approved by the engineer .
produce a finished microsurfacing that has a uniform texture free from excessive scratch marks tears or other surface irregularities .
ensure that the cured mixture fully adheres to the underlying surface .
based on a visual examination or test results the engineer may reject any work due to poor workmanship loss of texture raveling or apparent instability .
b .
weather limitations spread the microsurfacing mixture only when the ambient temperature for num hours immediately prior to placement has been at least num f num c. the current pavement surface and the ambient temperature is at least num f num c and rising .
supply a surface temperature thermometer and a sling psychrometer and take temperature and humidity measurements as directed by the engineer .
the weather is not foggy or rainy .
there is no forecast of temperatures below num f num cwithin num hours from the time of placement .
whenever the relative humidity exceeds num percent or the weather is overcast the placement of microsurfacing will be at the discretion of the engineer .
c. surface preparation before applying the microsurfacing mixture thoroughly clean all cracks and the area to be surfaced to the engineers satisfaction .
d. tack coat use a tack coat which consists of cationic asphalt emulsion cssnumh or cqsnumh .
dilute it at the rate of one part emulsion and three parts water and apply with an asphalt distributor .
the application rate is num to num galydnum num to num lmnum of diluted emulsion per square yard meter .
apply the tack coat according to section num .
if the surface course is placed within num days of the leveling course or if the engineer determines that excessive tracking of material is evident a tack coat will not be required between the leveling and surface course .
e. application prewet the surface by spraying water ahead of and outside of the spreader box at a rate that dampens the surface without allowing water to flow freely ahead of the spreader box .
spread the paving mixture on the prepared surface to produce a uniform finished surface .
take care when filling ruts to restore the designed profile of the pavement cross section .
excess crowning or overfilling of the rut area is not permitted .
use squeegees and lutes to spread the mixture in areas inaccessible to the spreader box and areas requiring hand spreading .
carry a sufficient amount of material at all times in all parts of the spreader box to ensure complete coverage .
make adjustments to the additive if necessary to provide a slower setting time during hand spreading .
if hand spreading is necessary pour the mixture in a small windrow along one edge of the surface to be covered and uniformly spread with a hand squeegee or lute .
provide a smooth neat seam where two passes meet .
immediately remove excess material from the ends of each run .
f. traffic control do not allow traffic on the microsurfacing mixture until it has cured sufficiently to prevent pick up or marring of the surface .
repair any damage done by traffic to the mixture at no expense to the department .
section nummicro surfacing num g. rut filling and leveling scratch course when required on the plans provide microsurfacing materials to fill ruts utility cuts depressions in the existing surface etc .
before the final surface course is placed .
when ruts are no more than num inch num mm in depth construct the levelingscratch course using a full width spreader box with a steel strikeoff .
fill ruts deeper than num inch num mm independently with a rutfilling spreader box num ft num m in width or as directed by the engineer .
place and open to traffic the rut filling and leveling scratch course at least num hours before surfacing .
h. workmanship excessive buildup uncovered areas or unsightly appearance are not permitted on longitudinal or transverse joints .
place longitudinal joints on lane lines .
excessive overlap is not permitted .
ensure straight lines along the roadway centerline lane lines shoulder or edge lines .
keep lines at intersections straight to provide a neat and uniform appearance .
num .
finished surface ensure that the finished microsurfacing has a uniform texture free of excessive scratch marks tears or other surface irregularities .
excessive tear marks are considered num marks that are num inch num mm wide or wider and num inches num mm or more long per num square yards num meters or any marks num inch num mm wide or wider or num inches num mm long .
ensure that the edges of the microsurfacing appear neat and that longitudinal alignment is parallel to the roadway centerline .
num .
joints and seams produce neat and uniform longitudinal and transverse joints .
construct transverse joints as butt type joints .
place longitudinal joints on lane lines when possible .
do not allow gaps between applications .
joints are acceptable if there is no more than a num inch num mm vertical space for longitudinal joints nor more than num inch num mm for a transverse joint between the pavement surface and a num ft num m straightedge placed perpendicular on the joint .
num .
areas the mixing machine can not reach surface these areas using hand tools to provide complete and uniform coverage .
clean and lightly dampen the area to be handworked before placing the mix .
ensure areas that require handwork produce a finished surface that is uniform in texture dense and has a neat appearance similar to that produced by the spreader box .
microsurfacing material required to repair deficiencies due to unsatisfactory workmanship and the work required to mix and place the materials according to the specifications will be provided at no expense to the deparment .
num quality acceptance take two samples of mixture for determining quality acceptance for each day of operation .
test the second sample only if the results of the first sample are outside mixture control tolerances .
test the samples according to gdt num .
the deviation in test results from the job mix formula will be used to determine compliance with the mixture control tolerances .
if more than one sample is tested the average deviation shall be used to determine compliance .
a mixture adjustment period will be provided during the first two days of operation .
if the average deviation of sample results for the first day are outside the mixture control tolerances you may adjust equipment settings to provide a mixture within the tolerances .
samples will be taken the second day after equipment changes if any have been made and the average deviation in test results will be calculated .
if the average deviation of test results for the second day is within mixture control tolerances mixture quality will be accepted for the first two days of operation .
if the average deviation from the second day is not within mixture control tolerances for percent residual asphalt content a num reduction in unit price will be assessed for each num percent the residual asphalt content is outside the mixture control tolerances for each of the first two days that tolerances were exceeded .
a. emulsified asphalt maintain the percent residual asphalt and gradation as shown on the microsurfacing design or as established by the engineer within the mixture control tolerances listed in table num .
after the adjustment period a num reduction in unit price will be applied for each num percent the residual asphalt content is outside the mixture control tolerance given in table num for the days production represented by the sample .
the average deviation of the samples will be used to determine conformance to the mixture control tolerance .
do not continue to operate and place materials outside the mixture control tolerances .
adjust the placement operation as necessary to maintain production within the tolerances given .
section nummicro surfacing num b .
aggregate application rate control the target spread rate for microsurfacing to within plus or minus num lbsydnum num kgmnum of the spread rate specified in the proposal based on the weight of dry aggregate .
mix placed in excess of the upper spread rate tolerance will not be paid for .
the unit price will be reduced by num for each pound num kg of aggregate per square yard meter less than the spread rate tolerances established above for each days placement of material .
accept pay reduction for deficient daily production or overlay the deficient area at full plan width and depth at the contractors expense .
do not continue to operate and place materials outside the spread rate tolerances .
adjust the placement operation as necessary to maintain production within the tolerances given .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. microsurfacing microsurfacing type i or ii surface course is measured and accepted as completed by the inplace square yard meter .
in computing square yards meters the lengths and widths used shall be as specified in section num measurement and payment .
b .
leveling scratch course a leveling scratch course is measured and paid for by the ton megagram of dry aggregate used .
tons megagrams of aggregate used shall be determined using the total daily revolutions of the aggregate feed belt and the corresponding gate setting and weight per revolution shown on the mixing unit calibration worksheet .
c. tack coat diluted emulsified tack coat is measured and paid for according to section num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment microsurfacing will be paid for at the contract unit price which is full compensation for furnishing all materials including lra modified bituminous materials and for furnishing all equipment work and labor .
payment will be made under item no .
num microsurfacing type i per square yard meter item no .
num microsurfacing type i leveling per ton megagram item no .
num microsurfacing type ii per square yard meter item no .
num microsurfacing type ii leveling per ton megagram num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numrumble strips num general description this work includes furnishing and placing rumble strips according to plan details and this specification .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numhot mix asphaltic concrete section numbituminous tack coat b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that asphaltic concrete conforms to section num types num mm superpave or num mm superpave mixes .
ensure that the tack coat conforms to section num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a .
hand rollers use nonvibrating hand rollers to compact the strips .
b .
forms ensure the form confines and spaces the hot mix according to the plan details .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction complete this procedure to install rumble strips num .
tack the entire num ft num m strip length .
section numrumble strips num num .
place the oiled form and ensure that the first strip coincides with the beginning of the first unit .
num .
place and level the plant mix .
roll the strips with the forms in place .
num .
remove the forms and compact the strips to the engineers satisfaction .
num .
repeat this operation to install the entire numft num m rumble strip .
install additional units as designated on the plans using the same methods and procedures .
note do not place strips on wet or frozen pavement .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement rumble strips are measured per each strip constructed .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment rumble strips will be paid for per each strip completed and accepted .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials and performing the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num rumble strips per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numportland cement concrete pavement num general description this work includes constructing pavement composed of portland cement concrete with or without reinforcement as specified on a prepared subgrade or subbase course .
follow the requirements of these specifications and conform to the lines grades thicknesses and cross sections shown on the plans or by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numportland cement concrete pavement num section numfield laboratory building section numgrind concrete pavement section numsealing roadway and bridge joints and cracks section numconcrete structures section numcoarse aggregate section numfine aggregate section numportland cement section numadmixtures section numcuring agents section numjoint fillers and sealers section numreinforcement and tensioning steel section numwater section numepoxy resin adhesives b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aci num astm c num requirements for uniformity astm c num method a gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num sop num report form furnished by the engineer requests for certification num submittals a. profilograph equipment and operator certification include in the contract unit bid price the cost to furnish and operate a rainhart model num profilograph to measure pavement profile deviations .
section numportland cement concrete pavement num before paving ensure that the operator and the profilograph are certified by the office of materials in accordance with standard operating procedure no .
num certification of contractor personnel and equipment for smoothness testing of portland cement concrete pavement with the rainhart profilograph .
certification includes a mechanical check of the profilograph functions and a written examination by the operator .
request certification in writing to the office of materials at least two weeks before it is needed .
b .
concrete design submit for approval a concrete design that is prepared by a testing laboratory approved by the office of materials .
the contractor will transmit the design to the engineer for approval at least num days before use .
c. approval of mix design proportions obtain approval from the office of materials for proposed concrete mix designs .
class num and num concrete mix designs will be verified for early compressive strength according to astm cnum method a .
class hes concrete mix designs will be verified for compressive strength development at num hours according to aashto t num and aashto t num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section portland cement num portland pozzolan cement num water num fine aggregate size no .
num num coarse aggregate class a or b crushed stone or gravel sizes as specified num steel bars for reinforcement num steel wire for concrete reinforcement num welded steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement num dowel bars and bar coatings num curing agents num air entraining admixtures num fly ash and slag num joint fillers and sealers num low modulus silicone sealant for roadway construction joints num epoxy adhesive for repairing cracks num chemical admixtures num a .
fly ash use fly ash if appropriate as a concrete additive to promote workability and plasticity .
it may be used as a partial replacement for portland cement in concrete but follow these limits num .
do not replace the cement quantity more than num percent by weight .
num .
replace cement with fly ash at the rate of num to num lbs num to num kg of fly ash to num lb num kg of cement .
num .
ensure that the fly ash mix conforms to subsection num quality acceptance .
num .
do not use type ip cement in fly ash mixes .
section numportland cement concrete pavement num b. granulated iron blastfurnace slag if high early strengths are not desired use granulated slag as a partial replacement for portland cement in concrete .
follow these limits num .
replace the quantity of cement num percent or less by weight if the numday forecast of the national weather service expects temperatures higher than num f num c. a .
if the numday expected low temperature is less than num f num c but not less than num f num c replace the quantity of cement num percent or less by weight .
b .
if the numday expected low temperature is less than num f num c do not use granulated slag .
num .
replace cement with slag at the rate of num lb num kg of slag to num lb num kg of cement .
num .
ensure that the granulated slag mix conforms to subsection num quality acceptance .
num .
do not use type ip cement or fly ash in slag mixes .
c. composition of concrete design the concrete mix to conform to the following requirements num .
coarse aggregate use coarse aggregate size no .
num num or num for plain portland cement concrete pavement .
use size no .
num or num coarse aggregate for continuous reinforced concrete pavement .
separate size no .
num or num in individual stockpiles of size no .
num and size no .
num .
blend according to approved mix proportions .
num .
fine aggregate use fine aggregate that meets the requirements for size no .
num .
when using two sizes or sources of fine aggregate to produce the proper gradation blend according to the approved design proportions .
d. protective materials provide materials to protect the concrete edges and surface from rain including standard metal forms or wood planks to protect the pavement edges covering material such as burlap or cotton mats curing paper or plastic sheeting material to protect the pavement surface num delivery storage and handling store aggregate from different sources in separate stockpiles .
num construction requirements num personnel a .
certified operator before paving have the office of materials certify a profilograph equipment operator .
certification includes a written examination by the operator .
num equipment a .
equipment requirements provide equipment and tools to perform the work .
provide equipment that allows the paver to operate at a constant production rate and rarely start and stop .
the engineer may limit the production rate or batch size if equipment does not keep pace with the other operations or causes poor workmanship .
section numportland cement concrete pavement num b. scales before use the engineer will inspect and approve the scales to weigh concrete materials and the devices to measure water .
tolerances are num percent throughout the operating range .
measure admixtures to num percent .
c. paving equipment ensure that equipment operating on the pavement has rubbertired wheels or flat steel wheels .
wait to operate concrete or shoulder paving equipment on the pavement until the concrete slab is num days old or has num psi num mpa compressive strength .
paving equipment may be either slipform or fixed form .
d. surface finish equipment use mechanical equipment to produce the surface finish of the mainline and transverse plastic concrete grooving .
ensure that the equipment uses rectangularshaped steel tines of the same size and uniform length .
use tines with a width between num in num mm and num in num mm .
space the tines approximately num in num mm apart .
e. field laboratory provide a field laboratory according to section num .
f. mechanical sprayers provide fully atomizing spraying equipment with a tank agitator to place curing compounds .
num preparation a .
prepare the road bed prepare the roadbed as required by the plans and specifications before placing concrete pavement .
b .
observe condition of subgrade and subbase check the subgrade and subbase as follows num .
prepare the full width of the subgrade and subbase according to the plans and specifications .
num .
ensure that the surface immediately under the concrete pavement allows proper pavement thickness and yield .
num .
trim high areas to the proper elevation .
num .
ensure that the subbase can support paving equipment without rutting or bogging .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
mix the concrete produce portland cement concrete by combining authorized proportions of materials in batches according to the construction methods in this specification .
mix the concrete produced in a stationary central mix plant for at least num seconds after all materials have entered the drum .
reduce the mix time if representative tests show that the concrete meets requirements of astm c num requirements for uniformity .
never reduce the mix time to less than num seconds .
b .
set forms set the forms as follows section numportland cement concrete pavement num num .
compact the foundation under the forms true to grade .
set the form so that it firmly contacts the foundation for the entire length at the specified grade .
num .
prevent the forms from settling or springing under the finishing machine .
num .
clean and oil the forms before placing the concrete .
c. dowel bars provide dowel bars at transverse joints unless otherwise noted in the contract plans .
d. place concrete after depositing the concrete on the grade avoid rehandling .
unload and place it as follows num .
unload the concrete into an approved spreading device and mechanically spread it on the grade .
num .
place the concrete continuously between transverse joints without using intermediate bulkheads .
num .
hand spread the concrete with shovels not rakes .
note do not allow personnel to walk in freshly mixed concrete with shoes coated with dirt or other materials .
num .
thoroughly consolidate the concrete against the faces of forms and along the full length and sides of joint assemblies .
num .
ensure that vibration does not cause puddling or grout accumulation on the surface .
for construction or expansion joints do not use grout that accumulates ahead of the paver .
num .
deposit concrete near the formed joints .
dump or discharge concrete only in the center of a joint assembly .
num .
take slab depth measurements as follows a .
probe the plastic concrete behind the paver .
b .
record the station number and depth measurements at least every num ft num m at num random increments across the slab .
c. provide these measurements to the engineer when requested .
num .
take air and slump determination tests at a rate of at least three of each test evenly distributed during the workday .
provide the results to the engineer when requested .
num .
keep reinforcing steel free of dirt oil paint grease mill scale and loose or thick rust that could impair the bond of the steel to the concrete .
num .
arrange operations to prevent leaveouts in continuous reinforced concrete pavement .
the engineer may approve leaveouts in emergencies if a plan is approved to increase the reinforcement .
the department will not pay for extra leaveouts .
e. place reinforcement place reinforcement according to the plans and as follows num .
do not insert lane tie bars in unsupported sides of fresh concrete .
num .
ensure that the steel placement method does not damage or disrupt concrete .
num .
use bent lane tie bars if needed in longitudinal formed joints construction .
however replace broken or damaged bars at no additional cost to the department .
f. construct the ramps prevent pavement slab stress by constructing a ramp of compacted earth or other material for movement on and off the pavement .
do not allow equipment that exceeds legal load limits on the pavement .
section numportland cement concrete pavement num g. consolidate and finish ensure that the sequence of operations is continuous from placement to final finish .
num .
consolidation perform vibration for the full width and depth of the pavement as follows a .
do not allow the vibrators to misalign load transfer devices or to contact forms or base .
b .
ensure that the vibrator amplitude is within the range recommended by the manufacturer .
use spud vibrators with an adjustable operating frequency between num and num vibrations per minute .
use surface pan vibrators with an adjustable operating frequency between num and num vibrations per minute .
c. if appropriate use surface vibrators and internal vibrators on concrete greater than num in num mm thick .
d. if appropriate use surface vibrators exclusively on pavements less than num in num mm thick .
e. stop vibration when the machine can not go forward .
f. obtain uniform consolidation and density throughout the pavement .
if it is not uniform stop the operation and provide methods or equipment that will produce pavement that conforms to the specifications .
num .
finishing after striking off and consolidating the concrete follow these steps a .
smooth and true the concrete using a float or finishing machine to minimize or eliminate hand finishing .
perform hand finishing only under the following conditions irregular dimension areas where operating mechanical equipment is impractical mechanical equipment breakdown only finish the concrete already deposited when the breakdown occurred abnormal circumstances approved by the engineer b .
ensure that the pavement surface final finish is true to grade uniform in appearance and free of irregular rough or porous areas .
c. prevent the surface within num in num mm of the pavement edge to deviate more than num in num mm in num ft num m when tested with a num ft num m straightedge in both transverse and longitudinal directions .
d. use mechanical equipment to produce a surface finish of transverse plastic concrete grooving for the mainline and ramps .
e. have the engineer determine the texture depth by conducting pavement surface tests such as gdt num at selected locations .
f. transversely sawgroove mainline and ramp areas with a surface texture depth less than num in num mm .
meet the depth requirement of num in num mm or greater .
perform sawgrooving to meet the following dimensions width num in num mm depth num in num mm spacing num in num mm centertocenter g. if required use hand tools to texture ramps acceleration lanes and deceleration lanes to surface texture mainline requirements .
finish irregular sections to a surface texture of at least num in num mm as shown in gdt num .
num .
numbering stations cast station numbers with a die in the pavement every num ft num m and num ft num mm from the right edge of the travel lane .
num .
protection from rain section numportland cement concrete pavement num protect the unhardened concrete from rain .
see subsection num.d protective materials .
when rain is imminent stop paving operations and place forms against the sides of the pavement .
cover the surface of the unhardened concrete with the protective covering .
h. remove forms do not remove forms from freshly placed concrete until it has set for at least num hours unless otherwise provided .
num .
remove forms carefully to avoid damaging the pavement .
num .
after removing the forms immediately cure the sides of the slab using the same method used to cure the pavement surface .
num .
remove and replace major honeycombed areas .
i .
work at night provide adequate lighting for work performed at night .
if lighting will not be provided at night stop the concreting operation in time to finish and saw during daylight hours .
j .
provide joints ensure that joints are designed configured and located as shown on the plans or required by the specifications .
num .
provide dowel bars at transverse joints unless otherwise noted .
num .
remove and replace plain concrete pavement that cracks during construction with no additional cost to the department at the engineers discretion .
num .
when chipping out random cracks for sealing use nonrigid epoxy on cracks that are not under expansioncontraction influence and that meet subsection num .
num .
seal continuous cracks that are under movement with sealant that meets subsection num .
num .
when removing and replacing a pavement section remove an area at least num ft num m long and the full width of the lane .
a .
saw to vertical face the sections to be removed and replace the concrete as a construction joint with dowels .
b .
use deformed bars as dowels in the sawcut construction joint .
use the size specified for contraction joints in the plans .
num .
thoroughly clean the drilled holes of contaminants and set the dowels into the hardened concrete face of the existing pavement with a type viii epoxy bonding compound .
see section num for epoxy bonding requirements .
num .
for contraction joints use undamaged and properly positioned dowels in existing construction or slab replacement areas .
coat the protruding dowel portions with a thin film of heavy grease .
num .
when both sides of an existing construction or contraction joint require slab replacements replace slabs continuously from sawcut construction joint to sawcut construction joint .
use dowels specified for contraction joints .
num .
before placing concrete uniformly apply a thin coat of heavy grease to epoxycoated dowels .
num .
when placing slabs continuously across transverse contraction joint locations use sawcuts to provide planes of weakness according to the requirements of this specification and the standard drawing for contraction joints .
k. types of joints num .
longitudinal joints for longitudinal joints use unpainted and uncoated deformed steel bars that are the size and length specified on the plans .
place the bars perpendicular to the joint using a mechanical device or rigidly secure the bars in place with supports .
num .
longitudinal formed joints construct longitudinal formed joints while the concrete is in a plastic state .
use methods and equipment that locate the joint reinforcement properly without disrupting it during construction .
section numportland cement concrete pavement num num .
longitudinal sawed joints cut longitudinal sawed joints with a mechanical saw within three days after the concrete is placed and before traffic or equipment enters the pavement .
num .
transverse joints transverse joints consist of construction joints contraction joints or expansion joints constructed at required locations .
a. construct transverse joints in partial width or adjoining lanes to abut the same joint of adjacent lanes unless otherwise specified on the plans .
b .
ensure that transverse joints in plain portland cement concrete requiring load transfer devices contain either plasticcoated or epoxycoated dowels .
c. before placing concrete secure dowel bars in place with supporting assemblies .
d. secure the assemblies in position on the subbase to keep the dowels from moving during concrete placement .
e. place dowel bars to a vertical and horizontal tolerance of plus or minus num in num mm of the plan position .
do not misalign the dowel bar more than num in per num ft num mm per num mm in the horizontal or the vertical plane .
f. remove and replace dowel assemblies displaced from the plan position more than the tolerances in subsection num.j .
g. when using epoxycoated dowels coat the entire surface with a thin film of heavy waterproof grease .
h. ensure accurate positioning of transverse sawed joints by marking the position of dowel bar assembly locations .
num .
construction joints construct transverse construction joints when interrupting concreting operations for more than one hour .
note do not construct transverse construction joints within num ft num m of an expansion joint contraction joint or transverse plane of weakness .
a .
move an unanticipated construction joint back to the last plan joint if necessary .
remove and dispose of excess concrete .
b .
form construction joints by securing in place a removable bulkhead or header board .
num place the board so that it conforms to the full cross section of the pavement .
secure it flush with the subbase and parallel to the normal transverse joints .
num slot or drill the board to allow placement of reinforcement as required by the plans .
note do not use the roll of laitance and grout that forms in front of the paver adjacent to transverse construction joints .
c. consolidate to full width and depth concrete adjacent to transverse construction joints with mechanical hand type spud vibrators .
keep one auxiliary vibrator available in case of mechanical malfunctions .
d. before applying the final finish to the concrete stringline and correct variations of the concrete surface within num ft num m on either side of the transverse construction joints .
provide equipment and tools such as work bridges personnel string lines straightedges lighting e. while the concrete is in a plastic condition stringline the surface longitudinally and correct surface deviations greater than num in per num ft num mm per num m in any direction .
f. when using plain portland cement concrete pavement place dowel bars in construction joints .
cast half the length of each dowel bar in the concrete during each phase of joint construction .
section numportland cement concrete pavement num g. when using epoxy coated dowels coat the protruding half of each dowel bar with a thin film of heavy waterproof grease before resuming joint construction .
grease coating is not required on plastic coated dowels .
h. after the concrete has hardened dismantle the bulkhead supporting the dowels .
do not disturb the dowels .
num .
contraction joints create planes of weakness in plain portland cement concrete pavement by cutting joints in the pavement surface .
create the planes according to the plans as follows a .
saw transverse contraction joints before the pavement cracks .
begin sawing when the concrete has hardened enough to prevent surface raveling usually num hours after placement but no more than num hours .
b .
continue sawing day and night regardless of weather conditions .
num .
expansion joints transverse expansion joints are required at locations shown on the plans .
a .
form expansion joints by securing a removable bulkhead that conforms to the full cross section of the pavement .
use bulkheads that can construct a vertical expansion wall without offsets indentations or burrs .
b .
use expansion joint filler required by the plans .
c. furnish and install preformed joint filler in lengths equal to the pavement width or the width of one lane .
do not use damaged or repaired joint fillers .
d. position the expansion joint filler vertically in the joint and at the proper grade .
use an installing bar or other device to secure the expansion joint filler at the proper grade and alignment .
l. cure the concrete immediately after finishing the concrete cure the entire surface when the concrete will not mar .
use one or more of these methods num .
impervious membrane method to use this method a. spray the entire surface of the pavement with white pigmented curing compound immediately after finishing the surface and before the concrete has set .
if the pavement is cured initially with cotton mats burlap or cotton fabric apply the compound after removing the mats .
note do not apply curing compound during rain .
b .
use mechanical sprayers to apply curing compound under pressure at a minimum rate of num gal per num ft² num l per num m² .
c. thoroughly mix the compound with uniformly dispersed white pigments .
d. during application use a mechanical device to stir the compound continuously .
e. use a hand sprayer if required to spray odd widths odd shapes and concrete surfaces exposed by removing forms .
f. do not apply curing compound to the inside faces of joints to be sealed .
g. if the membrane film becomes damaged within the curing period repair the damaged portions immediately with additional compound .
num .
white polyethylene sheeting to use this method a .
cover the top surface and sides of the pavement with polyethylene sheeting .
lap the units at least num in num mm .
b .
place the sheeting and weigh it down so that it contacts the surface .
c. extend the sheeting beyond the edges of the slab at least twice the thickness of the pavement .
d. unless otherwise specified maintain the covering in place for num hours after placing the concrete .
section numportland cement concrete pavement num num .
burlap cotton fabric or other methods contractors may cure the pavement with burlap cotton fabrics or other materials if the section remains wet for the duration specified by the engineer .
num .
cold weather curing to use this method a .
remove and replace concrete that freezes before the initial set time at no cost to the department .
b .
use polyethylene or canvas to protect concrete that has set but is exposed to freezing temperatures within num hours of placement .
ensure that the internal concrete temperature is above freezing for at least num hours after placing the concrete .
c. obtain approval from the engineer to use other protection methods such as hay straw or grass or to change the duration of the protection .
m. seal the joints clean and seal the joints according to section num and the plans .
immediately after completing the curing period fill in the joints with joint sealing material before opening the pavement to traffic .
during sealing do not spill the material on the concrete surface .
immediately remove excess material on the concrete surface and clean the surface .
do not use sand or similar material as a cover for the seal .
seal joints according to the plans .
n. open pavement to traffic wait to open the pavement slab to traffic except for joint sawing vehicles until the concrete is num days old unless representative compressive tests show that the slab has a compressive strength of num psi num mpa .
cure compressive test specimens used for traffic opening as near as possible to the roadway .
protect the pavement against traffic from the public employees and agents .
num .
erect and maintain barricades .
employ watchmen to block traffic from the newly constructed pavement for the period required in this specification .
num .
arrange the barriers away from public traffic on lanes remaining open .
num .
maintain signs that clearly indicate the lanes open to public traffic .
num .
if traffic must go across the pavement construct crossings satisfactory to the engineer to bridge over the concrete .
construct the crossing without additional compensation .
num .
repair or replace pavement damaged by traffic or other causes before final acceptance without additional compensation .
make repairs to the engineers satisfaction .
num quality acceptance the typical section sheet in the plans gives specific uses for each concrete classification .
refer to this specification for the minimum requirements of the concrete classifications for concrete design approval concrete mix design proportions batching control responsibilities and acceptance of hardened concrete based upon compressive strength development .
a .
transit mixed concrete ensure that transit mixed concrete meets the requirements of subsection num materials .
b .
mix design criteria proportion concrete mix designs using the following requirements section numportland cement concrete pavement num minimum cement content per cubic yard concrete cwt max .
watercement ratio lbslb design air content range class num num num num to num class num num num num to num class hes num num num to num minimum cement content per cubic meter concrete kg maximum watercement ratio kgkg design air content range class num num num num to num class num num num num to num class hes num num num to num produce evidence that the mix design proportions for class num and num concrete have strength development potential for num hours plus or minus num minutes and at num days as specified in subsection num.c approval of mix design proportions .
c. approval of mix design proportions the department will approve each proposed combination of materials and mix designs based on the use of approved materials compliance with subsection num.b mix design criteria and the following num .
flexural strength prepare at least num normally cured flexural specimens and test according to aashto t num and t num to ensure that the demonstrated laboratory flexural design strength at num days meets the following minimum design acceptance requirement dar .
note take the num flexural specimens from num separate trial batches .
make num specimens from each batch .
class no .
num concrete dar num psi .num s concrete dar num mpa .num s class no .
num concrete dar num psi .num s concrete dar num mpa .num s class hes concrete dar num psi .num s concrete dar num mpa .num s s a standard deviation of all numday flexural specimens for a given combination of materials and mix proportions prepared together .
do not use a value of s greater than num psi num kpa to calculate dar .
num .
compressive strength prepare and test at least num cylinders according to aashto t num and t num to ensure that the demonstrated laboratory compressive strength at num days for class num and num concrete exceeds the minimum job performance value jpv .
produce similar evidence that demonstrates strength development at num hours for class hes concrete .
class num concrete jpv minimum num psi .num r concrete jpv minimum num mpa .num r section numportland cement concrete pavement num class num concrete jpv minimum num psi .num r concrete jpv minimum num mpa .num r class hes concrete jpv minimum num psi .num r concrete jpv minimum num mpa .num r r the difference between the largest observed value and the smallest observed value for all compressive strength specimens at num days for a combination of materials and mix proportions prepared together .
a .
class num and num concrete num submit early compressive strength test results made at num hours plus or minus num minutes for at least num cylinders .
prepare and test according to astm c num method a .
num prepare cylinders from three separate trial batches and make four specimens from each batch .
num determine the average strength standard deviation and coefficient of variation for the design according to aci num .
do not use designs that produce a coefficient variation greater than num percent .
b .
class hes concrete submit evidence that designs proposed for use as class hes concrete have compressive strength development potential at num hours of num psi num mpa plus .num r. d. field adjustments on concrete mixes determine the aggregate surface moisture and apply free moisture corrections to the approved mix design .
the engineer will verify that the corrections are made properly .
adjust the approved proportions of the fine and coarse aggregate and water as desired provided num .
the cement factor is not decreased .
num .
the watercement ratio is not increased .
num .
adjustments produce concrete proportions according to this specification .
num .
the engineer is notified before use .
e. concrete mix tolerances keep concrete consistency and air content to vary within the following limits num .
consistency immediately before placement use gdt num to determine concrete slump .
do not use concrete for portland cement concrete pavement with a slump value greater than num in num mm .
num .
air content immediately before placement use gdt num gdt num or gdt num to determine the air content of the concrete .
concrete will not be accepted that has an air content outside of these limits lower acceptance limit num upper acceptance limit num f. concrete strength acceptance the concrete strength of portland cement concrete pavement is accepted based upon the compressive strength development at a specific time .
strength development is determined by a lot acceptance plan .
the pavement is subdivided into separate concrete lots of approximately num yd² num m² placed continuously except for required work stoppages .
num .
ramps section numportland cement concrete pavement num ramps may be set apart as individual lots .
include acceleration or deceleration lanes wedges or other varied width sections in other lots if the total paving quantity is not greater than num yd² num m² .
the engineer will randomly select three production units from each lot for strength determination tests .
num .
class num and num concrete a .
cast at least two cylinder sets for each production unit selected for acceptance testing .
a set is two num by num in num by num mm cylinders .
cure one set according to astm cnum method a .
cure the other set according to aashto t num. b .
after curing test each concrete cylinder according to aashto t num .
the test result is the average strength of the two cylinders .
num .
acceptance based on numhour strength concrete may be accepted by early strength determinations .
however concrete will not be accepted based on early strength development when the difference between the largest observed strength value and the smallest observed strength value exceeds num percent of the average .
a. compute the average x and the range r from the three acceptance tests results .
b .
have the engineer establish the minimum early strength s to be used for concrete acceptance .
the minimum early acceptance strength is the average strength at num hours plus or minus num minutes of the laboratory design less num times the standard deviation of the laboratory design .
c. if the average x of the three lot acceptance tests equal or exceed the value s the lot will be accepted at the full contract price and num day cylinders for this lot can be discarded .
d. if the average of the three lot acceptance tests fails to meet the acceptance limit the engineer will contact the contractor immediately .
the contractor may immediately remove the concrete in the lot or leave it in place pending acceptance or rejection from the numday strength test results .
num .
acceptance based on numday strength tests when a lot is potentially defective based on the early strength determinations and the contractor leaves the lot in place to be judged by the numday strength tests results retain and cure all num sets of numday cylinders .
a .
if the average numday strength of the lot does not meet the lower acceptance limit for a num pay factor the engineer may either order removal of the concrete in the lot apply a pay factor of num for the lot b .
the unit price of concrete pavement will be reduced for areas represented by each lot that does not meet the specified compressive strength at num days according to the following schedule pay factor schedule for strength determinations at num days acceptance limits for pay factor levels num lal num lal num lal concrete class num num psi num mpa num r num psi num mpa num r num psinum mpa num r concrete class num num psi num mpa num r num psi num mpa num r num psi num mpanum r lower acceptance limit lal num .
classification hes concrete cast at least two sets of cylinders for each production unit selected for acceptance testing .
a .
cure one set for num hours under conditions similar to those under which the pavement is cured .
cure the other set of cylinders for num days according to aashto t num. b .
test each cylinder according to aashto t num when the specified curing is complete .
the test results are the average strength of the two cylinders .
c. the engineer may accept the concrete at full contract price if the average of the three numhour test results exceeds the jpv established in subsection num.c .
section numportland cement concrete pavement num d. when the numhour strength tests determine that a lot is potentially defective the engineer will immediately notify the contractor .
at this time the engineer may require the immediate removal of the pavement in question .
if the engineer does not require immediate removal of the pavement select removal or acceptance on the basis of the numday strength development .
e. when the numhour strength tests determine that a lot is potentially defective and the concrete is retained for subsequent judgment conduct acceptance tests at num days on selected cylinders cured according to aashto t num .
questionable lots will be accepted based on the numday strength and provisions for testing computations and payment for classification no .
num concrete in subsection num.f.num class num and num concrete .
g. smoothness pavement smoothness will be accepted only after the engineer determines that the work was performed according to this and other specifications .
the completed pavement including corrective work must meet the applicable profile index value requirements .
perform smoothness testing as follows num .
ensure that the mainline riding surface produces a profile index value no greater than num inmile num mm km on each travel lane .
conduct tests according to gdt num .
num .
determine a profile index value for each tracing for each num mile num km segment .
correct individual bumps or depressions that exceed the blanking band by more than num in num mm at no additional expense to the department .
num .
if a paving operation exceeds a profile index value of num inmile num mmkm per lane for any segment suspend the paving operation and take corrective action approved by the engineer .
num .
use gdt num to test ramps and acceleration and deceleration lanes to attain an average profile index value no greater than num inmile num mmkm by rainhart profilograph for the entire section length .
correct individual bumps or depressions that exceed num in num mm from the blanking band at no additional expense to the department .
num .
take pavement profiles that are num ft num m away from and parallel to the new pavement edges on pavements greater than num ftnum m wide and up to num ft num m wide .
test pavement num to num ft num to num m wide parallel to and at the center line of the pavement section .
num .
begin the num mile num km record segments at the first days placement and continue until project completion except as noted in this specification .
num .
combine pavement sections less than num ft num m long that approach a bridge .
use the previous num mile num km segment to determine the profile index .
calculate as a separate record segment num ft num m sections or greater that approach a bridge .
this exception applies also to sections at project limits .
num .
determine a separate profile index value using gdt num for the num ft num m of roadway approaching each end of a bridge up to and including the joint with the approach slab .
average the profile index from the right and left wheelpaths for each num ft num m segment for each lane for each approach .
the average profile index value shall not exceed num inmile num mmkm .
num .
before paving farther perform and evaluate profiles from the first days placement .
a .
after completing and evaluating this test run adjust equipment as required by the engineer to improve smoothness before paving continues .
b .
complete the report form furnished by the engineer and attach to the profilograph tracings of each day .
include the following information in each trace project number beginning and ending station numbers num ft num m paving stations traffic direction section numportland cement concrete pavement num lane number date paved and tested construction joint locations have the certified profilograph operator obtain and evaluate the traces and submit the evaluation to the engineer .
provide results no later than the end of the second work day following placement .
num .
for mainline pavement correct num mile num km segments not meeting the profile index requirement using one of these methods a .
grind the entire lane surface of the num mile num km segment to a profile index value less than num inmile num mmkm .
use equipment that meets requirements in section num. b .
grind roughness in small segment areas no more than num ft num m of full lane width to produce a profile index value no greater than num inmile num mmkm .
if more than num ft num m of grinding is required grind the complete num mile num km segment according to method a above .
num .
correct ramps and acceleration and deceleration lanes that do not meet the profile index requirement to a profile index no greater than num inmile num mmkm .
prevent individual bumps from exceeding num in num mm from the blanking band .
use equipment specified in section num .
num .
correct num ft num m bridge approach sections that do not meet the profile index requirement .
a .
grind according to section num. b .
if appropriate use a bump grinder to correct bumps with a baseline of num ft num m or less .
c. grind the full lane width even when grinding including individual bumps .
d. retest pavement segments containing corrective slab replacements for final acceptance .
num .
correct segments that do not meet the profile index criteria of this specification at no additional expense to the department .
retest segments after correction with the rainhart profilograph .
num .
notify the engineer before profile testing .
the engineer will verify the results by randomly selecting a minimum of num out of every num consecutive record segment profiles to compute the profile index and to compare with contractor results .
the engineer may conduct profilograph tests at any time to verify contractor results .
the department may test record segments if the engineer determines that the contractor test results are inaccurate .
see subsection num adjustments .
h. thickness the engineer shall determine the pavement thickness using average core measurements tested according to gdt num .
the following table contains units for paving widths paving widths feet meters length of unit bridges excludedfeet meters num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num areas of equal depth in intersections entrances crossovers ramps etc .
are considered one unit and the thickness of each unit is determined separately .
if appropriate include small irregular areas as part of another unit .
num .
take one core for each num yd² num m² of pavement or fraction of pavement in each unit where the engineer selects .
the department will take one core at random in each unit .
a .
when the core measurement is deficient num in num mm or less from the plan thickness full payment is made .
b .
when the measurement is deficient more than num in num mm and not more than num in num mm from the plan thickness two additional cores are secured from the unit and used to determine the average thickness .
section numportland cement concrete pavement num c. a random selection process determines where to secure additional cores .
however do not secure cores within num ft num m of other thickness measurement cores .
the adjusted unit price in subsection num.a concrete pavement thickness deficiency is used to determine payment for the unit .
num .
consider pavement more than num in num mm thicker than the specified thickness to be the specified thickness plus num in num mm .
measurements more than num in num mm less than the specified thickness are not included in the average .
num .
when the core measurement is at least num in num mm less than the specified thickness a .
determine the pavement thickness in the affected location by taking additional cores at no less than num ft num m intervals parallel to the center line in each direction .
b .
continue until a core is found that is not deficient by more than num in num mm .
c. have the engineer evaluate areas more than num in num mm deficient in thickness .
remove deficient areas and replace with concrete pavement of the thickness shown on the plans if the engineer requires .
exploratory cores for deficient thickness are not used in averages for adjusted unit price .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the area that will be paid for under this item is the number of square yards meters of concrete pavement accepted as measured complete in place .
the pavement width measured is shown on the typical cross section of the plans including additional widening as required or widening directed in writing by the engineer .
the length is measured along the pavement surface .
work is accepted lottolot according to section num and this specification .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment concrete pavement completed and accepted that meets the specification requirements will be paid for at the full contract unit price per square yard meter .
payment for other accepted concrete pavement will be based on an adjusted unit price per square yard meter .
this price will be adjusted for payment for concrete pavement accepted but deficient in depth or compressive strength at num days .
price adjustments are specified in subsection num adjustments .
no additional payment over the contract unit price will be made for pavement units with an average thickness greater than on the plans .
no additional payment over the contract unit price will be made for a lot of concrete that develops more strength at num days than the compressive strength established in subsection num.f concrete strength acceptance .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and placing materials reinforcements dowel and joint materials supplies and incidentals to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num plain portland cement concrete pavement class no .
num concrete ______ in mm thick per square yard meter item no .
num plain portland cement concrete pavement class no .
num concrete _____ in mm thick per square yard meter item no .
num plain portland cement concrete pavement class hes concrete _____ in mm thick per square yard meter item no .
num continuously reinforced concrete pavement class no .
num concrete ______ in mm thick per square yard meter section numportland cement concrete pavement num item no .
num continuously reinforced concrete pavement class no .
num concrete ______ in mm thick per square yard meter item no .
num continuously reinforced concrete pavement class hes concrete ______ in mm thick per square yard meter num adjustments the contract unit price per square yard meter of concrete pavement will be adjusted for concrete pavement accepted but deficient in thickness or compressive strength at num days .
adjusted unit prices per square yard meter of concrete pavement are based on one or both of the following conditions a .
concrete pavement thickness deficiency num .
if the core is deficient num in num mm or less from the plan thickness full payment will be made .
if the core is deficient in thickness more than num in num mm but not more than num in num mm from the plan thickness num additional cores will be taken from the area .
a .
if the average measurement of these num cores is deficient num in num mm or less from the plan thickness full payment will be made .
b .
where the average pavement thickness is deficient by more than num in num mm but not more than num in num mm payment will be made at a portion of the unit price per square yard meter of concrete pavement as shown in the following table concrete pavement deficiency deficiency in thickness determined by cores in mm proportional part of contract price allowed num through num num through num num percent num through num num through num num percent num through num num through num num percent num num through num num percent num num through num num percent num num through num num percent num num through num num percent c. when the thickness of pavement is deficient by more than num in num mm and the engineer determines that the deficient area should not be removed or replaced num percent of the contract unit price will be paid .
num .
no payment or compensation for cost will be made for removing concrete according to this provision .
b. compressive strength deficiency when the compressive strength at num days expressed as an average strength x for a lot of concrete pavement is less than the values established by the pay factor table payment will be made at a reduced unit price per square yard meter as shown in the pay factor table .
c. combined deficiencies when a pavement section is deficient in thickness and compressive strength the contract unit price will be adjusted by the total reduction from applying the percentages in subsections num.a and subsection num.b above .
for combined deficiencies of num percent or more the engineer may leave the pavement in place at the combined payment reduction or order the deficient areas removed and replaced at no additional cost to the department .
if the engineer orders removal of the pavement payment will not be made for the original pavement or removal .
pavement replaced will be paid for at the appropriate unit price .
section numportland cement concrete pavement num d. profilograph testing if based on the departments profilograph tests the engineer determines that the contractor profilograph test results are inaccurate the contractor will be charged for profilograph testing at num for each trace mile num for each trace kilometer with a minimum charge of num .
section numgrind concrete pavement num general description this work includes grinding existing portland cement concrete pavement to eliminate joint faulting or to restore proper drainage and riding characteristics to the pavement surface .
perform the work according to these specifications and the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a. grinding equipment use power driven selfpropelled grinding equipment with these characteristics diamond blades designed to smooth and texture portland cement concrete pavement effective wheel base of at least num ft num m pivoting tandem bogey wheels at the front of the machine rear wheels arranged to travel in the track of the freshly cut pavement grinding head with the center no further than num ft num mm forward from the center of the back wheels ensure that the equipment section numgrind concrete pavement num cuts or planes at least num ft num mm wide operates without encroaching on traffic movement outside the work area grinds the surface without causing spalls at cracks joints or other locations periodically check the equipment to ensure that it is in proper working order especially the wheel roundness on the grinding equipment .
immediately correct outofround wheels .
b. rainhart profilograph use the rainhart profilograph to test ground pavement surfaces on ramps acceleration and deceleration lanes and other areas not suitable for testing with the road profiler for pavement profile index value .
num preparation complete spall repairs slab replacements and pressure grouting in the area to be ground before beginning grinding operations .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction grind the pavement surface areas designated on the plans .
only grind bridge decks and roadway shoulders when they are indicated on the plans required to promote drainage or required to conform to smoothness requirements if the work is new construction or bridge decks .
grind the surface areas as follows num .
schedule the construction operation to produce a uniform finished surface .
num .
maintain a constant cross slope between grinding extremities in each lane to ensure that grinding provides positive lateral drainage .
num .
transition auxiliary or ramp lane grinding from the mainline edge and at the end of the cut to provide positive drainage and acceptable riding surface .
num .
grind the entire area designated on the plans until the pavement surfaces of the adjacent sides of transverse joints and cracks are in the same plane .
num .
eliminate the faulting at joints and cracks and ensure that the overall riding characteristics are within the limits specified .
num .
texture the pavement surface but do not grind extra depth to eliminate minor depressions .
num .
remove grinding residue before it is blown by traffic action or wind .
do not allow residue to flow into gutters drainage facilities or across lanes used by public traffic .
num .
ensure that the operation produces pavement that conforms to the typical cross section and requirements in subsection num quality acceptance .
num quality acceptance produce a pavement surface that is true to grade and uniform with a longitudinal linetype texture .
a. texture ensure that the linetype texture contains corrugations that are parallel to the outside pavement edge and have a narrow ridge corduroytype appearance .
b .
grooves ensure that the peaks of the ridges are num in num in num mm num mm higher than the bottoms of the grooves with num to num num to num evenly spaced grooves per foot meter .
select the number of grooves per foot meter to produce the surface finish for each aggregate type that is in the concrete surface on the project .
groove spacing that does not meet the specified surface finish will not be accepted .
section numgrind concrete pavement num c. finished pavement surface correct deficiencies in the final surface finish from improper operation or equipment at no expense to the department .
this includes but is not limited to pavement corrugation due to out of round wheels on grinding equipment improper cutting head operations that cause the head to ride in and out of the pavement when encountering light and heavy cuts depressions created from improper starting and stopping during the cutting operation unground ridges left in the pavement from defective blades in the grinding head closely check the ground pavement surface during grinding and take corrective action if any of the above deficiencies occur .
the finished pavement surface will be measured for riding quality using the laser road profiler according to test procedure gdt num .
follow these requirements to ensure that the grinding produces an acceptable riding surface num .
ensure that the ground pavement surfaces on the mainline meet a pavement ride index value not exceeding num on each num mile segment num km segment for each vehicle lane .
num .
conduct tests according to gdt num .
calculate and report smoothness values for each num mile num km section of each vehicle lane .
num .
regrind areas that do not meet the smoothness requirements at no additional cost to the department .
d. regrinding to regrind areas to meet the smoothness or final surface finish num .
regrind the entire lane width in the area to be corrected .
regrind of just a portion of the lane width will not be permitted num .
perform spot regrinding on moderate to major deviations throughout the deficient num mile num km section of the lane to meet the smoothness and final surface finish requirements .
spot regrinding of just the largest deviations of a portion of the deficient num mile num km lane section will not be permitted .
the engineer may require profilograph traces before regrinding to locate deviations within a failed area .
the department will perform profilograph testing according to gdt num .
provide traffic control for profilograph testing at no cost to the department .
the engineer may require profilograph testing of ground surfaces on the mainline that meet the smoothness requirements .
testing will be performed according to gdt num to isolate locations with individual bumps or depressions greater than num in num mm outside the blanking band .
perform corrective grinding to eliminate these bumps or depressions at no additional cost to the department .
ensure that the pavement profile index value readings on ramps acceleration and deceleration lanes and other areas not suitable for road profiler testing do not exceed num inmile num mmkm when tested in accordance with gdt num .
if they are exceeded regrind the areas that exceed this value at no additional cost to the department .
regrind individual bumps or depressions greater than num in num mm outside the blanking band on the profilograph trace at no additional cost to the department .
inspect transverse joints and random cracks to ensure that adjacent surfaces are in the same plane .
grind surface misalignments greater than num in num mm of the surface planes on adjacent sides of the joints or cracks until the surfaces are flush .
e. pavement transverse slope ensure that the pavement transverse slope is uniform and that depressions or slope misalignments are not greater than num in .
in num ft num mm in num m when tested with a straightedge placed perpendicular to the centerline .
num .
minimize vertical alignment mismatches between adjacent cuts num in num mm maximum .
section numgrind concrete pavement num num .
check the transverse slope closely as the work progresses .
correct mismatches immediately .
num .
if one or more lanes are not to be ground ensure that the vertical interface edge between the ground and unground lanes is not misaligned more than num in .
num mm .
feather the cut from the ground lanes into the unground lanes to meet this requirement .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement pavement grinding on existing pavements is measured by the square yard meter .
determine the quantity of pavement grinding by multiplying the finished ground width by the total length ground .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the contract price per square yard meter for grinding concrete pavement is full compensation for furnishing labor materials tools equipment and incidentals grinding the existing surface removing residue and cleaning the pavement according to these specifications and as shown on the plans .
payment will be made under item no .
num grind concrete pavement per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section nummill asphaltic concrete pavement num general description this work includes milling existing asphaltic concrete pavement to restore proper grade andor transverse slope removing structurally unsound material providing clearance for overlay in curb and gutter sections or other purposes deemed necessary due to existing conditions .
perform the work according to these specifications and plan details .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment b. referenced documents gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
section nummill asphaltic concrete pavement num num materials num delivery storage and handling when specified stockpile the milled material at locations shown on the plans .
num .
uniformly stockpile the materials approximately num num ft num num m high .
num .
maintain the existing drainage pattern of water from the stockpile storage area .
num .
dress the reclaimed asphalt area to drain rainwater from the material .
num .
obtain the engineers approval of the stockpile locations and the method used to prevent milled material degradation segregation and reconsolidation .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a .
milling equipment use powerdriven selfpropelled milling equipment that is the size and shape that allows traffic to pass safely through areas adjacent to the work .
also use equipment that is designed to mill and remove a specified depth of existing asphalt paving equipped with grade and slope controls operating from a stringline or ski and based on mechanical or sonic operation capable of removing pavement to an accuracy of num in num mm furnished with a lighting system for night work as necessary provided with conveyors capable of side rear or front loading to transfer the milled material from the roadway to a truck b .
dust control provide power brooms vacuum sweepers power blowers or other means to remove loose debris or dust .
do not allow dust control to restrict visibility of passing traffic or to disrupt adjacent property owners .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
milling operation follow the plans to mill the designated areas and depths including bridge decks shoulders and ramps as required .
ensure the following requirements are met num .
schedule the construction operation .
use milling methods that will produce a uniform finished surface and maintain a constant cross slope between extremities in each lane .
num .
provide positive drainage to prevent water accumulation on the milled pavement as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
section nummill asphaltic concrete pavement num num .
bevel back the longitudinal vertical edges greater than num in num mm that are produced by the removal process and left exposed to traffic .
bevel them back at least num in for each num in num mm for each num mm of material removed .
use an attached mold board or other approved method .
num .
when removing material at ramp areas and ends of milled sections taper the transverse edges num ft num m to avoid creating a traffic hazard and to produce a smooth surface .
num .
protect with a temporary asphaltic concrete tiein paper joint vertical edges at other areas such as bridge approach slabs drainage structures and utility apputenance greater than num in that are left open to transversing vehicles .
place the temporary tiein at taper rate of at least num to num horizontal to vertical distance .
num .
remove dust residue and loose milled material from the milled surface .
do not allow traffic on the milled surface and do not place asphaltic concrete on the milled surface until removal is complete .
the reclaimed asphaltic pavement becomes the contractors property unless otherwise specified .
num quality acceptance ensure that the milling operation produces a uniform pavement texture that is true to line grade and cross section .
milled pavement surface acceptance testing will be performed using the laser road profiler method in gdt num .
milled pavement will be evaluated on individual test sections normally num mile num km long .
when the milled surface is to be left as the final wearing surface ensure that indices do not exceed num on milled pavement surfaces on interstates when the milled surface will be the final wearing surface num for other onsystem routes when the milled surface will be the final wearing surface num on interstates and num for other onsystem routes if the milled surface will be overlaid remill mile kilometer areas to meet the specified limits when the indices are exceeded .
remill at no additional cost to the department .
milled pavement surfaces are subject to visual and straightedge inspection .
keep a num ft num m straightedge near the milling operation to measure surface irregularities of the milled pavement surface .
remill irregularities greater than num in per num ft num mm in num m at no additional cost to the department .
ensure that the cross slope is uniform and that no depressions or slope misalignments greater than num in per num ft num mm in num m exist when the slope is tested with a straightedge placed perpendicular to the center line .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement milling existing asphaltic concrete pavement is measured by the square yard meter as described in subsection num measurement and quantities .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment milling asphaltic concrete pavement measured as specified will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square yard meter .
the price bid for this item includes the credit value of all reclaimed asphalt pavement rap recovered and no adjustment in the unit price for this item or other items will be considered for variations in the amount of rap actually recovered .
payment is full compensation for furnishing equipment milling hauling stockpiling milled material and satisfactorily performing the work .
section nummill asphaltic concrete pavement num payment will be made under item no .
num mill asphaltic concrete pavement ___ in mm depth per square yard meter item no .
num mill asphaltic concrete pavement variable depth per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numreinforced concrete approach slabs num general description this work includes building reinforced concrete approach slabs for bridges on completed and accepted subgrades .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numportland cement concrete pavement section nummiscellaneous concrete section numconcrete structures section numreinforcement steel section numconcrete barrier section numreinforcement and tensioning steel b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet these requirements a .
concrete use concrete specified as class a concrete see section num or pavement concrete see section num .
b .
steel bars for concrete reinforcement see subsection num .
c. forms use steel or wood forms that meet the requirements of section num or section num .
section numreinforced concrete approach slabs num d. concrete and reinforcement steel ensure that concrete for approach slabs is proportioned mixed placed and cured according to section num or that it meets the requirements for class a concrete section num .
place reinforcement steel according to section num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction construct the approach slab before placing the adjacent roadway paving unless otherwise specified in the plans .
a .
approach slabs finish cure and protect the approach slabs as specified in subsection num.q place concrete and subsection num.z.num bridge deck curing .
b .
curbs construct curbs of the dimensions required monolithic with the approach slab when specified on the plans .
place finish and cure the curb as specified in section num .
c. barriers construct and finish the barriers according to section num section num and plan details .
use concrete that is class a or better and proportioned and mixed according to section num .
d. final finish when the concrete has hardened and standing water and moisture sheen have disappeared give the concrete a final finish manually or mechanically according to requirements in section num for bridge decks .
num quality acceptance the riding quality of approach slabs will be tested with the lightweight profiler as part of the bridge deck according to subsection num.e ride quality test .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
section numreinforced concrete approach slabs num num measurement the quantity for payment for reinforced concrete approach slabs is the number of square yards meters complete in place and accepted .
the pay area is computed by the overall length and width of the approach slabs as shown on the plans with no deductions for areas with end posts and expansion joints .
num limits curbs barriers and reinforcing steel are not measured for payment but their cost is included in the price bid for the individual contract item .
num payment the area measured will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard meter .
payment will be made under item no .
num reinforced concrete approach slab per square yard meter item no .
num reinforced concrete approach slab including curb per square yard meter item no .
num reinforced concrete approach slab including barrier per square yard meter item no .
num reinforced concrete approach slab including sloped edge per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numasphalt paved ditches num general description this work includes paving ditches spillways and other similar waterways with hot asphalt mixture .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction section numaggregates for asphaltic concrete section numasphalt cement section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
section numasphalt paved ditches num num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of section num section num and section num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment use equipment that meets the requirements in section num for mixing and transporting the asphaltic concrete .
a. handoperated roller use a handoperated roller that weighs at least num lbs num kg .
b .
small power roller use a small power roller satisfactory to the engineer .
c. vibratory device use a vibratory device satisfactory to the engineer .
d. hand tampers use hand tampers to compact areas that can not be reached with rollers or vibrators .
e. forms use forms that are satisfactory to the engineer if required .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction use ditch paving construction methods that allow water to flow continuously and that keep the ditch unobstructed to prevent ponding or standing water .
protect the ditch paving areas under construction from flowing water elements and other disturbances until the materials are fully set .
a .
develop the asphalt mixture use a uniform homogeneous asphalt mixture of aggregate and bituminous material .
a job mix formula is not required however base the mixture on an approved design analysis that meets the requirements of either a num mm mixture or num mm superpave mixture level a as described in section num except that testing for moisture susceptibility gdt num and rutting susceptibility gdt num will not be required .
the asphalt content for ditch paving shall be set num higher than the optimum asphalt content determined during the mix design analysis .
control the mixture within the mixture control tolerances for the respective mix given in section num .
do not continue operation outside the mixture control tolerances .
b .
form the subgrade form the subgrade as follows section numasphalt paved ditches num num .
form the subgrade at the required depth below and parallel to the finished surface of the ditch or waterway required by the plans .
num .
remove soft yielding or otherwise unsuitable material and substitute with suitable material .
num .
compact the subgrade to num percent of the maximum dry density as determined by gdt num .
finish to a smooth firm surface .
num .
if shown on the plans place and compact the subgrade material to the required thickness .
c. stake the forms if forms are required stake them securely into position at the correct line and elevation .
d. place the asphalt mixture place the mixture on the prepared subgrade only when the subgrade is properly prepared and weather conditions are suitable .
place as follows num .
place the mixture within the temperature limits of num º to num ºf num º to num ºc .
num .
smooth the mixture by raking or screeding .
num .
thoroughly compact the mixture as follows a .
roll with a handoperated roller small power roller or vibratory device satisfactory to the engineer .
b .
use hand tampers to compact areas that can not be reached with rollers or vibrators .
c. compact until the surface is smooth and even and the texture is dense and uniform .
the thickness lines grades and cross section shall be as shown on the plans .
num .
remove forms if used and replace with compacted backfill .
shape the shoulders and slopes and complete them to conform to the required section .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. asphalt ditch paving asphalt for ditch paving is measured in tons megagrams as mixed placed and accepted .
the actual weight is determined by using an approved motor truck scale to weigh each loaded vehicle as the material is hauled to the roadway .
the weight measured includes all materials .
b. incidental items incidental items such as preparing the subgrade and excavating unsuitable material and backfill are not measured for separate payment unless otherwise specified .
those costs are included in the unit price bid .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a. asphalt ditch paving asphalt for ditch paving will be paid for at the contract unit price per ton megagram complete in place and accepted .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials bituminous material and equipment and for preparing the subgrade hauling stockpiling mixing spreading and rolling .
section numasphalt paved ditches num b. incidental items unless otherwise specified no separate payment will be made for incidental items .
payment will be made under item no .
num asphalt ditch paving mixture per ton megagram num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numrapid setting cement concrete end dams and patches num general description this work includes constructing bridge joint end dams and partial or full depth patches in concrete structures .
use rapid setting cement concrete under these conditions quick traffic return is required .
the required minimum depth is num in .
num mm num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numsealing roadway and bridge joints and cracks section numconcrete structures section numtwentyfour hour accelerated strength concrete section numjoint fillers and sealers section numepoxy resin adhesives section numrapid setting patching materials for portland cement concrete b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals a .
mix design submit rapidsetting cement concrete mix designs and materials to the office of materials for verification and approval at least num days before use .
num materials use these materials to construct bridge joint end dams or repair concrete section numrapid setting cement conrete end dams and patches num material section rapidsetting cement material num epoxy adhesive type ii num silicone sealant num.c.num and num preformed foam joint filler num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation prepare the surfaces for construction as follows num .
scarify the surface within the repair area using a concrete scabbler to remove unsound concrete and concrete laitance down to sound coarse aggregate .
num .
after scarifying the surface sandblast it to remove loose or unsound concrete or other contaminates .
num .
clean the prepared area with compressed air .
num .
completely coat the bottom and vertical side walls of the prepared area with a film of type ii epoxy approximately num to num mils num to num mm thick .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction repair the bridge joint end dams in the locations or areas indicated on the plans or as designated by the engineer .
remove asphaltic concrete from the end dams areas according to figure num figure num metric .
section numrapid setting cement conrete end dams and patches num figure num b.f.p.r .
num ft w num ft approach slab make saw cut full depth of overlay for vertical face typ .
pcc end dam temporary joint filler recess num mm below finished grade .
typ .
end bent w num ft asphalt overlay surfaces to be coated with type ii epoxy typ .
see contract plans for dimension w typ .
interm .
bent silicone sealant num ft w pcc end dam num in min .
asphalt overlay num in min .
num in min .
num in min .
num in radius each side of opening backer rod section numrapid setting cement conrete end dams and patches num figure num metric a .
weather limitations place rapidsetting cement concrete within the temperature range of num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc .
do not apply epoxy bonding adhesive to a damp substrate .
b .
mix design do not use aggregate that is larger than onequarter the depth of the repair .
c. general instructions handle mix place and finish rapidsetting cement concrete according to the manufacturers instructions .
ensure that the finished rapidsetting cement concrete surface is the same elevation and cross slope as the adjacent pavement .
d. placement place the rapidsetting cement concrete as follows num .
deposit it in the area while the epoxy is still tacky .
num .
vibrate it to completely fill the area of the end dam or patch .
b.f.p.r .
num mm w num mm approach slab make saw cut full depth of overlay for vertical face typ .
pcc end dam temporary joint filler recess num mm below finished grade .
typ .
end bent w num mm asphalt overlay surfaces to be coated with type ii epoxy typ .
typ .
interm .
bent silicone sealant num mm w pcc end dam num mm min .
num mm min .
num mm min .
num mm radius each side of opening backer rod section numrapid setting cement conrete end dams and patches num num .
finish the concrete to the proper grade do not disturb it until the watersheen disappears from the surface .
e. curing cure the rapidsetting cement concrete according to subsection num.z cure concrete and as follows num .
cure it long enough to develop the concrete strength in place as required in subsection num.g compressive strength .
num .
use the compressive strength test procedures in subsection num.a compressive strength testing except the laboratory may reduce the number of test cylinders .
f. joint reestablishment reestablish the joint as follows num .
place temporary joint material that conforms to subsection num in the joint so to place and screed the full width of the end dams or patches and to bridge the temporary joint material with the screeding apparatus .
num .
if patching a joint reestablish the joint opening to match the existing joint if constructing an end dam match the plan details .
num .
remove the temporary joint material .
sandblast the vertical faces of the joint opening to remove loose material and to produce a coarse texture conducive to bonding sealant .
num .
immediately after sandblasting seal the opening according to figure num metric and subsection num.c.num .
g. compressive strength do not allow traffic on end dams or patches until the rapidsetting cement concrete obtains a minimum compressive strength of num psi num mpa .
num quality acceptance a .
correction of defects remove and replace at the contractors expense completed end dams or patches that contain cracks are disbonded from asphalt or slab or are damaged from construction or traffic before final acceptance .
replace at the contractors expense silicone joint sealant that fails or that is not within the depth tolerances of figure num figure nummetric .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the area measured for payment is the rapidsetting cement concrete in cubic feet meters used in bridge joint end dams or patches completed in place and accepted .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the joints measured will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic foot meter for bridge joint and end dams and per cubic foot meter for patches .
payment is full compensation for sawing as required removing the asphaltic concrete material or spalled broken or damaged portland cement concrete cleaning the substrate by sandblasting or abrading and planing mixing placing finishing and curing the concrete section numrapid setting cement conrete end dams and patches num providing equipment tools and labor performing incidentals to complete the work including sealing the joints payment will be made under item no .
num rapidsetting cement concrete bridge joint end dams per cubic foot meter item no .
num rapidsetting cement concrete patching portland cement concrete per cubic foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numasphaltic concrete curb num general description this work includes constructing asphaltic concrete curbs according to these specifications .
construct curb that conforms to the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction section numbituminous tack coat section numaggregates for asphaltic concrete section numasphalt cement b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of section num section num and section num .
use a uniform homogeneous asphalt mixture of aggregate and bituminous material .
a job mix formula is not required however base the mixture on an approved design analysis that meets the requirements of either a num mm mixture or num mm superpave mixture level a as described in section num except that testing for moisture susceptibility gdt num and rutting susceptibility gdt num will not be required .
the asphalt content for asphaltic concrete curb shall be set num higher than the optimum asphalt content determined during the mix design analysis .
control the mixture within the mixture control tolerances for the respective mix given in section num .
do not continue operation outside the mixture control tolerances .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section numasphaltic concrete curb num num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment use equipment that meets the requirements in section num for mixing and transporting the asphaltic concrete .
a. selfpropelled curbing machine for curb construction use an approved selfpropelled curbing machine equipped with a hopper a powerdriven screw or other device that forces the mixture through a tube and then through a die attached to the tube design the mold to produce the desired cross section of the curb .
ensure that the curbing machine can thrust against the asphalt mixture to eliminate objectionable surface voids as the mixture passes through the mold produce curbing with a uniform texture shape and density use hand methods adjacent to structures .
num preparation prepare the curb foundation as follows num .
excavate subgrades for header type curbs to the required depth .
num .
remove and replace soft or unstable material with stable material .
num .
compact and finish the subgrade to num percent of the maximum density as determined by gdt num .
num .
shape the subgrade to the required line grade and cross section .
num .
when placing the curb on existing pavement thoroughly remove dirt and objectionable matter from the area receiving the curb .
num .
apply a tack coat at the rate directed by the engineer to the full width of the curb being placed .
note place sections of curb only after constructing adjoining spillways and drainage outlets .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. mixing asphaltic concrete ensure that the asphaltic concrete manufacturer meets the requirements of section num as applicable .
b .
placing curb material when beginning construction determine the working temperature of the asphaltic mixture to achieve the best results .
do not place curb material on an area where the surface temperature is below num ºf num ºc .
when the machine used to lay the asphaltic curb does not give adequate compaction as determined by the engineer take corrective measures to compact the finished curb adequately .
these measures include but are not limited to adjusting the mix loading the machine with additional weight using other corrective measures section numasphaltic concrete curb num c. observing tolerance if the grade line is uniform the curb can slump num in num mm below the specified height .
d. curing and protecting the curb protect the newly laid curb from traffic by using a barricade or other methods until the asphaltic mixture has cooled to air temperature .
once the curb is cool immediately backfill it .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance maintenance includes protecting the finished curb until final acceptance .
remove and replace curb or curb sections displaced destroyed or damaged from contractor negligence at no additional cost to the department .
num measurement asphaltic concrete curb complete in place and accepted is measured in linear feet meters along the face of the curb .
tack coat is measured and paid for according to section num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment asphaltic concrete curb measured for payment will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter for each curb height .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials including bituminous material preparing the subgrade or pavement surfaces cleaning hauling mixing placing and replacing if required and maintaining the curb to complete the item .
payment will be made under item no .
num asphaltic concrete curb___ inmm per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numgranite curb num general description this work includes furnishing and installing granite curb including excavating and backfilling .
construct curb that conforms to the lines and grades shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numrip rap and curbing stone b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use granite curbing that meets the requirements of subsection num .
ensure that type a curbing with dressed surfaces is free from drill marks or other artificial blemishes .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation prepare and excavate the foundation as follows num .
thoroughly tamp the bottom of the trench .
remove soft or yielding material to the depth ordered by the engineer .
num .
refill the trench with stable material and tamp the material in num in num mm layers or less .
num .
place the granite curb on a dry firm foundation .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
setting the curb set the curb true to line and grade and closely fit the adjacent sections as follows num .
thoroughly ram and maul the curbing into place .
section numgranite curb num num .
immediately after setting the curb place and compact the backfilling in num in num mm layers or less .
use backfill material approved by the engineer .
num .
when setting the curb on a fill or placing more than num in num mm of the curb above the surrounding ground protect the curb by placing at least an num in num mm wide bank of dirt behind it level with the top of the curb .
num .
divert the water away from the trench on steep grades or wherever there is a danger of water getting into the trench .
num .
lower the curb for driveways and alleys as directed .
cut and round curb sections adjacent to lowered curbs to num degrees .
num .
provide weep holes and drainage openings as indicated on the plans .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement granite curb complete and in place is measured for payment by the linear foot meter along the inner top exposed edge nearest the roadway centerline .
measurement for payment is not made for foundation excavation preparation compaction weep holes or drainage openings .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this item will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter for straight curbs radial or curved curbs complete in place and accepted .
payment will be made under item no .
num straight granite curb thick in mm x depth in mm type ___ per linear foot meter item no .
num circular granite curb thick in mm x depth in mm type ___ per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numprecast concrete header curb num general description this work includes furnishing and installing precast concrete header curb according to the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummiscellaneous concrete section numconcrete structures section numprecast concrete header curb num section numreinforcement and tensioning steel section numprecast concrete catch basin drop inlet and manhole units b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use concrete materials that meet the requirements of section num class aanum air entrained and the following specifications reinforcing and tensioning steel num dowel bars and tie bars num ensure that the manufacture and testing of concrete cylinders meet the requirements of section num as applicable .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. excavation excavate the subgrade to the required grade and cross section shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
remove unsuitable material in the subgrade and backfill as necessary .
b. precast concrete header curb use precast concrete header curb as an alternate for granite curb when specified in the plans .
num .
do not use it with existing or required granite curb unless shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
num .
make precast header curb in tangent sections only .
num .
pour curbed portions in place according to section num .
provide dowels or dowel holes in pouredinplace portions for tying in precast sections .
num .
ensure that precast sections conform to the dimensions and details on the plans .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
section numprecast concrete header curb num num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement precast concrete header curb complete in place is measured per linear foot meter .
excavation and backfill are not measured separately for payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this item measured for payment includes the required excavation backfill and incidentals to complete the item .
payment will be made under item no .
num precast concrete header curb height in mm per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numportland cement concrete pavement special num general description this work includes constructing pavement composed of portland cement concrete with or without reinforcement as specified on a prepared subgrade or subbase course .
follow the requirements of these specifications and conform with the lines grades thicknesses and typical crosssections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numfield laboratory building section numportland cement concrete pavement section numgrind concrete pavement section numsealing roadway and bridge joints and cracks section numconcrete structures section numcoarse aggregate section numfine aggregate section numportland cement section numadmixtures section numcuring agents section numjoint fillers and sealers section numportland cement concrete pavement special num section numreinforcement and tensioning steel section numwater section numepoxy resin adhesives b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num astm c num requirements for uniformity gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num sop num num submittals a. profilograph certification before paving ensure that the profilograph and operator are certified by the office of materials in accordance with standard operating procedure no .
num certification of contractor personnel and equipment for smoothness testing of portland cement concrete pavement with the rainhart profilograph .
certification includes a mechanical check of the profilograph functions and a written examination by the operator .
request certification in writing to the office of materials at least two weeks before it is needed .
b .
report form refer to subsection num.l smoothness testing for report form and submittal requirements .
c. concrete design submit for approval a concrete design prepared by a testing laboratory approved by the office of materials .
the contractor will transmit the design to the engineer for approval at least num days before use .
or submit for approval concrete mix proportions with commonly used materials without preparation by a laboratory .
the office of materials may approve proportions based upon the past performance of the material combination .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section portland cement num portland pozzolan cement num water num section numportland cement concrete pavement special num material section fine aggregate size no .
num num coarse aggregate class a or b crushed stone or gravel sizes as specified num steel bars for reinforcement num steel wire for concrete reinforcement num welded steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement num dowel bars and bar coatings num curing agents num air entraining admixtures num fly ash and slag num joint fillers and sealers num low modulus silicone sealant for roadway construction joints num epoxy adhesive for repairing cracks num chemical admixtures num a .
fly ash fly ash may be used as a concrete additive to promote workability and plasticity .
use it as a partial replacement for portland cement in concrete but follow these limits num .
do not replace the cement quantity more than num percent by weight .
num .
replace cement with fly ash at the rate of num to num lbs num to num kg of fly ash to num lb num kg of cement .
num .
ensure that the fly ash mix conforms to subsection num quality acceptance .
num .
do not use type ip cement in fly ash mixes .
b. granulated iron blastfurnace slag if high early strengths are not desired use granulated slag as a partial replacement for portland cement in concrete .
follow these limits num .
replace the quantity of cement num percent or less by weight if the numday forecast of the national weather service expects temperatures higher than num f num c. a .
if the numday expected low temperature is less than num f num c but not less than num f num c replace the quantity of cement num percent or less by weight .
b .
if the numday expected low temperature is less than num f num c do not use granulated slag .
num .
replace cement with slag at the rate of num lb num kg of slag to num lb num kg of cement .
num .
ensure that the granulated slag mix conforms to subsection num quality acceptance .
num .
do not use type ip cement or fly ash in slag mixes .
c. composition of concrete design the concrete mix to conform to the following requirements num .
coarse aggregate use coarse aggregate size no .
num num or num for plain portland cement concrete pavement .
use size no .
num or num coarse aggregate for continuous reinforced concrete pavement .
separate size no .
num or num in individual stockpiles of size no .
num and size no .
num .
blend according to approved mix proportions .
section numportland cement concrete pavement special num num .
fine aggregate use fine aggregate that meets the requirements for size no .
num .
when using two sizes or sources of fine aggregate to produce the proper gradation blend according to the approved design proportions .
num delivery storage and handling store fine aggregate from different sources in different stockpiles .
num construction requirements num personnel a .
certified operator before paving have the office of materials certify a profilograph equipment operator .
certification includes a written examination by the operator .
num equipment a .
equipment requirements provide equipment and tools to perform the work .
provide equipment that allows the paver to operate at a constant production rate and minimizes starting and stopping .
the engineer may limit the production rate or batch size if equipment does not keep pace with the other operations or causes poor workmanship .
b. ramp screeds and hand finishing tools ramp screeds and hand finishing tools may be used instead of conventional mainline paving equipment .
c. scales before use the engineer will inspect and approve the scales to weigh concrete materials and the devices to measure water .
tolerances are num percent throughout the operating range .
measure admixtures to num percent .
d. protective equipment provide materials to protect the concrete edges and surface against rain including standard metal forms or wood planks to protect the pavement edges covering material such as burlap or cotton mats curing paper or plastic sheeting material to protect the pavement surface e. auxiliary vibrator keep one auxiliary vibrator available in case of mechanical malfunctions .
f. texturing equipment ensure that the tines on the equipment are the same size and length and are rectangular shaped have approximately num in num mm of space between them are between num in and num in num mm and num mm wide num preparation a .
prepare the roadbed prepare the roadbed as required by the plans and specifications before placing concrete pavement .
section numportland cement concrete pavement special num b .
observe condition of subgrade and subbase check the subgrade and subbase as follows num .
prepare the full width of the subgrade and subbase according to the plans and specifications .
num .
ensure that the surface immediately under the concrete pavement allows proper pavement thickness and yield .
num .
trim high areas to the proper elevation .
num .
ensure that the subbase can support paving equipment without rutting or bogging .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
set forms set the forms as follows num .
compact the foundation under the forms true to grade .
set the form so that it firmly contacts the foundation for the entire length at the specified grade .
num .
prevent the forms from settling or springing under the finishing machine .
num .
clean and oil the forms before placing the concrete .
b .
place concrete after depositing the concrete on the grade avoid rehandling it .
unload and place it as follows num .
unload the concrete into an approved spreading device and mechanically spread it on the grade .
num .
place the concrete continuously between transverse joints without using intermediate bulkheads .
num .
perform any necessary hand spreading of concrete with shovels not rakes .
note do not allow personnel to walk in freshly mixed concrete with shoes coated with dirt or other materials .
num .
thoroughly consolidate the concrete on both sides of joint assemblies .
num .
ensure that vibration does not cause puddling or grout accumulation on the surface .
for construction or expansion joints do not use grout that accumulates ahead of the paver .
num .
deposit concrete near the formed joints .
do not dump or discharge concrete on a joint assembly unless the concrete is centered on the joint assembly .
num .
keep reinforcing steel free of dirt oil paint mill scale and loose or thick rust that could impair the bond of the steel to the concrete .
c. consolidate and finish ensure that the sequence of operations is continuous from placement to final finish .
num .
consolidation perform vibration for the full width and depth of the pavement as follows a .
do not allow the vibrators to misalign load transfer devices or contact forms or the foundation .
b .
ensure that the operating frequency is within these ranges .
use spud vibrators with an operating frequency of at least num vibrations per minute .
use tube vibrators with an operating frequency of at least num vibrations per minute .
use surface pan vibrators with an operating frequency of at least num vibrations per minute .
c. use handheld vibrators if needed .
section numportland cement concrete pavement special num ensure that the operating frequency is at least num vibrations per minute .
the intensity shall be sufficient to affect the mass of concrete having a num in num mm slump through a radius of at least num in num mm .
d. obtain uniform consolidation and density throughout the pavement .
if the pavement is not uniform stop the operation and provide methods or equipment that will produce pavement that conforms to the specifications .
e. keep a standby vibratory unit available in case a primary unit malfunctions .
num .
finishing after striking off and consolidating the concrete follow these steps a .
the concrete may be smoothed and trued using a hand float .
b .
ensure that the surface within num in num mm of the pavement edge shows no more than a ¼ in num mm deviation in num ft num m when tested with a num ft num m straightedge in both transverse and longitudinal directions .
c. ensure that mainline riding surface produces a profile index value of less than num in mile num mmkm on each travel lane .
d. protection from rain protect the unhardened concrete from rain .
see subsection num.d protective equipment .
when rain is imminent stop paving operations and place forms against the sides of the pavement .
cover the surface of the unhardened concrete with the protective covering .
e. remove forms remove forms from inplace concrete after it has set for at least num hours unless otherwise provided .
num .
remove forms carefully to avoid damaging the pavement .
num .
after removing the forms immediately cure the sides of the slab using the same method used to cure the pavement surface .
num .
remove and replace major honeycombed areas .
f. work at night provide adequate lighting for work performed at night .
if lighting will not be provided at night stop the concreting operation in time to finish and saw during daylight hours .
g. provide joints ensure that joints are designed configured and located as shown on the plans or required by the specifications .
num .
at the engineers discretion remove and replace plain concrete pavement that cracks during construction with no additional cost to the department .
num .
when chipping out random cracks for sealing use nonrigid epoxy that meets subsection num on cracks that are not under expansioncontraction influence .
num .
seal continuous cracks under movement with sealant that meets subsection num .
num .
when removing and replacing a pavement section replace an area at least num ft num m long and the full width of the lane .
a .
saw to vertical face the sections to be removed and replace the concrete as a construction joint with dowels .
b .
use deformed bars as dowels in the sawcut construction joint .
use the size specified for contraction joints in the plans .
num .
thoroughly clean the drilled holes of contaminants and set the dowels into the hardened concrete face of the existing pavement with a type viii epoxy bonding compound .
see section num for epoxy bonding compound requirements .
num .
for contraction joints undamaged and properly positioned dowels may be used in existing construction or slab replacement areas .
coat the protruding dowel portions with a thin film of heavy grease .
section numportland cement concrete pavement special num num .
when both sides of an existing construction or contraction joint require slab replacements slabs may be replaced continuously from sawcut construction joint to sawcut construction joint .
use dowels specified for contraction joints .
num .
before placing concrete uniformly apply a thin coat of heavy grease to epoxycoated dowels .
num .
when placing slabs continuously across transverse contraction joint locations use sawcuts to provide planes of weakness according to the requirements of this specification and the gdot construction standard for contraction joints .
num .
seal the joints according to the plans .
h. determine types of joints num .
longitudinal joints longitudinal joints shall contain unpainted and uncoated deformed steel bars that are the size and length specified on the plans .
place the bars perpendicular to the joint using a mechanical device or rigidly secure the bars in place with supports .
num .
longitudinal formed joints construct longitudinal formed joints while the concrete is in a plastic state .
use methods and equipment that locates the joint reinforcement properly without disrupting it during construction .
num .
longitudinal sawed joints cut longitudinal sawed joints with a mechanical saw within three days after the concrete is placed and before traffic or equipment enters the pavement .
num .
transverse joints transverse joints consist of construction joints contraction joints or expansion joints constructed at required locations .
a. construct transverse joints in partial width or adjoining lanes to abut the same joint of adjacent lanes unless otherwise specified on the plans .
b .
ensure that transverse joints in plain portland cement concrete requiring load transfer devices contain either plasticcoated or epoxycoated dowels .
c. before placing concrete secure dowel bars in place with supporting assemblies .
d. secure the assemblies in position on the subbase to keep the dowels from moving during concrete placement .
e. place dowel bars to a vertical and horizontal tolerance of num in num mm of the plan position .
do not misalign the dowel bar more than num in per foot num mm per num mm in the horizontal or vertical plane .
f. remove and replace dowel assemblies displaced from the plan position more than the tolerances in subsection num.j provide joints .
g. when using epoxycoated dowels coat the entire surface with a thin film of heavy waterproof grease .
h. ensure accurate positioning of transverse sawed joints by marking the position of dowel bar assembly locations .
num .
construction joints construct transverse construction joints when interrupting concreting operations for more than one hour .
note do not construct transverse construction joints within num ft num m of an expansion joint contraction joint or transverse plane of weakness .
a .
move an unanticipated construction joint back to the last plan joint and remove and dispose of excess concrete .
b .
form construction joints by securing in place a removable bulkhead or header board .
num place the board so that it conforms to the full cross section of the pavement .
secure it flush with the subbase and parallel to the normal transverse joints .
num slot or drill the board to allow placement of reinforcement as required by the plans .
section numportland cement concrete pavement special num note do not use the roll of laitance and grout that forms in front of the paver adjacent to transverse construction joints .
c. consolidate to full width and depth concrete adjacent to transverse construction joints with mechanical hand type spud vibrators .
keep one auxiliary vibrator available in case of mechanical malfunctions .
d. before applying the final finish to the concrete stringline and correct variations of the concrete surface within num ft num m on either side of the transverse construction joints .
provide equipment and tools such as work bridges personnel string lines straightedges lighting e. while the concrete is in a plastic condition stringline the surface longitudinally and correct surface deviations greater than num in .
in num ft num mm in num m in any direction .
f. when using plain portland cement concrete pavement place dowel bars in construction joints .
cast half the length of each dowel bar in the concrete during each phase of joint construction .
g. after the concrete has hardened dismantle the bulkhead supporting the dowels .
do not disturb the dowels .
h. when using epoxy coated dowels coat the protruding half of each dowel bar with a thin film of heavy waterproof grease before resuming joint construction .
grease coating is not required on plastic coated dowels .
num .
contraction joints create planes of weakness in plain portland cement concrete pavement by cutting joints in the pavement surface .
create the planes according to the plans and as follows a .
saw transverse contraction joints before the pavement cracks .
begin sawing when the concrete has hardened enough to prevent surface raveling usually num hours after placement but no more than num hours .
b .
continue sawing day and night regardless of weather conditions .
num .
expansion joints transverse expansion joints are required at locations shown on the plans .
a .
form expansion joints by securing a removable bulkhead that conforms to the full cross section of the pavement .
use bulkheads that can construct a vertical expansion wall without offsets indentations or burrs .
b .
use expansion joint filler required by the plans .
c. furnish and install preformed joint filler in lengths equal to the pavement width or the width of one lane .
do not use damaged or repaired joint fillers .
d. position the expansion joint filler vertically in the joint and at the proper grade .
use an installing bar or other device to secure the expansion joint filler at the proper grade and alignment .
i. seal the joints clean and seal the joints according to section num and the plans .
immediately after completing the curing period fill in the joints with joint sealing material before opening the pavement to traffic .
j .
cure the concrete immediately after finishing the concrete cure the entire surface when the concrete will not mar .
use one or more of these methods num .
impervious membrane method to use this method section numportland cement concrete pavement special num a. spray the entire surface of the pavement with white pigmented curing compound immediately after finishing the surface and before the concrete has set .
if the pavement is cured initially with cotton mats burlap or cotton fabric apply the compound after removing the mats .
note do not apply curing compound during rain .
b .
use mechanical sprayers to apply curing compound under pressure at a minimum rate of num gal per num ft² num l per num m² .
use fully atomizing spraying equipment that is equipped with a tank agitator .
c. thoroughly mix the curing compound immediately before use .
d. during application use a mechanical device to stir the compound continuously .
e. if required use a hand sprayer to spray odd widths odd shapes and concrete surfaces exposed by removing forms .
f. do not apply curing compound to the inside faces of joints to be sealed .
g. if the membrane film becomes damaged within the curing period repair the damaged portions immediately with additional compound .
num .
white polyethylene sheeting to use this method a .
cover the top surface and sides of the pavement with polyethylene sheeting .
lap the units at least num in num mm .
b .
place the sheeting and weigh it down so that it contacts the surface .
c. extend the sheeting beyond the edges of the slab at least twice the thickness of the pavement .
d. unless otherwise specified maintain the covering in place for num hours after placing the concrete .
num .
burlap cotton fabric or other methods contractors may cure the pavement surface with burlap cotton fabrics or other materials if the section remains wet for the duration specified by the engineer .
num .
cold weather curing to use this method a .
remove and replace concrete that freezes before the initial set time at no additional cost to the department .
b .
use polyethylene or canvas to protect concrete that has set but is exposed to freezing temperatures within num hours of placement .
ensure that the internal concrete temperature is above freezing for at least num hours after placing the concrete .
c. obtain approval from the engineer to use other protection methods such as hay straw or grass or to change the duration of the protection .
k. open pavement to traffic wait to open the pavement slab to traffic except for joint sawing vehicles until the concrete is num days old unless representative compressive tests show that the slab has a compressive strength of num psi num mpa .
prevent pavement slab stress by constructing a ramp of compacted earth or other material to move on and off the pavement .
do not allow equipment that exceeds legal load limits on the pavement .
protect the pavement against traffic from the public employees and agents .
num .
erect and maintain barricades .
employ watchmen to block traffic from the newly constructed pavement for the period required in this specification .
num .
arrange the barriers away from public traffic on lanes remaining open .
num .
maintain signs that clearly indicate the lanes open to public traffic .
section numportland cement concrete pavement special num num .
if traffic must go across the pavement construct crossings satisfactory to the engineer to bridge over the concrete .
construct the crossing without additional compensation .
num .
repair or replace pavement damaged by traffic or other causes before final acceptance without additional compensation .
make repairs to the engineers satisfaction .
num quality acceptance the typical section sheet in the plans specifies concrete classifications for specific uses .
this specification establishes minimum requirements for these concrete classifications for concrete design approval concrete mix design proportions batching control responsibilities and acceptance of hardened concrete based upon compressive strength development .
produce portland cement concrete by combining proportions of approved materials in batches according to the construction methods specified in this specification .
mix concrete produced in a stationary central mix plant for at least num seconds after the materials enter the drum .
mix time may be reduced if the representative tests show that the concrete meets requirements of astm c num requirements for uniformity .
never mix less than num seconds .
a .
transit mixed concrete ensure that transit mixed concrete meets the requirements of subsection num.e.num transitmixed concrete .
b .
mix design criteria proportion concrete mix designs using the following requirements minimum cement per cubic yard concrete cwt maximum water cement ratio lbslb design air content range minimum compressive strength at num days psi class num num num num to num num class hes num num num to num num minimum cement per cubic meter concrete kg maximum water cement ratio kgkg design air content range minimum compressive strength at num days mpa class num num num num to num num class hes num num num to num num c. compressive strength prepare and test at least num cylinders according to aashto t num and t num to ensure that the demonstrated laboratory compressive strength at num days for class num concrete is at least num psi num mpa and the minimum laboratory compressive strength for class hes concrete is num psi num mpa at num hours .
d. field adjustments on concrete mixes determine the aggregate surface moisture and apply free moisture corrections to the approved mix design .
the engineer will verify that the corrections are made properly .
adjustment may be made to the approved proportions of the fine and coarse aggregate and water provided the cement factor is not decreased .
the watercement ratio is not increased .
section numportland cement concrete pavement special num adjustments produce concrete proportions according to this specification .
the engineer is notified before use .
e. concrete mix tolerances ensure that concrete consistency and air content is maintained within the following limits num .
consistency immediately before placement use gdt num to determine concrete slump .
do not use concrete for portland cement concrete pavement with a slump value greater than num in num mm .
num .
air content immediately before placement use gdt num gdt num or gdt num to determine the air content of the concrete .
concrete will not be accepted that has an air content outside of the following limits lower acceptance limit num upper acceptance limit num f. concrete strength acceptance num .
class num portland cement concrete pavement strength will be accepted based on compressive strength development at num days .
the compressive strength value shall be at least num psi num mpa .
a. fabricate and cure specimens for field acceptance according to aashto t num. b .
after curing the omr will test the cylinders according to aashto t num .
the test frequency is outlined in the departments sampling and testing information .
num .
class hes high early concrete strength pavement may be accepted based on compressive strength development at num hours .
the compressive strength value shall be at least num psi num mpa .
when concrete is defective based on the numhour strength test and the concrete is retained for acceptability judgment acceptance will be based on test results conducted at num days .
the acceptance strength value shall be at least num psi num mpa .
a .
cure specimens fabricated for numhour strength for num hours under conditions that are similar to those under which the pavement will be cured .
b .
cure specimens fabricated for numday evaluation per aashto t num. c. test all specimens per aashto t num .
g. depth measurement the engineer will designate pavement areas to be examined for depth measurement compliance with the plan and specifications .
remove and replace areas deficient more than num in num mm .
the engineer may require a reduction in payment .
correct deficiencies in slab depth as directed by the engineer .
h. final finish ensure that the final finish produces a pavement surface that is true to grade uniform and free of irregular rough or porous areas .
produce the final surface finish using mechanical or handoperated equipment to groove the plastic concrete .
use texturing equipment with rectangularshaped spring steel tines .
i. texture depth testing test the pavement surface to determine the texture depth by using gdt num at locations selected by the engineer .
section numportland cement concrete pavement special num transversely sawgroove areas that have a surface texture depth less than num in num mm .
ensure that the areas meet the average depth requirement of num in num mm or greater .
sawgroove the areas to meet these dimensions widthnum in num mm depthnum in num mm spacingnum in centertocenter num mm j. smoothness profile include in the contract unit bid price the cost to furnish and operate a rainhart model num profilograph to measure pavement profile deviations .
measure and correct pavement profile deviations as follows num .
ensure that the mainline riding surface produces a profile index value no greater than num inmile num mm km on each travel lane .
conduct tests according to gdt num .
determine a profile index value for each tracing in each ¼ mile num km segment .
num .
correct individual bumps or depressions that exceed the blanking band by more than num in num mm at no additional expense to the department .
num .
suspend paving operations if a profile index value exceeds num inmile num mmkm per lane for any segment .
take corrective action approved by the engineer .
num .
test ramps acceleration lanes and deceleration lanes using gdt num to ensure that the average profile index value does not exceed num inmile num mmkm for the entire section length .
num .
correct individual bumps or depressions that exceed num in num mm from the blanking band at no additional expense to the department .
num .
take pavement profiles num ft num m from and parallel to the new pavement edges for pavements greater than num ft num m wide and up to num ft num m wide .
test pavement num to num ft num to num m wide parallel to and at the center line of the pavement section .
num .
begin the num mile num km record segments at the first days placement and continue until project completion except as noted in this specification .
combine pavement sections less than num ft num m approaching a bridge with the previous num mile num km segment to determine the profile index .
num .
calculate as separate record segment sections num ft num m or greater approaching a bridge and sections at project limits .
num .
determine a separate profile index value according to gdt num for the num ft num m of roadway approaching each end of a bridge up to and including the joint with the approach slab .
average the profile index from the right and left wheelpaths for each num ft num m segment for each lane for each approach .
ensure that the average profile index value is no greater than num inmile num mm km .
num .
notify the engineer before profile testing .
the engineer will verify the results by randomly selecting at least num out of every num consecutive record segment profiles to compute the profile index and to compare with contractor results .
k. pavement tolerances for projects that include weighinmotion truck scales follow these pavement tolerances num .
ensure that the rainhart profilograph readings do not exceed num inmile num mmkm in the num ft num m approach to the scales and the num ft num m beyond the scales .
num .
ensure that the rolling straightedge measurements show no deviation greater than num in num mm within num ft num m. l. smoothness testing perform smoothness testing as follows num .
perform and evaluate profiles from the first day of placement before continuing paving .
section numportland cement concrete pavement special num when the test run is complete and evaluated the engineer may require equipment adjustments to improve smoothness before paving continues .
num .
complete the report form furnished by the engineer and attach it to each days profilograph tracings .
include the following information in each trace project number beginning and ending station numbers num ft num m paving stations traffic direction lane number date paved and tested construction joint locations num .
have the certified profilograph operator obtain and evaluate traces to be submitted to the engineer .
provide results no later than the end of the second work day following placement .
num .
for mainline pavement correct num mile num km segments that do not meet the profile index requirement by using one of these methods a .
grind the entire lane surface of the num mile num km segment to a profile index value no greater than num inmile num mmkm .
use equipment that meets the requirements in section num. b .
grind roughness in small segment areas no more than num ft num m of full lane width to produce a profile index value no greater than num inmile num mmkm .
if more than num ft num m of grinding is required grind the complete num mile num km segment according to method a above .
num .
correct ramps and acceleration and deceleration lanes that do not meet the profile index requirement to a profile index no greater than num inmile num mmkm .
prevent individual bumps from exceeding num in num mm from the blanking band .
use equipment specified in section num .
num .
correct num ft num m bridge approach sections that do not meet the profile index requirement .
a .
grind according to section num. b .
use a bump grinder to correct bumps with a baseline of num ft num m or less .
c. grind the full lane width even when grinding individual bumps .
d. retest pavement segments containing corrective slab replacements for final acceptance .
num .
correct segments that do not meet the profile index criteria of this specification at no additional expense to the department .
retest segments after correction with the rainhart profilograph as specified .
num .
the engineer may conduct profilograph tests at any time to verify contractor results .
the department may test record segments if the engineer determines that the contractor test results are inaccurate .
if this occurs see subsection num adjustments .
m. acceptance pavement smoothness will accepted when the engineer determines that the work was satisfactorily performed according to the specifications .
the completed pavement including corrective work meets the applicable profile index value requirements .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement portland cement concrete pavement special complete inplace and accepted is measured by the square yard meter .
section numportland cement concrete pavement special num num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment concrete pavement completed and accepted will be paid for at the full contract unit price per square yard meter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and placing materials reinforcements dowels joint materials supplies and incidentals to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num plain portland cement concrete pavement class num concrete _____ in mm thick per square yard meter item no .
num plain portland cement concrete pavement class hes concrete _____ in mm thick per square yard meter item no .
num continuously reinforced concrete pavement class num concrete _____ in mm thick per square yard meter item no .
num continuously reinforced concrete pavement class hes concrete _____ in mm thick per square yard meter num adjustments a. profilograph tests if based on the departments profilograph tests the engineer determines that the contractor profilograph test results are inaccurate the contractor will be charged for profilograph testing at num for each trace mile num for each trace kilometer with a minimum charge of num .
section numplain portland cement concrete shoulders num general description the work includes constructing plain portland cement concrete shoulders on a prepared subgrade or subbase according to these specifications .
construct the shoulders to conform with lines grades thicknesses and cross sections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numportland cement concrete pavement section numsealing roadway and bridge joints and cracks section numconcrete structures section numgraded aggregate section numportland cement section numplain portland cement concrete shoulders num b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num astm c num requirements for uniformity aashto t num aashto t num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num num submittals a .
concrete mix design submit to the engineer a concrete mix design prepared by a qualified testing laboratory .
the engineer will transmit the design to the office of materials for approval .
ensure that the concrete mix design conforms to subsection num.a composition of class sp concrete .
num materials use materials that conform to subsection num materials for portland cement concrete pavement or subsection num for graded aggregate .
gradation requirements are modified to require num to num percent by weight to pass the no .
num num mm sieve for graded aggregate .
a .
composition of class sp concrete ensure that the concrete mix design conforms to the following requirements num .
aggregates a .
shoulders not constructed in continuity with travel lanes num graded aggregate meeting the requirements in subsection num and as modified in subsection num materials may by used if the shoulders are not constructed in continuity with travel lanes .
num graded aggregate may be used as the coarse and fine aggregate portions of the concrete mix except that the gradation is modified to require num to num percent passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
num use aggregates manufactured to meet the gradation at the quarry or blended at the plant site to produce the desired results .
ensure a uniform aggregate gradation when charging the mixer .
b .
shoulders constructed in continuity with travel lanes use concrete aggregate in shoulders constructed in continuity with travel lanes as specified in subsection num.c composition of concrete and subsection num.c.num fine aggregate .
num .
mix design criteria base the proportions of class sp concrete mix designs on the following requirements minimum cement content per cubic yard meter concrete cwt kg maximum water cement ratio lbslb kgkg design air content range class sp concrete num num num num num to num section numplain portland cement concrete shoulders num num .
fly ash use fly ash as an additive in concrete to promote workability and plasticity or as a partial replacement for portland cement if the following limits are met a .
replace the cement quantity no more than num percent by weight .
b .
replace cement with fly ash at the rate of num to num lbs num to num kg of fly ash to num lb num kg of cement .
c. do not use type ip cement in fly ash mixes .
calculate the watercement ratio based on the total cement material in the mix including fly ash .
construct portland cement concrete shoulders with the same class of concrete required in the adjacent sections when constructed in continuity with travel lanes ramps acceleration lanes deceleration lanes or other sections .
produce evidence that the proportions have the potential for strength development at num days as required in subsection num.b approval of mix design proportions .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment use equipment that meets the requirements in subsection num equipment .
num preparation prepare the roadbed as required by the plans and specifications before placing the concrete shoulder .
ensure that the foundation immediately under the concrete shoulder and the areas supporting the paving equipment will not contribute to deficient shoulder thicknesses or excessive yield losses .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
placing concrete place concrete as follows num .
deposit the concrete on the grade do not rehandle it if possible .
num .
unless truck mixers truck agitators or nonagitating hauling equipment are equipped to discharge concrete without segregation concrete shall be unloaded into an approved spreading device and mechanically spread on grade .
num .
place it continuously between transverse joints without using the intermediate bulkheads .
num .
perform any necessary hand spreading with shovels .
note do not allow personnel to walk in freshly mixed concrete with shoes coated with harmful substances .
num .
thoroughly consolidate with vibration the concrete against and along the form faces and along the full length and both sides of joint assemblies .
num .
do not continue vibration if puddling or excessive grout accumulates on the surface .
note do not use grout that accumulates ahead of the paver in construction or expansion joints .
section numplain portland cement concrete shoulders num num .
deposit concrete near formed joints .
do not dump or discharge concrete onto a joint assembly unless the concrete is centered on the joint assembly .
b .
placing reinforcement place the reinforcement according to details on the plans .
do not allow reinforcement placement to disrupt or damage the concrete .
do not insert lane tie bars into unsupported sides of fresh concrete .
c. achieving consolidation vibrate the full width and depth of the shoulder .
do not allow the vibrators to contact the foundation load transfer devices side forms or joints .
if the vibrator does not produce uniform consolidation and density stop the operation to furnish methods or equipment that will produce pavement according to the specifications .
d. finishing finish the concrete pavement as follows num .
smooth and true the concrete to the proper crosssection with hand floats or mechanical floats .
num .
ensure that the surface conforms to the required cross section and contains no irregular rough or porous areas .
num .
make the surfaces flush at the joint between the roadway and shoulder .
num .
finish the surface to provide a uniform texture in all areas except rumble strips .
use mechanical equipment for grooving plastic concrete brooming or burlap drag .
num .
form rumble strips in the shoulder surface according to the plans .
e. cleaning up immediately after finishing remove the loose material and clean the grout from the surface of adjacent lanes .
f. constructing joints use the joint type of filler and type of sealer designated in the plans .
construct joints according to subsection num.j provide joints section num and the following num .
transverse contraction joints saw transverse contraction joints in the shoulder to abut like joints in the roadway or construct joints as shown on the plans .
num .
longitudinal joints a .
on the longitudinal joint adjacent to the adjoining lane place reinforcement at locations shown on the plans .
b .
secure the reinforcement in place with supporting assemblies or by inserting into supported sides of fresh concrete or by using mechanical equipment to insert them while placing concrete .
num .
construction joints form transverse construction joints when concreting operations will be interrupted for more than num hour .
construct the joint according to subsection num.k.num construction joints except stringline requirements are num in num mm maximum deviations in num ft num m. g. curing cure concrete according to subsection num.l cure the concrete .
h. permitting traffic on shoulders before using a shoulder as a haul road for loaded or unloaded vehicles section numplain portland cement concrete shoulders num num .
ensure that compressive strength tests show the concrete has developed at least num psi num mpa and is at least num days old .
num .
construct earth ramps to facilitate movement across the shoulder .
place barricades to prevent traffic encroachment .
num .
seal the joints before permitting vehicles or equipment on the shoulder .
num quality acceptance a .
concrete mixing produce portland cement concrete shoulders using class sp concrete as follows num .
combine authorized proportions of approved materials in homogenous batches according to the construction methods in this specification .
num .
mix concrete produced in a stationary central mix plant for at least num seconds after placing materials in the drum .
num .
reduction of the mix time may be allowed if representative tests show that the concrete meets requirements of astm c num requirements for uniformity but never reduce the mix time to less than num seconds .
num .
ensure that transit mixed concrete meets requirements in subsection num.e.num transitmixed concrete .
b .
approval of mix design proportions the office of materials will review concrete mix designs and will verify that compressive strength development is according to aashto t num and t num .
the department will approve material combinations and mix designs using approved materials and complying with subsection num.a composition of class sp concrete and the following num .
flexural strength take at least num normally cured flexural specimens to ensure that the numday laboratory flexural design strength is according to aashto t num and t num and is within the following design acceptance range dar .
class sp concrete dar num psi .nums num mpa .nums where s the standard deviation of numday flexural specimens for a combination of materials and mix proportions prepared together .
do not use a value of s greater than num psi num kpa to calculate dar .
a mixture may be used that exceeds the upper limit of the dar .
num .
compressive strength prepare and test num cylinders according to aashto t num and t num to determine the numday laboratory compressive strength for class sp concrete .
ensure that it exceeds the following minimum laboratory performance value lpv .
class sp concrete lpv num psi .numr num mpa .numr where r the difference between the largest observed value and the smallest observed value for numday compressive strength specimens for a combination of materials and mix proportions prepared together .
c. field adjustments on concrete mixes determine the aggregate surface moisture and apply free moisture corrections to the approved mix design .
the engineer will verify that these corrections are made properly .
adjustments to the approved proportions of the fine aggregate coarse aggregate and water may be made according to these guidelines do not decrease the cement factor .
do not increase the watercement ratio .
ensure that adjustments produce concrete proportions according to this specification .
notify the engineer before making adjustments .
section numplain portland cement concrete shoulders num d. concrete mix tolerances ensure that variations in consistency and concrete air content are within the following limits num .
consistency immediately before placing determine concrete slump using gdt num .
concrete for portland cement concrete shoulders will not be accepted if the slump value is greater than num in num mm .
num .
air content determine the concrete air content immediately before placement using gdt num or gdt num .
concrete will not be accepted with an air content outside the following limits lower acceptance limit num percent upper acceptance limit num percent e. acceptance of concrete strength portland cement concrete shoulder strength shall be accepted based upon its numday compressive strength development .
num .
subdivide the shoulder into separate lots of approximately num yd² num m² of concrete shoulder placed continuously except for overnight or other minimal discontinuance .
num .
randomly select three production units from each lot for strength determination tests .
num .
cast one set of cylinders for each production unit being tested .
num .
a set consists of two num by num in num by num mm cylinders cured according to aashto t num .
the test is the average strength of the two cylinders tested according to aashto t num .
num .
determine lot strength acceptance according to the limits in the pay factor schedule for strength determinations at num days table .
a .
if the average strength of the lot based on the three acceptance tests does not meet the lower acceptance limit shown in the num pay factor the contractor may leave the lot in place at a reduced unit price according to the pay factor schedule for strength determinations at num days .
b .
if the average strength of the lot does not attain the lower acceptance limit shown for a num pay factor the engineer may order the removal of any or all of the concrete in the lot .
pay factor schedule for strength determinations at num days acceptance limits for pay factor levels num lal num lal num lal class sp concrete num psi num mpa num r num psi num mpa num r num psi num mpa num r lower acceptance limit lal the pay factor is num for concrete that remains in place when outside the num pay factor limits for compressive strength .
f. thickness tolerances determine the thickness by measuring the fresh concrete depth at the shoulder edges at least every num ft num m of shoulder length .
the engineer will evaluate areas deficient by more than num in num mm thick .
if the engineer requires removal remove and replace the shoulder pavement in full cross sections according to plan requirements .
if removal and replacement are not required payment is made at num percent of the contract unit price for areas deficient by more than num in num mm .
areas that are deficient by more than num in num mm through num in num mm will be paid for at num percent of the contract price per square yard meter .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
section numplain portland cement concrete shoulders num num measurement the work to be paid for under this item is the number of square yards meters of portland cement concrete shoulders completed and accepted as measured in place .
the measurement width is the shoulder width shown on the plan typical cross section .
the measurement length is along the surface at the inside edge of the paved shoulder .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the work will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard meter .
payment is full compensation for providing materials reinforcement equipment and labor mixing hauling handling placing and providing incidentals to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num plain portland cement concrete shoulders type___ per square yard meter num adjustments the contract unit price per square yard meter of concrete shoulder will be adjusted for concrete shoulder accepted with a numday compressive strength or thickness deficiency .
if a shoulder section is deficient in thickness and compressive strength the contract unit price will be adjusted by the total reduction of the application of the two individual percentages shown in the pay factor schedule and subsection num.f thickness tolerances .
for combined deficiencies of num percent or more the engineer may allow the shoulder to stay in place or require its removal .
if the engineer requires shoulder pavement removal the original pavement nor its removal will be paid for .
pavement replaced satisfactorily will be paid for at the appropriate unit price .
section nummiscellaneous concrete num general description this work includes placing portland cement concrete as follows as slope paving on end rolls cut slopes paved ditches spillways and ditch slopes in median pavement as sidewalks in concrete curbs gutters curb and gutters and valley gutters as nonreinforced headwalls as velocity dissipators and concrete slope drains as concrete spillways curb cut wheel chair ramps at other locations designated on the plans or as directed this work includes subgrade preparations including fine grading and backfilling forming furnishing placing and finishing concrete constructing weep holes and furnishing and placing the coarse aggregate furnishing and placing preformed joint fillers as shown on the plans section nummiscellaneous concrete num placing driveway concrete as shown on the plans .
nominal num in num mm or num in num mm thick as specified or to match existing pavement .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numsubgrade construction section numportland cement concrete pavement section numconcrete structures section numcuring agents section numjoint fillers and sealers section numreinforcement and tensioning steel b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use concrete that conforms to the minimum requirements for class b as specified in section num except that a onebag mixer may be used .
the requirements of subsection num.g cold weather concrete curing and protection plan and subsection num.x pour concrete in cold weather for cold weather concrete placement are deleted .
place miscellaneous concrete only when the air temperature is num f num c and rising .
protect concrete from freezing for the first num hours .
hand finishing is allowed .
other materials and their specifications are as follows material section steel bars for concrete reinforcement num membrane curing compound type num num dowel and tie bars and reinforcing steel num joint fillers and sealers num welded steel wire for concrete reinforcement num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
section nummiscellaneous concrete num num equipment a .
forms forms are subject to the engineers approval .
use forms that are wood or metal that is readily available straight and oiled before each use use metal divider plates and templates .
use the slip form placement method when applicable .
if the slip form method does not produce a product with the proper quality shape grade or alignment the engineer may require using fixed forms .
b. weep holes provide weep hole drain pockets filled with coarse aggregate to use with weep hole drain pipe or formed openings according to the plan details .
num preparation before placing the concrete excavate for toe walls edge walls and weep hole drain pockets place coarse aggregate in weep hole drain pockets and grade finish and compact the subgrade surface .
use mechanical tamps for compaction if necessary .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
extent and thickness of pavement see the plans to determine the areas to be paved and the dimensions .
thicknesses are subject to a minus tolerance of num in num mm .
do not perform overlay pours .
b .
preparation of subgrade finish the subgrade for miscellaneous concrete to the line and grade on the plans and the following num .
compact the subgrade to the same degree as the roadway on which it is placed .
compact the subgrade according to section num .
num .
if a contract involves a roadway and a bridge contractor the roadway contractor shall complete the grading for the slope paving .
the bridge contractor shall complete final grading compacting dressing placing and maintenance to the structures until completion .
num .
when placing paving on the front slopes of ditches and shoulders place any required special materials during the roadway construction .
num .
do not excavate for velocity dissipators spillways and slope drains below the foundation elevation .
do not excavate wider than necessary to provide working space or to remove soft unsuitable material .
backfill with selected material .
num .
when fitting spillways to concrete pavement set the specified dowel bars into the pavement when it is laid .
use metal parting strips to hold the ends of dowels bent into the grooves .
c. concrete num .
mixing mix class b concrete as specified in section num with the following exceptions a .
use of small capacity jobsite batchers and onebag mixers is allowed .
the rate of concrete placement in subsection num.p meet the minimum placement rates is waived for miscellaneous concrete .
section nummiscellaneous concrete num b .
proportion concrete ingredients volumetrically if the engineer has approved equipment calibration and operation and the operator is certified by the office of materials .
num .
placing and finishing place and finish concrete as follows a .
deposit concrete within forms or against other pavements on a compacted and wetted subgrade to the depth to produce the specified thickness .
note do not place concrete on a muddy or frozen surface .
b. vibrate the headwalls .
c. strike off the concrete to a plane surface and finish it with a type iv or type v finish as defined in subsection num.ab finish concrete and complete the following num concrete slope paving .
give a final finish with a stiffbristle broom .
with the engineers approval mechanically convey the concrete to the forms .
num concrete sidewalks .
give a type v finish unless otherwise noted on the plans .
test the surface with a num ft num m straightedge laid parallel to the center line .
eliminate irregularities greater than num in num mm per num ft num m while the concrete is still plastic .
ensure that concrete sidewalk constructed as curb cut wheelchair ramps has a rough or textured finish .
num concrete paved ditches .
ensure that the surface of the bottom and sides of paved ditches are uniform and true to grade and cross section .
ensure that straightgrade tangents do not deviate more than num in num mm within num ft num m when tested with a num ft num m straightedge .
do not allow deviation if it reduces the ditch paving thickness causes water to pond or alters the direction of flow .
finish the ditch paving by floating with wood or metal floats to bring mortar to the surface to cover the coarse aggregate .
use reinforcing that conforms to plan details if required .
num concrete curbs gutters and median .
finish according to subsection num.c.num placing and finishing .
remove face forms as soon as possible and finish the exposed surfaces with a wood float .
use a straightedge to test the edge of the gutter and top of the curb and median to conform to the requirements for the adjacent pavement .
irregularities shall not exceed num in num mm in num ft num m. place the curb and gutter using a machine as long as the results are satisfactory .
num curb cut wheel chair ramps .
construct a type i ii or iii ramp according to georgia standard numw .
tie ramps into adjacent paved or unpaved sidewalk and use a rough or textured finish .
num .
joints follow these procedures to construct joints on slopes ditches sidewalks and curbs gutters and medians .
a. slope paving place paving on slopes in horizontal or vertical courses but not a mixture of both .
num construct horizontal courses approximately level and at least num ft numm but no more than num ft num m wide measured along the slope .
when needed construct trapezoidal courses at the top and bottom to accommodate sloping berm and ditch line conditions .
num edge the paving at construction joints between courses with a num in num mm radius tool .
num provide vertical contraction or construction joints spaced along the horizontal course at right angles to the horizontal construction joints at approximately num ft num m intervals in line not staggered .
no other vertical lines will be required in horizontal courses .
when using vertical contraction joints cut them with a tool onethird the depth of the paving during the finishing operation .
edge the contraction joints the same as construction joints .
section nummiscellaneous concrete num vertical courses approximately equal and at least num ft num m but no more than num ft num m wide across the plane of the slope .
the desired width is num ft num m. horizontal lines are not required in vertical courses .
separate slope paving from the masonry of structures sidewalks curbs and rigidtype roadway pavements of preformed joint filler that are num in num mm thick .
b .
concrete paved ditches form joints in concrete paved ditches as follows num space contraction joints at num ft num m intervals .
num place expansion joints only where the paved ditch joins the roadway pavement or some other structure .
num do not use joint sealers for expansion or contraction joints .
c. concrete sidewalk form transverse contraction joints using a tool designed to form a groove onethird the depth of the sidewalk at intervals shown on the plans .
where sidewalks abut the curb and gutter ensure that alternate joints coincide .
round the edges with a num in num mm edger .
make expansion joints according to the materials dimensions and locations specified on the plans .
d. concrete curbs gutters and medians form contraction joints or expansion joints on curbs gutters and medians .
num contraction joints .
ensure that joints in curb gutters and medians are spaced the same as the joints in paving .
form joints by using metal divider plates or sawing them as in section num .
form joints at least onefifth but not greater than onefourth the depth of the concrete .
except for sawed joints finish the joints with a num in num mm edging tool .
for curbs gutters and medians adjacent to pavement other than concrete contraction joints shall be as follows for header curb and combination curb and gutter install contraction joints spaced no more than num ft num m apart .
for gutter median install a contraction joints spaced no more than num ft num m apart .
num expansion joints .
form expansion joints according to the plan details or as directed .
ensure that they coincide with the expansion joints in the adjoining pavement or gutter .
cut the joint fillers to the same cross section as the construction .
trim flush the material that protrudes after the concrete is finished .
when miscellaneous concrete items are not adjacent to concrete construction provide expansion joints at an interval of at least num ft num m. e. curb cut wheelchair ramps locate and form expansion joints for curb cut wheelchair ramps according to the special details for ramp type a b c or d. num .
curing use curing methods specified in subsection num.l cure the concrete .
ensure that the membrane curing compound is type num if used .
pack honeycombed areas immediately after removing the forms .
d. backfilling backfill the areas as soon as possible without damaging the work .
e. cleanup when concrete work is complete clean each surface .
protect the work from stains or other damage until final acceptance .
section nummiscellaneous concrete num num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a .
concrete slope paving concrete slope paving is measured for payment in square yards meters of accepted surface area of paving of the specified thickness .
concrete in toe or edge walls excavation backfill weep holes and aggregates are not measured for separate payment .
b .
concrete sidewalks concrete sidewalks are measured in square yards meters of the specified thickness complete in place and accepted .
the length is the actual measured length along the surface .
the width is the plan width or as directed .
excavation and backfill are not measured separately for payment .
c. concrete paved ditches the area measured for payment is the square yards meters of exposed surface area exclusive of top edges of the specified thickness placed according to the plans or as directed .
reinforcing steel excavation preparation of subgrade including type i backfill forms and concrete in toe or edge walls are not measured separately for payment .
type ii backfill when required will be paid according to section num .
d. concrete curbs gutter median pavement and combination curb and gutter the following are measured by the linear foot meter along the face of the curb concrete curb and gutter concrete curb concrete header curb the following are measured by the square yard meter or by the linear foot meter whichever is specified concrete gutter concrete valley gutter concrete valley gutter with curb concrete median pavement concrete gutter with raised edge the length used to compute the square yards meters or linear foot meter is measured along the center line of the gutter .
the width is the total width of the gutter including the curb or raised edge .
concrete doweled integral curb includes dowels .
e. concrete headwalls headwalls are measured for payment according to subsection num.b payment per cubic yard meter and subsection num.e filler concrete .
filler concrete where required will be paid for at num percent of the contract unit price for class b concrete .
f. concrete spillways concrete spillways regardless of the type specified are measured by the actual number poured complete and accepted .
section nummiscellaneous concrete num g. concrete slope drains concrete slope drains are measured in square yards meters along the surface complete and accepted .
h. velocity dissipators velocity dissipators are measured in square yards meters surface measure complete and accepted .
i .
concrete driveways driveway pavement is measured along the surface from the paving edge or back of the curb to where old and new concrete join .
the width is the average width constructed .
j .
curb cut wheelchair ramps for new construction curb cut wheelchair ramps will not be measured .
for new construction linear feet meters of curb and gutter will include the transitioned curb in front of ramps and square yards meters of concrete sidewalk will include ramps .
no additional payment will be made for curb cut ramps .
for existing sidewalks curb cut wheelchair ramps are measured as the actual number formed and poured complete and accepted .
no additional payment will be made for sawing existing sidewalk and removal and disposal of removed material for new ramp construction .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment these items measured as specified above will be paid for at the contract unit price per each per square yard meter per linear foot meter or per cubic yard meter .
payment will be made under a. slope paving item no .
num concrete slope paving thick in mm per square yard meter b. sidewalks item no .
num concrete sidewalk thick in mm per square yard meter c. concrete ditches item no .
num plain concrete ditch paving thick in mm per square yard meter item no .
num reinforced concrete ditch paving thick in mm including reinforcing steel per square yard meter d. curbs gutters combination curb and gutter headers and medians item no .
num concrete curb and gutter thick in mmx width in mmtype___ per linear foot meter item no .
num concrete header curb height in mm type___ per linear foot meter item no .
num concrete valley gutter thick in mm per square yard meter item no .
num concrete valley gutter with curb thick in mm per square yard meter item no .
num concrete gutter with raised edge thick in mm per square yard meter item no .
num concrete median thick in mm per square yard meter item no .
num concrete median corrugated thick in mm per square yard meter section nummiscellaneous concrete num item no .
num concrete doweled integral curb type___ including dowels per linear foot meter e. spillways drains and velocity dissipators item no .
num concrete spillway type___ per each item no .
num concrete slope drain per square yard meter item no .
num velocity dissipators per square yard meter f. headwalls item no .
num concrete headwalls per cubic yard meter g. driveway concrete item no .
num driveway concrete___ in mmthick per square yard meter h. curb cut wheelchair ramps item no .
num curb cut wheelchair ramps type__ per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numroller compacted concrete pavement num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numelastomeric profile bridge joint seals num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numsawed joints in existing pavements num general description this work includes sawing joints in existing portland cement concrete pavements such as roadway pavements intersections driveways parking areas and sidewalks when removing existing pavements is shown on the plans or required by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
section numsawed joints in existing pavements num b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a .
mechanical saw use an adequately powered watercooled mechanical saw with a diamondedge blade or an abrasive wheel that will cut a straight joint to the required depth .
the engineer may require that a guide be used with the saw to produce a satisfactory joint .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
joints saw joints true to the lines designated by the engineer .
saw the joints at least num in num mm deep or deeper if the engineer directs to remove pavement along true lines and to prevent spalling or overbreaking of pavement that will remain in place .
saw with diamond blades .
do not dry saw with abrasive blades .
b .
removal of pavement after joints have been sawed to completely isolate a pavement to be removed num .
begin removing the pavement .
num .
protect the edges of the pavement that will remain .
do not use removal methods that may damage these edges .
c. traffic control after removing the pavement do not allow traffic or other equipment to cross the exposed edges of the remaining pavement until new pavement is constructed in its place .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
section numsawed joints in existing pavements num num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the length of sawed joints measured for payment is the actual linear feet meters of joints acceptably sawed .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment sawed joints as described above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter .
payment will be made under item no .
num sawed joints in existing pavements per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numwaterproofing pavement joints and cracks num general description this work includes waterproofing joints and cracks in the pavement by cleaning the existing surface and placing a membrane over joints and random cracks as shown on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numtraffic control section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction section numwaterproofing membrane material b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use membranes that meet the requirements of subsection num .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section numwaterproofing pavement joints and cracks num num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a. bituminous tack coat place bituminous tack coat on portland cement concrete old asphaltic concrete surfaces the engineer will determine when to place bituminous tack coat on new asphaltic concrete surfaces .
when self adhesive waterproofing fabric is applied on existing surfaces a bituminous application will not be necessary .
before placing the membrane num .
prime the surface according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
correct spalls greater than num in .
num mm in diameter that will prevent the material from bonding to the pavement or that will leave a cavity under the material .
repair spalls using asphaltic concrete that meets the requirements of section num or other materials such as cold mixes approved by the engineer .
num .
place the primer on the surface at the rate specified by the primer manufacturer .
extend it num in num mm wider than the membrane .
before applying the membrane allow the primer to dry until it is tackfree .
num .
cover the sections that are primed with membrane within the same day or repriming will be required .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
placing the membrane place the membrane on joints and cracks over concrete pavements on interstate mainline and ramps and designated state routes that will be surfaced with asphaltic concrete unless otherwise noted on the plans .
num .
place the membrane only when the temperature is above num ºf num ºc and the pavement surfaces are dry and free of dirt or debris .
num .
install the membrane in widths of at least num in num mm and center them over the joint or crack within a num in num mm tolerance .
num .
seal joints as follows a. seal transverse joints and cracks first starting at the outside edge of the pavement and extending the full length of the joints .
b. seal the longitudinal joints after the transverse joints placing the membrane in the direction that the project will be paved .
if laps are needed place them in the transverse and longitudinal membranes with an overlap of at least num in num mm .
section numwaterproofing pavement joints and cracks num num .
install the membrane straight and wrinklefree with no curled or uplifted edges .
slit and fold down wrinkles over num in num mm wide .
num .
press the membrane against the concrete or asphalt surface using a hand roller or other equipment to ensure proper bonding .
num .
bond the edges and corners of the strips securely to the surface .
before placing the overlay rebond or replace strips that have loose edges or corners at no expense to the department .
num .
place the asphaltic concrete overlay when the membrane surface is dry .
num .
traffic will be allowed to enter the section between the time of placing the membrane and placing the paving for a maximum of num calendar days .
before paving replace damaged or disbonded membrane at no additional cost to the department .
num .
fill joints or cracks flush with the pavement if they are wider than num in num mm or deeper than num in num mm and not adequately filled to provide support for the membrane over the joint .
use pg num asphalt cement hot pour or other approved sealant material before placing the membrane as directed by the engineer .
num .
clean the joint to remove dirt and debris before filling the joint .
comply with the shortterm pavement marking requirements of section num .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the membrane quantity complete in place and accepted is measured in linear feet meters .
the length for transverse joints waterproofed is based on the typical cross section in the plans except that where widening occurs for extra lanes field measurements are made to determine the exact length waterproofed .
the length for longitudinal joints and random cracks waterproofed are measured in place along the center line of the joint on the surface of the pavement .
no allowance is made for laps .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment will be made at the contract unit price per linear foot meter of joint and crack waterproofed which will include cleaning the surface and furnishing and placing the primer and membrane .
payment will be made under item no .
num waterproofing pavement joints and cracks width per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numplacement of pavement reinforcement fabric num general description this work includes installing type ii pavement reinforcement fabric and high strength pavement reinforcement fabric over cracks joints and patches in existing asphaltic concrete pavement .
install the fabric in strips or full width before placing an overlay where shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
install high strength pavement reinforcement fabric on asphaltic concrete interstate projects .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numtraffic control section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction section numbituminous tack coat section numfabrics b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use the reinforcement fabric that meets the requirements of subsection num .
bituminous binder materials when required shall meet the requirements of section num bituminous tack coat .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a. template when using fabric strips use a template or other method satisfactory to the engineer to apply the bituminous tack coat uniformly .
b .
mechanical device use a mechanical device approved by the engineer when placing the fabric full width on the pavement to ensure the fabric is placed smooth free of wrinkles and with no uplifted edges .
section numplacement of pavement reinforcement fabric num c. roller place the fabric in total contact with the underlying pavement .
roll the fabric with a static drum or pneumatic roller to ensure adequate adhesion to the pavement surface .
num preparation before an existing pavement surface is milled mark the location of joints and cracks with an offset reference so that they can be located after milling has been completed .
a .
cleaning the pavement immediately before applying the bituminous tack coat clean the pavement surface to remove rocks dirt debris and other materials that may prevent a clean bonding surface .
b .
repairing potholes spalls or cracks before placing the fabric repair potholes spalls or cracks greater than num in num mm wide .
repair spalls and potholes using asphaltic concrete that meets the requirements of section num or other materials such as cold mixes approved by the engineer .
fill cracks with pg num asphalt cement or other materials approved by the engineer .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction do not install reinforcement fabric when ambient temperatures are less than num f num ºc .
use a bituminous tack coat when temperatures are between numf num ºc and numf numºc for all reinforcement fabric types .
when ambient temperatures are a minimum of num f num ºc and rising reinforcement fabric with a selfadhesive backing may be installed at the contractors option without applying a bituminous tack coat except when the fabric is placed on a milled surface .
use a bituminous tack coat when fabric is placed on a milled surface regardless of the temperature .
a .
applying bituminous binder use a bituminous tack coat to bond selfadhesive fabric to the pavement and apply the bituminous tack coat at a rate of num galyd² num lm² over nonmilled surfaces and num galyd² num lm² over milled surfaces .
heat the bituminous tack coat and apply within a temperature range of num f to num f num ºc to num ºc .
use bituminous tack coat to bond nonselfadhesive fabric to the pavement and apply at a rate of num galyd² num lm² over nonmilled surfaces and num galyd² num lm² over milled surfaces .
heat the bituminous tack coat and apply within a temperature range of num f to num f num ºc to num ºc .
where using fabric strips use a template or other method satisfactory to the engineer to apply bituminous tack coat uniformly .
do not allow the width of the bituminous tack coat applied to exceed the width of the fabric by more than num in num mm on each side .
b .
placing the fabric for selfadhesive reinforcement fabric remove the release liner of the fabric and place the adhesive side to the pavement .
place selfadhesive reinforcement fabric no more than num hours in advance of the paving operation to ensure proper adhesion of the fabric to the pavement .
section numplacement of pavement reinforcement fabric num place nonselfadhesive reinforcement fabric at least num hour but no more than num hours in advance of the paving operation to ensure proper adhesion of the fabric to the pavement .
place fabric on the pavement immediately after the bituminous tack coat has been applied to the pavement .
place the nonwoven polyester side of the fabric on the pavement .
install the fabric so that it is smooth free of wrinkles with no uplifted edges .
provide a minimum of num in num mm overlap on all sides of the repair area .
center the material over the repair area within a num in num mm tolerance .
when placed full width use a mechanical device approved by the engineer to place the fabric on the pavement .
immediately after the fabric is placed on the pavement ensure that the fabric is in total contact with the underlying pavement .
roll the material with a static drum or pneumatic roller to ensure adequate adhesion to the pavement surface .
any fabric with loose edges corners or other improperly bonded areas shall be replaced at the expense of the contractor prior to placement of the overlay or opening the fabric section to traffic .
c. overlapping fabric if more than one strip of fabric is required to cover the repair area the seams that are created shall be butt or lapped seams .
when waterproofing is required use lap seams with a minimum num in num mm overlap .
make all lapped seams in the direction of the paving operation to prevent pickup by the paving train .
the width of the fabric strips shall be shown on the plans .
make joint overlaps to prevent pickup by the paving train that places the asphaltic concrete .
d. protecting fabric when full width fabric is used schedule work so that the fabric will be covered with asphaltic concrete prior to reopening the section to traffic .
do not allow traffic other than necessary construction equipment or emergency vehicles on unprotected fabric .
if approved by the engineer traffic will be allowed to use a section with applied fabric strips for a maximum of num days .
coordinate all activities to conform to this restriction .
replace any damaged fabric prior to paving at the contractors expense .
when shortterm pavement markings are required the markings shall meet the requirements of section num .
when inplace fabric is exposed to moisture prior to application of the overlay make sure the fabric is completely dry before the overlay is placed .
if the fabric sticks to tires of trucks or paving equipment during the construction overlays hot mix asphalt may be broadcast over the fabric for protection .
e. placing overlay use an asphaltic concrete overlay that meets the requirements of section num .
prior to placement of the overlay apply a bituminous tack coat over the fabric at a rate determined by the engineer as described in subsection num.a.num .
the minimum thickness of asphaltic concrete over the strip shall be num in num mm .
milling may be required to provide the minimum thickness .
when using a vibratory roller for compaction avoid the use of excessive amplitude .
the use of excessive amplitude during the compaction process may result in an undesirable riding surface .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the reinforcement fabric complete in place and accepted is measured by the square yard meter for fullwidth fabric or by the linear foot meter for fabric strips .
no allowance will be made for laps .
section numplacement of pavement reinforcement fabric num num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment will be made at the contract unit price per square yard meter or per linear foot meter of reinforcement fabric as shown in subsection num measurement .
payment is full compensation for the work specified in this section including cleaning the surface and furnishing and placing the pavement reinforcement fabric .
payment for pavement reinforcing fabric strips also includes all milling required to place the fabric according to the plans .
payment will be made under item no .
num pavement reinforcement fabric strips type ii num inch num mm width per linear foot meter item no .
num pavement reinforcement fabric full width type ii per square yard meter item no .
num high strength pavement reinforcement fabric num inch num mm width per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section nummodular expansion joints num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numportland cement concrete end dams and patches num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numbridge deck joint seals num general description this work consists of furnishing and installing bridge deck joint sealing systems at the locations shown on the plans .
these bridge deck joint sealing systems consist of a joint seal and may include concrete headers .
use a joint seal material that conforms to one of the following a preformed elastomeric neoprene profile seal or a lowdensity closed cell crosslinked ethylene vinyl acetate polyethylene copolymer nitrogenblown seal .
use either epoxy concrete or elastomeric concrete for header material .
mix and use elastomeric and epoxy concrete material according to the manufacturers guidelines .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
section numbridge deck joint seals num num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numsteel structures b. referenced documents gdt num astm a num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num num submittals a .
working drawings furnish working drawings covering the proposed joint installation .
before the joint is installed the bridge engineer will review these drawings and indicate this review on the drawings .
the department is not responsible for the accuracy of the drawings .
assume responsibility for conforming to the specifications and plans .
include these items in the submission manufacturers brochure on the proposed joint showing component physical dimensions installation procedures material certifications and a table of variable temperatures and dimensions drawings that detail the joint installation and indicates the length of component members treatment of directional changes and field splicing of steel locking rails expansion joint fabricator documentation ensure that the expansion joint fabricator is aisc category i shop approved .
supply documentation with the shop drawings .
b. submissions for preformed elastomeric neoprene profile seals furnish the manufacturer of the performed elastomeric neoprene profile seal a working drawing for each installation .
this drawing shall include all of the following information identification and orientation of each joint length of each joint including a minimum num in num mm turn up at both barrier faces total projected movement range of the joint use a fulllength seal if a full bridge width installation can be made .
if traffic conditions require that the joint seal installation be in stages indicate the splice points section numbridge deck joint seals num in addition to the above if existing edge beams are to remain as joint headers furnish the manufacturer of the seal the following joint width measurements taken at num ft num mm intervals along the full length of the joint plus a measurement of the joint width of each barrier in the area of the turn ups ambient temperature taken when width measurements are made have the manufacturer of the preformed elastomeric neoprene profile seal use this information to determine quantities of materials needed and the profile size or sizes for each joint .
have the manufacturer enter this data on the working drawing and verify that the data is accurate and submit a copy to the engineer for review .
show an indication of such verification on the drawings .
engineer approval is required before installing the joint seal .
the department review will be considered a service to assist the contractor .
the department will assume no responsibility for the accuracy of the drawings and the contractor will not be relieved of any responsibility for conforming to the specifications and plans .
num materials a. elastomeric concrete material elastomeric concrete material includes twocomponent elastomer and prebagged fillers .
mix the elastomeric concrete material and use it according to the manufacturers recommendations .
this may require using heat to accelerate curing and ensure a quality bond to the concrete and steel .
use the elastomeric concrete material with these features compatible with the concrete and steel to which it is bonded smooth riding surface across the joint can be mixed using normal equipment can be mixed and placed between num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºcb .
joint sealing system use a joint sealing system designed for hs num truck loading and impact according to aashto design parameters .
ensure that the system can accommodate the movements indicated in the plans .
c. preformed elastomeric neoprene profile seal the preformed elastomeric neoprene profile seal shall as a minimum have the capability to be evacuated of air during installation have the capability to be pressurized with air during the adhesive curing time be compatible with the epoxy and elastomeric concrete header materials if required be designed to withstand num expansion num contraction total num withstand the effects of vertical and lateral movements skew movement and rotational movement without adhesive or cohesive failure .
ensure the preformed elastomeric neoprene profile meets the requirements of astm d num .
ensure the adhesive used with the preformed elastomeric neoprene profile seals is a twocomponent epoxy based thixotropic paste meeting the seal manufacturers requirements .
d. lowdensity closed cell crosslinked ethylene vinyl acetate polyethylene copolymer nitrogenblown seal the lowdensity closed cell crosslinked ethylene vinyl acetate polyethylene copolymer nitrogenblown seal shall as a minimum be held in place by a twocomponent num solid modified epoxy adhesive .
compatible with the epoxy and header materials .
section numbridge deck joint seals num preformed resistant to abrasion oxidation oils gasoline salt and other materials that may be spilled on or applied to the surface .
grooved with the grooves approximately num in .
num mm wide by num in .
num mm deep and spaced between num in .
to num in .
num mm to num mm apart and run along the entire length of the bond surface side of the seal .
designed so that when compressed to num of original width the center portion of the top will not extend upward above the original height of the seal by more than num in .
num mm .
recessed below the riding surface throughout the normal limits of joint movement .
resistant to ultra violet rays .
beige or gray color .
shop marked to indicate the top or bottom side of the seal in such a way as to be clearly visible during installation .
ensure the lowdensity closed cell crosslinked ethylene vinyl acetate polyethylene copolymer nitrogenblown seal has a working range of num tension and num compression .
ensure the seal meets the following physical properties test requirements test method tensile strength num psi num kpa astm dnum suffix t elongation at break num min .
astm dnum suffix t weatherdeterioration no deterioration for at least num years aashto tnum accelerated weathering compressiondeflection num psi num kpa min .
num psi num kpa max .
num deflection of original width astm dnum suffix b tear strength num psi num kpa astm dnum density num to num pcf num to num kgmnum astm dnum the adhesive used with the lowdensity closed cell crosslinked ethylene vinyl acetate polyethylene copolymer nitrogenblown seals shall be a twocomponent num solid modified epoxy adhesive meeting the requirements of astm cnum type i grade num class b c. the adhesive shall also have the following physical properties tensile strength num psi num mpa min .
compressive strength num psi num mpa min .
shore d hardness num psi num mpa min .
water absorption num by weight for applications on moist or hard to dry concrete surfaces the adhesive shall be as specified by the joint material manufacturer .
e. epoxy concrete material ensure the epoxy concrete material is as a minimum compatible with all allowable joint seal materials and concrete or steel to which it is bonded .
capable of providing a smooth riding surface across the joint .
capable of being mixed using normal equipment .
capable of being mixed and placed at temperatures of num ºf num ºc and above . .
section numbridge deck joint seals num use header material that is a twocomponent rapid curing epoxy with aggregate that cures to a dense semiflexible weather abrasion and impactresistant epoxy concrete .
ensure the material has the following physical properties test requirements test method mixed epoxy without aggregate before and after oven aging at numo f num c for num hours tensile strength min .
num psi num mpa astm d num elongation at break min .
num astm d num shore d hardness num astm dnum pot life max .
num minutes gdt num mixed epoxy with aggregate compressive strength at num hours min .
num psi num mpa astm cnum num cylinders resilience at num deflection min .
num gdt num bond strength to concrete min .
num psi num mpa gdt num wet bond strength to concrete min .
num psi num mpa gdt num thermal compatibility no delamination astm c num minimum psi or concrete failure .
have the manufacturer furnish the aggregate used in epoxy concrete .
use wellgraded clean and dry aggregate meeting the following gradation requirement size percent passing by weight no .
num sieve num no .
num sieve num note test according to aashto t num .
f. elastomeric concrete material ensure the elastomeric concrete material is as a minimum compatible with all allowable joint seal materials and concrete or steel to which it is bonded .
provides a smooth riding surface across the joint .
capable of being mixed using normal equipment .
capable of being mixed and placed between num ºf and num ºf num ºc and num ºc .
section numbridge deck joint seals num g. elastomeric concrete cured binder material ensure elastomeric concrete cured binder material without filler has the following physical properties h. elastomeric concrete binder material ensure that the elastomeric concrete binder material with filler has the following physical requirements test requirements test method resilience at num deflection min .
num gdt num bond strength to concrete min .
num psi num mpa gdt num wet bond strength to concrete min .
num psi num mpa gdt num pot life min .
num minutes gdt num minimum psi mpa or concrete failure i .
temporary joint filler use temporary joint filler when epoxy concrete material is used .
the temporary joint filler shall be an extruded rigid cellular polystyrene with enough compressive strength to maintain the correct joint width and to obtain relatively smooth and straight faces upon removal of the material .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
test requirements test method before oven aging tensile strength min .
num psi num mpa astm d num elongation at break num num astm d num hardness type d durometer num num astm d num compression set num hrs at max .
num f num c num astm d num method b tear resistance min .
num lbsin num kgmm astm d num inmin num mmmin water absorption max .
num astm d num heat shrinkage max .
num astm d num impact strength min .
num ftlbsmin num n m gdt num properties after oven aging at num f num c for num hrs tensile strength min .
num psi num mpa astm d num elongation at break num num astm d num hardness type d durometer num num astm d num impact strength min .
num ftlbsmin num n m gdt num section numbridge deck joint seals num num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a .
surface preparation ensure that the compressed air used to sandblast andor blow debris is free of moisture and oil .
use air compressors for cleaning joints that are equipped with suitable traps capable of removing surplus water and oil in the compressed air .
check the compressed air daily for contamination .
do not use contaminated air .
use a compressor that can deliver compressed air at a continuous pressure of at least num psi num kpa .. num .
preparation for headers remove loose eroded and unsound concrete from the surface within the joint area .
provide horizontal bonding areas by cutting all angular areas of concrete blockouts .
immediately before placing the epoxy or elastomeric concrete sandblast the concrete surfaces or abrade free of oil dust dirt traces of asphaltic concrete or other contaminants .
num .
preparation for joint seal remove loose eroded and unsound concrete from the surface within the joint area .
immediately before placing the seal sandblast the concrete surfaces or abrade free of oil dust dirt traces of asphaltic concrete or other contaminants .
sawcutting of the concrete deck maybe necessary to provide an acceptable attachment surface for the joint seal .
num fabrication a .
joint fabrication have the joint fabricated full width of the bridge deck except in stage construction one lane at a time or when joint length prohibits shipment .
num construction use an installer trained by the manufacturer to install the bridge deck joint sealing system .
a manufacturers representative shall be present during the installation of the epoxy or elastomeric concrete headers .
install the joint system according to the manufacturers recommendations and the following a. blockouts blockouts shall be according to the plan details .
b .
weather limitations do not perform any part of the installation in rainy weather or when rain is expected within one hour of installation .
ensure the surface is completely dry before applying adhesive or primer .
the ambient temperature must not be less than num ºf num ºc during installation of the epoxy concrete material and preformed elastomeric neoprene profile seal .
ensure the ambient temperature is between num ºf num ºc and num ºf num ºc while installing the elastomeric concrete material .
ensure the ambient and surface temperatures are between num ºf num ºc and num ºf num ºc while installing the lowdensity closed cell crosslinked ethylene vinyl acetate polyethylene copolymer nitrogen blown seal .
c. general safety handling mixing finishing and curing handle place finish and cure elastomeric concrete joint systems according to the manufacturers instructions and the following section numbridge deck joint seals num num .
fill the blockout as shown in the plans to the correct grade .
num .
after filling the blockouts on both sides cure the material according to the manufacturers instructions .
mix and place the epoxy mortar according to the manufacturers recommendations and the following num .
before adding the aggregate thoroughly mix the two components resin and hardener of the epoxy mortar .
num .
mix the epoxy mortar in a mechanical mortar mixer by combining one volume of mixed epoxy resin plus hardener in the required proportions with three volumes of aggregate meeting the requirements of this specification .
num .
prime the surface of the concrete in accordance with the manufactures recommendations before applying the epoxy concrete .
num .
place and finish the epoxy concrete within one half hour of mixing .
the cure time of epoxy mortar is directly related to temperature .
use the following table as a general guideline for cure time at various temperatures .
air and deck temperature of oc approximate cure time hours num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num postpone the installation process if the ambient temperature is not num ºf num ºc and rising .
if you can not postpone the operation use supplemental heat to complete the operation and reopen the lane in a reasonable time .
if using supplemental heat ensure that the cure has progressed throughout the mass of the header .
d. mixing and placing elastomeric concrete material handle place finish and cure the elastomeric concrete material according to the manufacturers instructions .
allow the elastomeric concrete to cool and solidify for at least one hour before opening to traffic .
e. preformed elastomeric neoprene profile joint seal application num .
after the epoxy or elastomeric concrete has developed enough strength to be traffic ready remove the temporary joint filler when called for and thoroughly clean the joint faces of all joint filler .
num .
lightly sandblast the joint to remove all residue .
num .
apply the adhesive according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
install the preformed elastomeric neoprene profile seal so that it is recessed approximately num inch num mm below the riding surface .
num .
after a joint has been sealed promptly remove all surplus residue on the bridge deck .
f. lowdensity closed cell crosslinked ethylene vinyl acetate polyethylene copolymer nitrogenblown seal application num .
after the epoxy or elastomeric concrete if required has developed enough strength to be traffic ready remove the temporary joint filler when called for and thoroughly clean the joint faces of all joint filler .
num .
lightly sandblast the joint to remove all residue .
num .
apply the epoxy adhesive to both sides of the joint opening and into the grooves of the joint seal material .
num .
splice the seal using the heat welding method by placing the joint seal material ends against a teflon heating iron of num f num c for num seconds and pressing the ends together tightly .
section numbridge deck joint seals num num .
install the joint seal material in one piece .
num .
begin installation at the low end of the joint .
install the joint seal material by compressing the material and pushing it down into the joint opening until it has recessed approximately num inch num mm below the deck surface .
do not push the joint seal material into the joint at an angle that will stretch the seal material .
num .
once installation of the joint seal material has begun do not stop the process until it has been completed .
num .
immediately and thoroughly clean off excess epoxy from the surface of the joint material .
do not use solvents to clean the top surface of the joint seal material g. opening to traffic do not permit traffic to drive over sealed joints until the epoxy or elastomeric concrete has hardened enough to resist displacement of the seal due to deck movement or other causes .
allow the elastomeric concrete to cool and solidify for at least one hour before opening to traffic .
allow the epoxy concrete to cure for at least two hours before opening to traffic .
num quality acceptance a .
acceptance provide evidence from the manufacture that the joint system has been used successfully in installations with similar environmental and project conditions .
failure to perform adequately in actual use shall be cause for rejection .
b .
correction of defects at the contractors expense repair or remove and replace joint seals that are complete and have leaks have adhesive or cohesive failure or that are damaged during construction or by traffic before final acceptance .
num contractor warranty and maintenance to comply with subsection num materials certification provide certification from the manufacturer that shows that the bridge deck joint sealing system materials conform to the requirements stated in subsection num .
transfer to the department the manufacturers standard fiveyear performance warranty on each installation .
a warranty claim may be filed for cohesive or adhesive failure of the materials supplied or material failure due to weathering .
num measurement when listed as a pay item in the proposal bridge deck joint seal will be measured and paid for at the contract price linear foot meter complete inplace joint at the location specified on the plans .
payment is full compensation for the removal of any old sealant cleaning the joint and furnishing and installing the new seal and header if required and all incidentals .
no separate measurement and payment will be made unless a pay item for the work is included in the proposal .
if no pay item is included in the proposal the cost of the joint seal shall be included in the overall bid price submitted .
no separate measurement or payment will be made for any sawcutting required to install the joint .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment when shown in the schedule of items in the proposal the following items will be paid for separately section numbridge deck joint seals num item no .
num performed elastomeric neoprene profile joint seal with epoxy concrete headers bridge no.______bent no._____ per linear foot meter item no .
num performed elastomeric neoprene profile joint seal with elastomeric concrete headers bridge no.______bent no._____ per linear foot meter item no .
num lowdensity closed cell crosslinked ethylene vinyl acetate polyethylene copolymer nitrogenblown seal with epoxy concrete headers bridge no.______bent no._____ per linear foot meter item no .
num lowdensity closed cell crosslinked ethylene vinyl acetate polyethylene copolymer nitrogenblown seal with elastomeric concrete headers bridge no.______bent no._____ per linear foot meter item no .
num lowdensity closed cell crosslinked ethylene vinyl acetate polyethylene copolymer nitrogenblown seal bridge no.______bent no._____ per linear foot meter item no .
num elastomeric profile bridge joint seals bridge no.______bent no._____ per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numpressure grouting portland cement concrete pavement num general description this work includes pumping a slurry type grout mixture through holes drilled in the pavement into voids underneath the slabs to stabilize and underseal portland cement concrete pavement .
use a grout mixture that can form a hard and durable mass to fill voids under the pavement .
regrout unstable slabs after initial undersealing and stabilizing as directed by the engineer .
num definitions initial set num psi num kpa with a num in² num mm² probe according to aashto t num proctor needle test .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numfull depth slab replacement section numremoval of portland cement concrete roadway slabs section numfine aggregate section numportland cement section numadmixtures section numwater section numlime section nummineral filler section numchlorides b. referenced documents gdt num section numpressure grouting portland cement conrete pavement num aashto t num proctor needle test num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials a .
fine aggregate ensure that fine aggregate meets the requirements of subsection num except mortarmaking properties are not required .
b. grout mixtures the bid item designates the required undersealing grout mixture types .
the mixture contains the proportions listed in the table of grout mixtures below .
use enough mixing water with the dry ingredients to produce a grout consistency that makes the efflux time from the flow cone at least num seconds and no more than num seconds .
use gdt num to determine the grout consistency .
add cement cement and limestone dust cement and fly ash or cement and fine aggregate in the proper proportions to a mixed batch to produce the required consistency .
table of grout mixtures mix proportions percent by weight of dry materials grout types dry materials num num num num num cement min .
num num num num num limestone dust num num num fly ash num num num fine aggregate num num ensure that materials meet the requirements of these specifications material section portland cement types i or iii section num mineral filler limestone dust section num calcium chloride type i section num fly ash type f section num water section num fine aggregate size no .
num subsection num agricultural lime subsection num agricultural lime used for undersealing shall have at least num passing the no .
num num µm sieve and num passing the no .
num num µm sieve .
the laboratory may approve other commercially available accelerators that may be substituted for calcium chloride .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section numpressure grouting portland cement conrete pavement num num construction requirements num personnel provide personnel to control the lifting on every slab that is undersealed .
furnish a truck driver and sufficient workers to assist operating static load measuring gauges on the slab stabilization testing equipment .
num equipment a. batching equipment the batching equipment includes weight hoppers and scales for each dry material or calibrated volumetric batch hoppers .
calibrate volumetric batch hoppers in increments equivalent to one num lb num kg bag of cement .
use aggregate scales accurate to num percent and cement scales accurate to plus or minus num percent .
equip conveyor belts with windproof covers if the belts convey the dry materials into the mixer .
b. mixing equipment for mix types one through four use a watertight batchtype mixer or highspeed colloidal mixer capable of blending the materials into a homogenous mixture .
use a highspeed colloidal mixer for mix type five .
c. grout pumping equipment use grout pumping equipment with a positive displacement plunger or pistontype pump or a screwtype worm pump .
num .
ensure that the discharge line is equipped with the following pressure gauge at the pump capable of measuring from num to num psi num to num kpa positive cutoff valve at the nozzle end bypass return line for recirculating the grout back into a holding tank or mixer num .
equip the end of the discharge line with a nozzle or device that remains secure in the drilled holes and is free of leaks .
num .
furnish a blow pipe with enough air pressure to dislodge loose debris .
num .
provide an auger of the proper size and length to open clogged holes .
d. drilling equipment provide the following drilling equipment air compressorsprovide air compressors with enough capacity to operate pneumatic hammers or drills .
pneumatic or hydraulic drillsprovide pneumatic or hydraulic drills equipped with bits that will cut num in num mm or other approved diameter holes through the concrete pavement .
operate the equipment so as to prevent damage to the pavement being drilled .
do not create excessive down pressure to force the bit through the concrete rapidly .
the engineer must approve the drilling procedure .
e. slab stabilization testing equipment furnish a two axle truck with dual rear wheels .
load the rear axle to num kips num kg evenly distributed between the two sides .
f. slab lift measuring equipment ensure that equipment used to measure the slab lift can simultaneously detect movement of the two outside slab corners adjacent to a joint and the adjoining shoulder .
ensure that the equipment can make these measurements to num in num mm .
section numpressure grouting portland cement conrete pavement num num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
observing weather limitations begin pressure grouting operations when the air temperature in the shade and away from artificial heat is at least num ºf num ºc and rising .
stop pressure grouting if the temperature is num ºf num ºcand falling or when the subgrade contains an abnormal amount of moisture .
b .
testing slab testing is performed to detect all slabs having a deflection greater than num in num mm .
perform testing between num am and num am unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
in hot weather test between num am and num am if directed by the engineer .
stop testing if slabs are beginning to lockup .
num .
preliminary testing by the department preliminary testing is not required on slabs that require grouting but have been previously tested and marked by the department .
num .
preliminary testing by the contractor if the department has not performed preliminary testing use static methods to test each transverse joint and crack on the project or within designated project areas .
do not test however transverse cracks in slabs that are to be replaced entirely .
test the joints and cracks as follows a. furnish four gauges on two gauge mounts two gauges per mount that can detect slab movement under the load to the nearest num in num mm .
b .
maintain the gauges and mounts in operating order .
furnish the loaded truck truck operator and personnel to place and assist in operating the gauges .
c. position one set of gauges with one gauge referenced to the corner of each slab on both sides of the joint near the pavement edge .
zero in the gauges with no load on the slab on either side of the joint .
d. move the test truck into position and stop it with the center of the test axle about num ft num mm behind the joint and the outside test wheel approximately num ft num mm from the pavement edge .
e. read the back gauge and move the test truck across the joint to about num ft num mm forward of the joint .
read the forward gauge .
f. repeat this operation for each joint to be tested .
the inspector will read and record the gauges .
g. when required perform additional tests on slabs that move more than num in num mm or as shown on the plans .
perform additional tests as follows num drill one hole in the corner of the slab where the movement was measured .
num drill the holes the same diameter as the undersealing holes and place the holes num in num mm from the transverse and shoulder joint .
num fill the test holes with water and observe .
num if the engineer believes the pavement system readily drains the water poured into the test hole pressure grout the slab .
based on the results of testing deflection measurements and water drainage observations the engineer will determine which slabs require undersealing .
h. after the designated slabs have been pressure grouted according to these specifications retest them according to subsection num.b.num testing .
i. regrout and retest slabs that deflect more than num in num mm or deflect the amount shown on the plans as directed .
section numpressure grouting portland cement conrete pavement num slabs will be accepted that continue to show movement greater than specified after two properly performed groutings .
c. drilling holes the plans show the location of holes to be drilled in each type of slab for undersealing .
however whenever possible use the holes from previous undersealing work by redrilling .
to begin drilling num .
use the hole pattern and pumping sequence shown on the plans with modifications to use as many holes from previous undersealing work as possible .
the engineer may alter the hole pattern .
only the actual number of holes drilled will be considered for payment for the initial undersealing .
num .
drill the holes num in num mm diameter or another size if approved by the engineer .
ensure that the holes provide positive seal for the pumping nozzle .
num .
for the first undersealing drill the holes to approximately num in num mm deep beneath the bottom of the concrete unless the engineer approves an alternate depth .
the engineer shall designate the number depth and location of holes for undersealing attempts after the initial attempt .
num .
be careful during operations to not break or crack the slabs .
num .
repair slabs that have cracks that extend through the drill hole at the contractors expense .
make repairs according to section num and section num .
d. cleaning holes after drilling the holes and immediately before pumping the underseal grout insert a pipe with enough air pressure in each hole to remove debris and to provide a passage for the grout if necessary .
e. pumping underseal grout properly position the lift measuring device before pumping grout under a slab .
fill the voids under a slab as follows num .
pump grout in holes designated by the engineer .
num .
have the engineer determine the time of day to perform pressure grouting .
the engineer may require pressure grouting during late night and early morning hours if the slabs can not be stabilized with daytime grouting .
num .
during pumping watch the lift measuring device to prevent excessive pumping pressures rapid lifting of slabs or substantial rising of the adjacent shoulders .
num .
stop pumping in the hole when the cavities or voids are filled within the range of the hole being grouted .
grout flowing out of an adjacent hole or joint or the edge of the slab is sufficient evidence that the voids and cavities are filled and pumping should cease .
additional evidence is that the slab rises rapidly or the adjacent shoulder begins to rise .
a .
lift the slab slightly to move grout into the existing cavities and voids .
b .
do not lift more than num in num mm for a slab measured at the outside joint corner unless approved by the engineer .
note do not crack the slabs by differential lifting .
num .
secure the discharge hose nozzle in the hole to provide a seal that will maintain the grout pressure underneath the slab .
ensure that the nozzle end does not extend below the bottom of the concrete .
num .
continue pumping in a hole until a clear flow of grout comes out other holes joints or cracks or until the slab begins to lift excessively .
section numpressure grouting portland cement conrete pavement num num .
repeat this procedure in other holes until the voids are filled .
do not plug the holes during grouting operations .
num .
when edge drains are near the shoulder or pavement interface take precautions to minimize the amount of grout that flows into the edge drain system .
use the following procedure or an alternate approved by the engineer to monitor grout flow into the edge drain system a .
drill one or more observation holes in the asphaltic concrete shoulder as close as possible to the shoulder or pavement interface .
b .
time the grouting operation to prevent and stop excess grouting in a hole to ensure that grout does not flow into the edge drain system .
c. when grouting operations are complete fill the observation holes with asphaltic concrete .
num .
prevent slabs from cracking during the undersealing operation .
remove and replace slabs cracked during this operation at the contractors expense according to section num and section num .
f. cleaning up before permitting traffic on the section remove grout deposits on the pavement or shoulders and clean the surface .
remove debris bags spillage etc .
from the rightofway each day .
g. permanently sealing holes remove the grout from the holes and fill the holes with a stiff sandcement mixture or an approved quick setting patching material .
repair filled holes that ravel out or become damaged .
also repair unsatisfactorily filled holes from previous undersealing work at the contractors expense as directed by the engineer .
h. testing for slab stability after pumping the grout under the designated slab and permitting traffic over the slabs for at least num hours test the slabs for stability .
conduct these tests by static loading as in subsection num.b.num.h and subsection num.b.num.i .
based on the test results and criteria on the plans the slabs will be accepted or designated for further undersealing as directed by the engineer .
i .
opening to traffic do not permit traffic on the grouted slabs until the grout has taken an initial set normally num to num hours .
schedule the operations so that the grout has initially set and the work area is cleared before traffic is allowed on the grouted slabs .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement portland cement incorporated into the pressure grout slurry is measured by the num lb num kg bag .
a. holes on an initial undersealing attempt holes drilled through the existing concrete slabs at the locations and to the depths shown on the plans or directed by the engineer are measured per each .
section numpressure grouting portland cement conrete pavement num if holes drilled for the first stabilizing attempt are used for the second stabilizing attempt holes are not paid for again by the department .
if new holes are drilled they are measured per each .
b .
preliminary testing preliminary testing described in subsection num.b.num.h and subsection num.b.num.i .
is measured by the linear mile linear kilometer horizontal measure for each lane of each roadway tested when required .
bridges are not included in the measurement .
c. stability testing stability testing in subsection num.h is measured by the joint .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a. holes holes will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment is full compensation for drilling and sealing the hole .
if holes drilled for the first stabilizing attempt are used for the second stabilizing attempt the department does not pay for the holes again .
b. portland cement pressure grout slurry portland cement pressure grout slurry will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per num lb num kg bag of cement or fraction thereof .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials to be incorporated into the grout slurry hauling mixing pumping and cleaning to stabilize the slabs .
c. preliminary testing preliminary testing when shown on the plans and in the proposal as a payment item will be paid for at the contract price bid per linear mile kilometer horizontal measure .
bridges will be excluded from the linear mile kilometer measurement .
d. stability testing static testing of slabs performed according to subsection num.b.num.h and subsection num.b.num.i .
will be paid for each time the joint is tested .
payment is full compensation for furnishing the load test truck driver and personnel necessary to assist in the testing .
e. pumping under seal grout no separate payment will be made for this work .
include the cost in the bid submitted for portland cement pressure grout slurry .
the precautions used will require prior approval of the engineer .
payment will be made under item no .
num holes per each item no .
num portland cement pressure grout slurry grout type___ ___ or___ per bag num lb num kg item no .
num preliminary testing per linear mile kilometer item no .
num stability testing per joint num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numpatching portland cement concrete pavement spall repair num general description this work includes partial depth patching of spalls and potholes in portland cement concrete pavement by removing the broken damaged or disintegrated concrete pavement .
this work also includes removing asphaltic concrete patches from spalled or damaged areas of the pavement surfaces and patching them with approved patching materials according to this specification and the existing pavement crosssections .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numtwentyfour hour accelerated strength concrete section numcoarse aggregate section numfine aggregate section numjoint fillers and sealers section numepoxy resin adhesives section numrapid setting patching materials for portland cement concrete b. referenced documents qpl num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that the materials used to repair and patch portland cement concrete pavement conform to the rapid setting patching material requirements .
the laboratory may waive the setting time requirements of approved materials if the minimum compressive strength development is unaffected .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment to clean the repair areas use air compressors equipped with traps that can remove surplus water and oil in the compressed air .
ensure that the compressor can deliver compressed air at a continuous pressure of at least num psi num kpa .
the engineer will check the compressed air daily for contamination .
do not use contaminated air .
section numpatching portland cement concrete pavement spall repair num num preparation a .
removing and preparing the repair area prepare to perform partial patching of spalled joints and potholes as follows num .
partial depth patching of spalled joints a .
sound each transverse joint and longitudinal joint with a visual defect to determine the limits of the damaged or defective areas .
strike the pavement surface along the sides of each joint with a hammer chain drag or similar tool to detect unsound concrete that sounds flat or hollow .
b .
mark the limits of the defective areas on the pavement by making a rectangle num in num mm beyond the outer limits of the unsound concrete area as a guide for sawing .
c. mark spalled areas less than num ft num mm from each other along a joint as one spall area .
if separated by num ft num mm or more mark as separate spall areas .
do not repair defective spalled joint areas less than num in num mm long and num in num mm wide under this specification .
thoroughly clean and seal them with silicone sealant as part of the joint sealing operation specified in section num. d. saw the rectangular marked areas with near vertical faces at least num in num mm but not more than num in num mm deep .
e. remove unsound material within the sawed area with a maximum num lb num n chipping hammer .
f. do not damage or fracture the sound concrete substrate to be left on the bottom of the spall area .
do not use sharp pointed bits .
g. if the unsound material is more than num in num mm deep the engineer may direct a num ft num m slab replacement be placed which is classified and paid for under section num and section num. h. before placing the patching material saw the face of the existing transverse or longitudinal joints bordering the repair areas .
saw at least num in num mm deep and num in num mm wide with the full depth of the saw cut extending at least num in num mm beyond the limits of the repair areas in each direction .
i .
immediately before placing the patching material thoroughly clean the surfaces within the repair areas by sandblasting and air blasting to remove oil dust dirt traces of asphaltic concrete slurry from saw operation and other contaminants .
j .
place a num in num mm wide piece of closed cell polyethylene foam shaped to fit the saw cut in the joints bordering the repair areas .
if backtoback repairs are made at a joint support the num in num mm closedcell polyethylene foam during the placing operation to maintain a true straight joint line .
have the engineer approve the method used .
the polyethylene foam must be supported in a straight line when the patching material is placed so a straight joint line will be formed .
maintain a straight line or the engineer may require the repairs be repeated at no additional cost to the department .
num .
partial depth patching of pavement potholes the engineer will determine which pavement potholes will be repaired .
use the procedures given for repairing spalled joints to repair potholes within the pavement surface .
the requirement of using the num in num mm closedcell polyethylene foam does not apply .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numpatching portland cement concrete pavement spall repair num num construction a .
concrete patching patch concrete one lane at a time safely and rapidly to minimize inconvenience to the traveling public .
num .
accomplish the work with other operations in progress within an area if possible .
num .
complete the work before the grinding operation begins if grinding is specified .
num .
remove and replace completed concrete patches that contain cracks shrinkage compression failures or are damaged by construction or traffic before final acceptance at no additional cost to the department .
b .
placing patching material use repair method num unless the state materials research engineer gives written approval to use repair method num .
use repair method num when the average daily temperature is num ºf num ºc or above .
use of repair method num if approved is limited to the manufacturers written recommendations .
for the following repair methods begin the placement when the surface within the repair area is dry and thoroughly free of contaminants .
ensure that the finished surface including joints meets a surface tolerance of num in num mm per num ft num m. use approved measures as necessary to keep pavement surfaces adjacent to this operation free of excess grout and other materials .
unless otherwise specified complete the patching operations and open the lanes to traffic before sunset each day .
num .
repair method num twentyfour hour accelerated strength concrete use this method as follows a .
completely coat the concrete surface areas within the repair area with a film of type ii epoxy approximately num to num mils num to num mm thick .
b .
mix the concrete on site in a portable mixer .
obtain approval for the mix design and mixing method from the laboratory .
the material must meet a slump range of num in .
nummm to num in .
nummm .
c. deposit the concrete in the repair area while the epoxy is still tacky .
vibrate it to form a dense homogeneous mass of concrete that completely fills the patch area .
d. screed the concrete to the proper grade and do not disturb it until the water sheen disappears from the surface .
e. cover the concrete with wet burlap or membrane curing compound .
allow the curing to continue for at least three hours .
the engineer may require longer curing to ensure sufficient concrete strength development before opening to traffic .
num .
repair method num rapid setting patching material for portland cement concrete pavement type i ii iv and v a .
in addition to the requirements outlined in subsection num.a removing and preparing the repair area prepare the surfaces in the repair areas according to the manufacturers written recommendations .
b .
perform the patching material handling mixing placing consolidating screeding and curing according to the manufacturers written instructions as approved by the laboratory .
c. continue curing for at least one hour and until opening the section to traffic .
c. special requirements the following special requirements apply to this work num .
if repairing adjacent to an unstable shoulder place a form the full depth of the repair area to maintain a true straight shoulder joint and to prevent the patching material from intruding onto the shoulder area .
num .
after curing the patching material remove the form and repair the shoulder at no cost to the department .
section numpatching portland cement concrete pavement spall repair num num .
during sandblasting protect traffic in the adjacent lanes .
num .
after the sandblasting operations a .
thoroughly clean the area to be repaired with compressed air .
b .
remove sand from the sandblasting operation from the roadway and shoulders .
num .
do not overcut the pavement beyond marked areas whenever possible .
num .
remove saw slurry and other contaminates from the overcutting .
num .
repair the overcuts by filling fulldepth with an approved lowviscosity epoxy compound using a type ii epoxy adhesive specified in section num .
make these repairs as soon as possible but not after the joint is resealed .
num .
reestablish original transverse and longitudinal joints by sawing and sealing the joints with silicone that meets the requirements of subsection num the plan details and section num .
reestablish the joints within num days after placing the patch .
ensure that reestablished joints are at least num in num mm wide .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the area measured for payment is the number of square yards meters of patching complete in place and accepted .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the area measured as specified above will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard meter .
payment is full compensation for equipment tools labor incidentals to complete the work including but not limited to removing existing asphaltic concrete patching material or the spalled broken or damaged portland cement concrete cleaning the open area by sandblasting furnishing placing finishing and curing the patching material sawing and sealing new transverse and longitudinal joints payment will be made under item no .
num patching portland cement concrete pavement per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numfull depth slab replacement num general description this work includes replacing portland cement concrete pavement slabs full or partial length .
remove the slabs according to the plans or as directed by the engineer .
see section num .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numgrind concrete pavement section numsealing roadway and bridge joints and cracks section numtwentyfour hour accelerated strength concrete section numremoval of portland cement concrete roadway slabs section numjoint fillers and sealers section numreinforcement and tensioning steel section numepoxy resin adhesives b. referenced documents gdt num num submittals obtain approval of the mix design from the office of materials before using the mix .
num materials ensure that materials used in full depth slab replacement conform to the following specifications material section twentyfour hour accelerated strength concrete section num dowel bars and bar coatings subsection num epoxy section num silicone sealant subsection num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel furnish traffic control while the department conducts slab movement testing described in subsection num.b .
quality of work at no additional cost to the department .
num equipment use sufficient equipment to perform work such as drilling dowel holes setting dowels spreading striking off consolidating screeding concrete and sawing and sealing joints .
obtain the engineers approval of the equipment before starting the work .
section numfull depth slab replacement num place the dowels at the locations specified on the plans by using pneumatic or hydraulic drills and bits that will drill a num in num mm diameter hole in the existing concrete faces .
num preparation a .
clean the exposed faces before placing the concrete thoroughly clean the vertical exposed faces of the existing slabs to remove contaminates .
num .
use wire brushing or other methods approved by the engineer .
num .
remove existing silicone or other joint sealant from the exposed concrete faces .
b .
preparing base remove debris and standing water from the base .
thoroughly compact loose base material by hand tamping before placing concrete .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
installing the dowels complete these steps to install the dowels num .
use a pneumatic or hydraulic drill to drill a num in num mm diameter hole in the existing concrete faces .
place the dowels at locations specified on the plans .
num .
if the engineer allows drill a hole no greater than num in num mm diameter to insert the dowel bars .
follow these guidelines a .
operate the equipment so as to prevent damage to the pavement being drilled .
b .
obtain the engineers approval for the drilling procedure .
c. thoroughly clean the drilled holes of contaminants .
num .
set the type and size of dowels specified in the plans into the hardened concrete face of the existing pavement with type viii epoxy bonding compound that meets the requirements in section num. a .
place the dowels at locations noted on the plans with onehalf of the dowel protruding out of the pavement .
b .
place the dowels at the correct horizontal and vertical alignment .
do not misalign them more than num in num mm within the vertical or oblique plane .
c. place enough epoxy in the back of the hole to completely fill the entire cavity around the dowel upon insertion of the dowel bar .
remove excess epoxy .
d. use epoxy adhesive packaged in a cartridge with a mixing nozzle that thoroughly mixes the two components as they are dispensed .
use a mixing nozzle at least num in num mm long .
or use a machine that mixes the two components thoroughly to the proper ratio as the material is being placed .
e. allow the epoxy to harden before placing the concrete to prevent the dowels from moving during the concrete placement .
num .
at the free joints shown on the plans use epoxycoated plain round steel dowel bars that meet the requirements of subsection num .
coat the protruding portion of the epoxy coated dowels with a thin film of grease or other approved material to ensure proper bondbreaking characteristics .
num .
cleanly saw the edges of the epoxycoated smooth dowels bars .
do not shear them .
note num never drive dowels into a dowel hole with a sledge hammer or other device .
section numfull depth slab replacement num note num coated dowels will be rejected if they can not be freely inserted into a dowel hole .
b .
setting forms forms are not required for this work .
the vertical faces of the existing pavement and shoulder bordering the replaced slab or joint area serve as the forms .
however if the shoulder is irregular or unstable num .
place a form the full depth of the replaced slab or joint area to maintain a true straight shoulder joint and to prevent the concrete from intruding into the shoulder area .
num .
compact the foundation under the form true to grade so that the form when set will firmly contact the base at the correct grade .
num .
clean and oil the forms before placing the concrete .
num .
wait four hours to remove the forms from the freshly placed concrete unless otherwise specified .
carefully remove the forms to avoid damaging the pavement .
num .
repair the shoulder to the engineers satisfaction at no additional cost to the department .
c. placing and finishing concrete the required concrete for the work will be numhour accelerated strength concrete that meets the requirements of section num .
obtain mix design approval from the laboratory before use .
place the concrete only when the ambient temperature is num f num c and rising .
do not place concrete when the underlying base material is muddy or frozen .
num .
deposit the concrete within the slab replacement area in a way that requires as little rehandling as possible and prevents mix segregation .
num .
minimize hand spreading as much as possible .
but where necessary use shovels not rakes .
note do not allow workmen to walk in fresh concrete with shoes coated with earth or other foreign substances .
num .
fill the replaced slab area with concrete and thoroughly consolidate by rodding spading and using sufficient vibration to form a dense homogeneous mass throughout the area .
num .
ensure the final surface area has a uniform appearance and is free of irregularities and porous areas .
the finished surface including joints shall meet a surface tolerance of num in .
in num ft num mm in num m in any direction .
for slab replacements done in preparation for resurfacing of the pavement the finished surface including joints shall meet a surface tolerance of num in .
in num ft num mm in num m in any direction .
perform necessary corrections by grinding according to section num .
the engineer may order replacement if any replaced slab is low in relation to adjacent slabs .
the engineer will require replacement if it is determined that excessive pavement grinding is necessary to match the profile of the full depth slab replacement or if grinding the adjacent pavement would create a drainage problem .
do the following at no additional cost to the department perform all necessary corrections furnish all necessary traffic control personnel materials and equipment to detect deviations .
grind or replace slabs to correct surface tolerance deviations if the project involves resurfacing or grinding the pavement surface a flat finish will be satisfactory .
otherwise a broom or handtine finish will be required that will produce a surface texture depth of num in .
nummm or greater as measured by gdt num .
the engineer shall approve the finishing method and any deficient areas corrected to his or her satisfaction and performed at your expense .
section numfull depth slab replacement num d. curing concrete use the applicable portions of section num regarding concrete mix and curing in this work .
e. sawing and sealing joints establish transverse and longitudinal joints within the slab replacement area by doing the following num .
saw and seal the joints with silicone sealant that meets the requirements of subsection num .
seal according to plan details and section num .
num .
ensure that the width of the sawed joints is num in num mm unless otherwise directed .
num .
saw and seal the joints as soon as possible but not more than num days after placing the slab unless the plans specify otherwise .
sawing and sealing of the reestablished joints is included in the bid cost for slab replacement .
f. protecting from rain properly protect the concrete from rain before the concrete hardens by following these guidelines num .
keep the materials to protect the concrete surface available at all times .
protective materials include burlap or cotton mats curing paper or plastic sheeting material .
num .
when rain is imminent stop the paving operations and begin covering the surface of the unhardened concrete with the protective covering .
g. working at night if night work is authorized on the project provide lighting for work performed at night for safety traffic control and work control and completion .
correct unsatisfactory work to the engineers satisfaction at no additional cost to the department .
h. opening to traffic schedule slab replacements so that the concrete will have a curing time of at least four hours .
complete the work and open the lanes to traffic before sunset the day it is placed unless authorized otherwise .
the engineer may require a longer curing period mix design adjustments or other corrective action to ensure sufficient concrete strength development before opening to traffic .
num quality acceptance a .
surface tolerance ensure that the finished surface tolerance including joints is num in per num ft num mm in num m in any direction .
make corrections by grinding according to applicable items in section num .
b .
quality of work complete work that meets the requirements in the specifications and plans .
until final acceptance of this work replace damaged or broken slabs due to the following improper or unsatisfactory methods equipment or materials construction or public traffic replace the slabs at no additional cost to the department .
the department may also require removal and replacement of repaired slabs with a differential movement at the transverse joints greater than num in num mm at no cost to the department .
the department will measure the movement using an num lb num kg singleaxle load with dual tires and with the axial load centered num ft num mm from the edge of the shoulders as close to the transverse joints as possible .
section numfull depth slab replacement num testing will be done between num am and num am when slab movement is the greatest .
the movement will be measured using dial gauges that can detect movement to the nearest numin num mm . .
the engineer will determine whether the slab movement test is required .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement full depth replacement slabs are measured for payment by the cubic yard meter using the average squared dimensions times the average depth .
dowels and dowel placement are not measured for separate payment but are included in the unit price bid for full depth slab replacement .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment full depth replacement slabs will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials including dowels epoxy and numhour accelerated strength concrete performing work such as repairing shoulders if required removing unsatisfactory material sawing and sealing new joints and performing other work specified in this specification payment will be made under item no .
num full depth slab replacement per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numportland cement concrete whitetopping num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numfilter fabric for embankment stabilization num general description this work consists of placing filter fabric for embankment stabilization as shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numfabrics section numfilter fabric for embankment stabilization num b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use filter fabric that meets the requirements of subsection num filter fabric for embankment stabilization .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation prior to placing filter fabric remove logs stumps and any other objects from the ground surface that would tend to puncture the fabric .
leave grasses that have formed root mats in place to provide support for fabric placement .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. filter fabric placement place and protect filter fabric as follows num .
place filter fabric according to the locations and details shown on the plans .
num .
ensure the fabric is placed with the warp direction perpendicular to the roadway direction and sewn as shown on the plans unless otherwise directed .
num .
spread the filter fabric as uniformly as practical over the contour of the ground to avoid looseness .
num .
ensure field sewn seams are made with a lock stitch and comply with the requirements for factory seams as given in the material specifications .
num .
protect the filter fabric from chemicals and prolonged sunlight .
num .
replace any filter fabric damaged by neglect at no additional cost to the department .
b .
fill placement over fabric place fill over the filter fabric according to the plans and applicable portions of section num .
maintain at least num in num mm of soil between the fabric and any construction equipment .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
section numfilter fabric for embankment stabilization num num measurement this work is measured in square yards meters of accepted materials in place .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment filter fabric for embankment stabilization is paid for at the contract price per square yard meter complete and in place .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials placing materials sewing of fabric as required and for all labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to perform the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num filter fabric for embankment stabilization per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numindentation rumble strips num general description this work includes constructing rumble strips on paved shoulders or centerlines by milling or grinding num in num mm deep depressions into the finished surface as shown in the plans .
num definitions skip ground in place rumble stripsrumble strips placed with num ft num m of strips and num ft num m of clear space between .
continuous ground in place rumble stripsrumble strips placed continuously .
edge line rumble strips rumble strips placed continuously on the edge line traffic stripe .
centerline rumble stripes rumble strips placed continuously on the centerline traffic striping .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section numindentation rumble strips num num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a .
cutting tool use a cutting tool that meets these requirements has independent suspension from the power unit to allow the tool to selfalign with the slope of the shoulder is equipped with guides to provide consistent alignment of each line of indentations in relation to the roadway houses a single rotarytype millinggrinding head in line in the direction of travel the cutting tips on the millinggrinding head are arranged to provide a smooth cut with no more than num in num mm between the peaks and valleys num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. indentations form the rumble strip indentations as follows num .
for traveled ways opened to traffic install the indentations within ten calendar days .
num .
ensure the finished indentations conform to the following a. indentations have a concave circular shape and are spaced num in num mm center to center .
b .
skip continuous and centerline rumble strips indentation dimensions num in num mm wide with a num in num mm gap in the direction of travel num in num mm long when measured perpendicular to the direction of travel .
minimum num in num mm maximum num in num mm deep at center .
c. edge line rumble strip indentation dimension num in num mm wide with a num in num mm gap in the direction of travel num in num mm long when measured perpendicular to the direction of travel .
minimum num in num mm maximum num in num mm deep at center .
excess waste material resulting from the operation may be swept to the grassed shoulder and spread where applicable .
if an adjacent grassed shoulder is not available or if directed by the engineer remove and dispose of the waste material in a manner approved by the engineer .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
section numindentation rumble strips num num measurement indentation rumble strips are measured by the gross linear mile kilometer .
the plan quantity is the pay quantity unless the engineer makes authorized changes .
no deductions will be made for intersections ramps bridges or skips .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment will be made at the contract unit price bid per gross linear mile kilometer .
payment is full compensation for furnishing equipment and labor and for satisfactorily performing the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num indentation rumble stripsground in place continuous per gross linear mile kilometer item no .
num indentation rumble stripsground in place skip per gross linear mile kilometer item no .
num indentation edge linerumble stripsground in place continuous per gross linear mile kilometer item no .
num indentation centerline rumble stripsground in place continuous per gross linear mile kilometer num adjustments general provisions num through num section numgeogrid reinforcement num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numsealing roadway and bridge joints and cracks num general description this work includes removing the existing sealant material if applicable cleaning the joint and installing silicone sealant in the roadway and bridge joints specified on the plans .
the plans will designate the type of joint transverse or longitudinal location of joint mainline shoulder ramps accelerationdeceleration lanes type of joint roadway bridge to be resealed which type silicone to use type a b c or d the engineer will determine the roadway and bridge cracks to be resealed .
unless otherwise specified on the plans use type a silicone for roadway joints and use type d silicone for bridge joints .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
section numsealing roadway and bridge joints and cracks num num related references a .
standard specifications section numportland cement concrete section numconcrete structures section numjoint fillers and sealers section numepoxy resin adhesives b. referenced documents qpl num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section silicone sealant and bond breakers num epoxy resin adhesives num for a list of silicone joint sealant sources please see qpl num .
select and use bond breakers backer rod if required or tape according to subsection num.a.num bond breakers num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a .
air compressors use air compressors equipped with traps to remove surplus water and oil in the compressed air .
do not use contaminated air .
ensure that the compressor can deliver compressed air at a continuous pressure of at least num psi num kpa .
the engineer may check the compressed air for contamination .
b. silicone sealant pump apply silicone sealant by pumping only .
use a caulking gun with a cartridge for touchup work or small applications only .
use a pump with sufficient capacity to deliver the necessary volume of silicone to completely fill the joint in a single pass .
ensure that the nozzles size and shape closely fits into the joint to fill the joint with sealant with enough force to prevent voids in the sealant and to force the sealant to contact the joint faces .
section numsealing roadway and bridge joints and cracks num c. caulking gun use a caulking gun with cartridge for the following situations touch up work .
placing vertical runs of type a silicone in a bridge deck joint when type b c or d silicone is used in the horizontal runs .
sealing voids and cracks with type a silicone where type b c or d silicone which will be applied on top of the type a silicone might leak through .
sealing small cracks in the concrete .
num preparation before installing a bond breaker or sealant ensure that the joint is clean and dry .
complete all cleaning air blasting or air drying .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. resealing existing joints num .
remove existing sealant completely remove the existing sealant in the joints .
take care during removal and cleaning to prevent damaging or enlarging the existing width of the joint .
repair any damaged areas at no cost to the department .
num .
depth of existing joint determine if the joint depth will accommodate the required sealant thickness and bond breaker and provide the required recess below the riding surface .
consider that the backer rod is thicker after it is squeezed into the joint .
if necessary saw the existing joint deeper and wider to provide the joint depth and width specified on the plans .
num .
clean the joint thoroughly clean the joint of all foreign material including oil asphalt curing compound sealant adhesive paint rust and existing sealant if still present .
demonstrate to the engineer that the proposed method of cleaning old sealant or foreign material from joints will not widen the joints by more than num in num mm .
the method shall not alter the joint profile including rounding of the top corner or alter the texture of the concrete riding surface .
do not use chemical agents to clean the joint .
ensure that the cleaning process produces a new clean concrete face on the vertical faces of the joint .
b. sealing new joints num .
sawing saw the transverse and longitudinal joints according to the specifications and plan details .
a .
make the initial cut and wait for the concrete to harden enough to prevent spalling or raveling b .
make the second cut to the width and depth shown on the plans .
note do not use a gang saw to make a completed cut in a single operation .
c. if spalling of the sawed edge harms the joint seal patch the spall with an approved epoxy patching compound and allow it to fully cure before installing the joint sealant .
d. make each patch to the intended neat lines of the finished cut joint .
section numsealing roadway and bridge joints and cracks num num .
cleaning freshly cut sawed joints immediately after sawing the joint do the following a .
completely remove the resulting slurry from the joint and clean the immediate area by flushing it with a jet of water under pressure .
use other tools as necessary .
b .
when the surfaces are thoroughly clean and dry and immediately before placing the joint sealer use compressed air with a pressure of at least num psi num kpa to blow out the joint and remove dust traces .
c. if freshly cut sawed joints are contaminated before they are sealed clean them according to section num. d. ensure that cleaning methods do not alter the joint profile the rounding of the top corners or the concrete riding surface texture .
do not clean the joint with chemical agents .
c. sealing joints num .
install bond breakers select and use bond breakers backer rod if required or tape according to section num.a.num .
a .
before installing a bond breaker clean and dry the joint or crack .
before placing the bond breaker and sealant complete the cleaning air blasting or air drying .
b .
ensure that the backer rod diameter is at least num percent larger than the joint width .
c. install the backer rod in the joint at the depth specified on the joint detail in the plans as directed by the engineer and according to subsection num.b .
note the width of some bridge joints may require backup material other than the typically shaped round backer rod .
d. use material available in square or rectangular shapes or cut the strips from sheet stock to fit properly into the joint .
use approved bond breaking tapes in place of backer rod in some applications .
see plan details for various joint types .
num .
install silicone sealant install the silicone sealant immediately after cleaning the joint or crack and installing the bond breaker .
keep the joint or crack clean and dry .
if the joint or crack becomes contaminated damp or wet remove the bond breaker if it has been installed .
clean and dry the joint or crack and install a new bond breaker before placing the sealant .
follow these guidelines when placing the sealant a .
ensure that the air temperature during placement is at least num ºf num ºc .
b .
use a pump to apply the silicone sealant .
the pump must be able to completely fill the joint to the specified width and height of sealant in one pass .
use a nozzle with the proper size and shape to closely fit inside the joint .
the sealant must be introduced inside the joint with enough pressure to prevent voids in the sealant and to force the sealant into contact with the joint faces .
c. use a caulking gun with cartridge for touchup work small applications such as vertical runs with type a silicone in a bridge deck joint when type b c or d silicone is used and to seal voids and cracks with type a silicone where type b c or d silicone might leak through .
you may also use a caulking gun to seal small cracks in the concrete .
d. after placing type a silicone sealant tool it to provide the specified recess thickness and shape as shown on the plans .
apply sufficient force to the sealant in this tooling operation to force the sealant against the joint faces and to ensure proper wetting and bonding of the sealant to the joint faces .
type b c and d silicones are selfleveling and do not normally require tooling .
e. because of the consistency of type b c and d silicones ensure that the bond breaker completely closes off gaps and voids where the silicone might leak through .
section numsealing roadway and bridge joints and cracks num to ensure that the gaps are closed use any of the following methods stuff small pieces of backerrod into the gaps and voids place a piece of bond breaking tape over the void use type a silicone to seal the void .
if using type b c or d silicone and a backerrod ensure the backer rod is type m. do not use type l backer rod with type b c and d silicone .
f. place the sealant to conform to the specified recess and thickness shown in the plans .
num .
clean pavement after sealing a joint or crack immediately remove the surplus sealant or other residue on the pavement or structure surfaces .
num .
open to traffic do not permit traffic on the sealed joints or cracks until the sealant is tack free .
the sealant has cured enough to resist displacement from slab movement or other causes .
debris from traffic does not imbed into the sealant .
num .
special requirements the following requirements apply to this work a. seal the joints and cracks for any one days work on resealing projects within num calendar days after surface grinding for that day is completed unless otherwise specified on the plans .
seal joints on new pavement after the curing period .
when the plans call for resealing before specified grinding increase the recess depth and joint depth by num to num in num to num mm to compensate for the depth of the pavement removed during the grinding operation .
b .
the engineer will determine all cracks to be resealed .
c. route cracks to the depth specified on the plans by wet or dry sawing with diamond or abrasive blades .
remove sawing residue or other contaminants .
d. if the manufacturer recommends a primer use it according to the recommendations .
when required install primer before the backup material .
e. seal the bridge joints including the approach slab specified on the plans .
only reseal nonarmored joints onesealant receptacle and concrete surfaces on joint faces unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
num quality acceptance if a sealed joint fails due to any of the following reasons it will be rejected .
adhesion or cohesion failure of joint material unsatisfactory or improper quality of work damage by operations or public traffic damage to the sealant from displacing because of slab movements or insufficient curing before opening to traffic repair the joint to the engineers satisfaction at no additional cost to the department .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement when listed as a pay item in the proposal joints and cracks sealed and resealed will be measured in linear feet meters .
section numsealing roadway and bridge joints and cracks num no separate measurement and payment will be made unless a pay item for the work is included in the proposal .
if no pay item is included in the proposal include the cost of the joint sealing and resealing in the overall bid price submitted .
no separate measurement or payment will be made for any sawcutting required to seal or reseal the joint .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment when listed as a pay item in the proposal joints and cracks sealed or resealed will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials equipment tools labor and incidentals to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num resealing roadway joints and cracks type___ per linear foot meter item no .
num resealing bridge joints type___ per linear foot meter item no .
num sealing roadway joints and cracks type___ per linear foot meter item no .
num sealing bridge joints type___ per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numconcrete structures num general description this work consists of manufacturing and using portland cement concrete to construct structures .
see the contract plans for the specified color and locations for placing integrally colored concrete .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numscope of work section numbridge excavation and backfill section numgrind concrete pavement section numprestressed concrete bridge members section numreinforcement steel section numwaterproofing fabrics section numdampproofing section numconcrete barrier section numcoarse aggregate section numfine aggregate section numportland cement section numconcrete structures num section numspecial surface coating for concrete section numgraffitiproof coating for concrete section numreinforcement and tensioning steel section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members b. referenced documents astm a numm astm a numm astm a num astm c num astm c num astm d num type i or type ii aashto specifications aashto m num or c num aashto m num aashto m num aashto t num aashto t num aws d num laboratory standard operating procedure quality assurance for ready mix concrete plants in georgia standard operating procedure for ready mix concrete american iron and steel institute specification for the design of cold formed steel structural members federal specification ttpnumd type ii georgia standards num and numl qpl num qpl num qpl num gdt num dot num num submittals a .
concrete mix designs the contractor is responsible for all concrete mix designs .
ensure that concrete mixes contain enough cement to produce workability within the waterratio specified in table numconcrete mix table below .
design concrete mixes that meet the requirements of the table numconcrete mix table below .
the office of materials will determine the concrete properties using the applicable method in section num of the sampling testing and inspection manual .
section numconcrete structures num table numconcrete mix table english class of concrete num coarse aggregate size no .
num num minimum cement factor lbsydnum max water cement ratio lbslb num slump acceptance limits in lowerupper num num entrained air acceptance limits lowerupper minimum compressive strength at num days psi aaa aanum aa a b cs num num num num num num graded agg .
num num num num num num .num .num .num .num .num num num num num num num num num num num num num½ num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num metric class of concrete num coarse aggregate size no .
num num mini mum cement factor kgmnum max water cement ratio kgkg num slump acceptance limits mm lower upper num num entrained air acceptance limits lowerupper minimum compressive strength at num days mpa aaa aanum aa a b cs num num num num num num graded agg .
num num num num num num .num .num .num .num .num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num notes num .
portland cement may be partially replaced with fly ash as provided in subsection num.d.num or with granulated iron blast furnace slag as provide for in subsection num.d.num .
num .
specific size of coarse aggregate may be specified .
num .
lower limit is waived when air entrained concrete is not required .
num .
the mixture will be capable of demonstrating a laboratory compressive strength at num days of num psi num mpa num r. compressive strength will be determined based upon result of six cylinders prepared and tested in accordance with aashto t num and t num .
where r difference between the largest observed value and the smallest observed value for all compressive strength specimens at num days for a given combination of materials and mix proportions prepared together .
section numconcrete structures num num .
designed slump may be altered by the office of materials when type f water reducers are used .
num .
minimum cement factor shall be increased by num lbsydnum num kgmnum when size no .
num coarse aggregate is used .
num .
when class a is specified for bridge deck concrete the entrained air acceptance limits shall be num to num .
submit all concrete mix designs to the office of materials om for review .
the department will approve mixes that contain materials from approved sources and produce concrete that meets these specifications .
submit concrete mix design proportions for approval by one of the following methods num .
request approval of specific proportions when requesting approval of specific concrete mix design proportions for classes of concrete include the following information source of each material apparent specific gravity of the cement and the fly ash if used bulk specific gravity saturated surface dry of each aggregate percent absorption of each aggregate amount of each material required to produce a cubic yard meter of concrete proportions of admixtures per cubic yard meter of concrete and any use limitations proposed slump and air content of the design evidence that the proposed mixture complies with subsection num concrete mix designs that do not have a proven performance record and have not been used by the department must meet minimum laboratory strength requirements .
num .
obtain readymix design proportions for commonly used materials get approved concrete mix designs from authorized readymix concrete plants .
readymix concrete plants approved according to laboratory standard operating procedure quality assurance for ready mix concrete plants in georgia are authorized to submit concrete mix designs for approval .
see qpl num for a list of approved plants .
num .
use laboratorydesigned proportions for commonly used materials use laboratorydesigned concrete mix proportions from either of the following sources a. laboratorydesigned proportions are available for commonly used combinations of materials .
request these mixes in writing from the state materials engineer .
request specific classes of concrete and specify the source of ingredients .
b .
select a combination of materials from approved sources and request that the laboratory determine a mix that meets requirements in the table numconcrete mix table above .
the laboratory will establish proportions for strength and workability under laboratory conditions .
b .
delivery tickets have the concrete plant transmit delivery tickets dot form num with each load of concrete delivered to the work site .
give the engineer one of these delivery tickets .
ensure that the following information is on the delivery ticket project designation date time class and quantity of concrete section numconcrete structures num actual batch proportions free moisture content of aggregates quantity of water withheld concrete mixing revolutions if available forms do not provide the required information ask the engineer to provide one .
c. formwork plans the engineer may require detailed formwork plans for review .
if so prepare the formwork plans and submit them to the engineer .
in no case will the contractor be relieved of responsibility for the formwork plans .
when constructing permanent steel bridge deck forms submit bar support details and types to the department for approval before placing the deck form reinforcement .
d. falsework plans submit for review by the engineer detailed falsework plans for spans under which traffic flows .
the engineer may require plans for spans that do not accommodate traffic .
e. shop and erection drawings submit fabricators shop and erection drawings to the engineer for review and approval .
indicate the following in the drawings grade of steel physical and section properties for permanent steel bridge deck form sheets locations where the forms are supported by steel beam flanges subject to tensile stresses f. hauling vehicle information before hauling starts on new bridges submit the following information for each vehicle weight on each axle empty weight on each axle fully loaded centertocenter distances of axles centertocenter distances of wheels measured parallel to each axle g. cold weather concrete curing and protection plan secure the engineers approval of a cold weather concrete curing and protection plan for bridges and structures .
emphasize protection for the underside of bridge decks when using metal forms and include the protection procedures to be used .
protection procedures shall keep the concrete above num f num c for num hours after placement and above freezing for num days after placement .
choose the protection method from table num based on the expected temperature within num hours after concrete placement .
section numconcrete structures num table numcold weather protection protection procedure expected temperatures within num hours heated enclosures below num f num c commercial blankets below num f num c batt insulation below num f num c heavyduty polyethylene num f numc or above h. color additives submit to the engineer the following num .
product data manufacturers specifications and instructions for color additives .
num .
samples for concrete color selection submit sample chip of specified color indicating color additive number and required dosage rate .
submittals are for general verification of color .
num materials ensure that materials meet the specification requirements of table num table nummaterials specifications material section coarse aggregate num num fine aggregate size no .
num num dampproofing or waterproofing material bituminous num portland cement num num portlandpozzolan cement num num admixtures airentraining admixtures num retarding admixtures num water reducing admixtures num granulated iron blastfurnace slag num.a.num fly ash num.a curing agents num joint fillers and sealers num special surface coating num linseed oil num.a .
mineral spirits num.a.num water num graded aggregate num num graffiti proof coating num section numconcrete structures num material section concrete used in bridge construction num.f num .
use either class a or class b coarse aggregate of the designated size except when using limestone or dolomite in bridge structures .
when using limestone or dolomite use class a coarse aggregate .
num .
use type i or type ii portland cement or type ip portlandpozzolan cement unless otherwise specified .
do not use air entraining cement .
num .
the gradation requirements of graded aggregate are modified to require num to num by weight passing the no .
num num mm sieve .
construct bridge sections containing duct enclosures for stressing tendons using concrete with a maximum stone size of no .
num .
use concrete manufactured at plants that qualify as approved sources according to the standard operating procedure for ready mix concrete .
see qpl num for a list of approved plants .
for a list of approved deck oil protective surface treatment sources see qpl num .
use colored concrete additive made with pure concentrated mineral pigments especially processed for mixing into concrete and complying with astm c num .
if adding color additives to the mix at the jobsite furnish color additives in premeasured mixready disintegrating bags to minimize jobsite waste .
do not use accelerator admixtures containing calcium chloride in colored concrete mix .
num delivery storage and handling a .
aggregate stockpile stockpile aggregate as follows num .
keep stockpile areas firm reasonably level welldrained clean and free of sod or foreign matter .
num .
stockpile aggregate separately by type and source .
num .
form stockpiles using methods and equipment that do not cause the aggregate to segregate become contaminated or degrade .
the engineer may reject improperly formed stockpiles .
num .
stockpile aggregate long enough for the moisture content to stabilize .
num .
do not use aggregates stored in pits or silos that contain water .
b .
aggregate handling operate aggregate handling equipment carefully to minimize segregation breaks spills contamination and mixing of the sizes and types of aggregates .
c. cement storage store cement as specified below .
reject all caked lumpy or contaminated cement .
num .
bulk cement use bulk cement unless the engineer allows bag cement to be used .
store bulk cement in bins or silos designed for this purpose .
provide moistureproof storage containers with a mechanism that allows cement to flow freely from the discharge opening .
num .
different brands store and use cement of different brands and types or from different mills separately .
d. admixture storage and handling carefully store and dispense admixtures as recommended by the manufacturer to prevent contamination .
section numconcrete structures num e. concrete handling and placing handle and place concrete according to the following num .
haul time limitations ensure that concrete reaches its final position in the forms within one hour after adding the cement to the aggregates .
if retarders or water reducers are used the allowable time limit increases to num hours .
test concrete immediately for acceptance tolerances before placing in forms using limits established in table numconcrete mix table .
num .
placement limitations after delivering the concrete to the job site or the staging area at the site or after mixing the concrete at the site transport it carefully to the placement point to prevent excessive slump loss or segregation .
use any of the following equipment buckets buggies pumps other approved means f. form storage store forms off the ground .
g. precast unit handling except as noted below the applicable portions of subsections num delivery storage and handling num.a prepare bearing areas num.b erecting psc bridge members and num.d concrete finish shall govern .
handle precast nonprestressed units as follows num .
do not lift the units from the casting bed until the concrete reaches a strength of at least num psi num mpa .
num .
do not transport or erect the units until they reach a strength of at least num psi num mpa .
num .
restrict live loads including erection equipment on the units until they reach a minimum strength of num psi num mpa .
h. color additives comply with manufacturers instructions .
deliver to site or batch plant in original unopened packaging .
store color additives in dry conditions .
num construction requirements num personnel a .
supervision personnel and skilled workers provide enough supervision personnel and skilled workers to do the following num .
properly produce place and finish concrete in each pour unit according to subsection num.p table num minimum placement rates or as required by the plans .
num .
check screed clearances and tolerances before beginning deck pours .
num .
place concrete without delays .
b .
plant operator certification volumetric proportioning requires that the operator be certified by the office of materials .
section numconcrete structures num num equipment a .
equipment restrictions do not use delivery conveyance or vibratory units that leak grout water oil or gas .
provide enough equipment tools and materials to properly produce place and finish concrete in each pour unit according to the subsection num.p table numminimum placement rates or as required by the plans .
the engineer may prohibit equipment that delays concrete placement .
b. volumetric proportioning equipment when concrete ingredients are proportioned volumetrically obtain the engineers approval for the equipment and its calibration and operation .
ensure the following the equipment meets the specifications in astm c num .
the concrete producer conducts calibration tests at least every num months .
the equipment is calibrated for each new concrete mix before production .
c. batching plant equipment ensure that batching plants have the following equipment and that the equipment meets the standards listed .
num .
bins ensure that bins and bin compartments meet the following standards adequate capacity for the required concrete production supported on a rigid framework on a stable foundation capable of holding the bins securely designed to discharge efficiently and freely into the weigh hopper positive means of control that slows down and shuts off the material flow when the weigh hopper has the correct quantity .
discharging mechanisms that prevent material leaks when closed leakfree aggregate storage bins divided aggregate storage bins for fine aggregate and each size of coarse aggregate partitioned aggregate storage bin compartment that prevents the materials from mixing leakproof moistureproof cement bins with a vibrator or other mechanism to discharge cement num .
weigh hoppers ensure that weigh hoppers meet the following standards have suitable containers freely suspended from scales have adequate capacity to maintain the subsection num.p table numminimum placement rates have a discharge mechanism that prevents material leaks when closed have vents to permit air to escape have vibrators or other equipment that ensures complete and efficient discharge of materials have a dust seal and a port or valve for sampling cement num .
scales scales used for weighing concrete materials shall have accuracy within plus or minus one percent under operating conditions .
ensure the following when directed by the engineer the owner demonstrates the accuracy of the scales .
section numconcrete structures num scales are kept clean and in good operating condition .
the scale operator can clearly see indicating devices .
the scale operator can easily access controls .
d. mixers and agitators ensure that mixers and agitators meet the following requirements num .
general requirements for mixers and agitators provide mixers and agitators that meet these requirements a .
capacity plates ensure that the mixer or agitator has a legible metal plate or plates attached in an easily visible location .
the plates shall indicate the rated capacity in cubic yards meters for mixing and agitating .
c. concrete production the mixer shall produce concrete that meets the requirements in the table numconcrete mix table .
d. mixer performance test the mixer or agitator may be required to pass a mixer performance test .
mixer performance will be evaluated at the discretion of the engineer .
mixer performance tests will include the following by the omr num taking samples of concrete at the onequarter and threequarter points of the batch discharge num measuring the slumps of each concrete sample if the two slump values differ by more than num in num mm do not use the mixer or agitator until it meets the requirements of the test .
the engineer may permit the equipment to be used if the num in num mm tolerance can be met by using a longer mixing time or a smaller batch .
num .
mixing speed follow these guidelines for mixing speed do not exceed num revolutions at mixing speed .
discharge all concrete from truck mixers before drum or blades reach num revolutions including revolutions at agitating speed .
use the mixing speed defined by the manufacturer for the mixing equipment .
if the manufacturers definition of mixing speed is not available use a mixing speed of num to num revolutions per minute .
num .
mixer and agitator maintenance maintain mixers and agitators as follows a .
when mixers and agitators are discharged remove the entire contents before adding materials for the next batch .
b .
clean mixers and agitators often to prevent concrete and grout accumulation .
c. do not discharge cleaning water into any pipe catch basin or structure .
d. if cement or aggregates accumulate in mixers and agitators when cleaning water is discharged remove them immediately at no expense to the department .
num .
mixer types use stationary mixers or truck mixers .
a. stationary mixers ensure that stationary mixers meet the following standards num combine the concrete ingredients into a homogeneous uniform mass within the specified time and when loaded to capacity .
section numconcrete structures num num efficiently and uniformly discharge the concrete within the tolerances allowed in subsection num.d.num.c mixer performance test .
num permit discharge only after the specified mixing time has elapsed using a locking device .
b .
truck mixers ensure that truck mixers meet the following standards meets the requirements listed in subsection num.d.num.a stationary mixers has an approved revolution counting device in good operating condition does not haul more than the rated capacity in cubic yards meters as shown on the attached capacity plates num .
agitator types use truck agitators or truck mixers operating at agitating speed .
ensure that agitators meet the following requirements a .
keeps the mixed concrete in a homogeneous uniform mass b .
efficiently and uniformly discharges the concrete within the tolerances allowed in subsection num.d.num.c mixer performance test e. concrete buckets keep concrete buckets clean and in good working condition .
f. concrete buggies keep concrete buggies clean and in good working condition .
g. concrete pumps concrete pumping equipment is subject to the engineers approval .
use pumping equipment that has adequate capacity and is suitable for the proposed work .
h. chutes and troughs do not use chutes longer than num ft num m without the engineers permission .
flush chutes and troughs with water after each run .
do not discharge this water into freshly placed concrete or into conveyance unit .
promptly remove hardened concrete from chutes and troughs .
ensure that chutes and troughs meet the following requirements num .
metal or metal lined num .
slope not exceeding one vertical to three horizontal num .
baffles or a series of short lengths placed to reverse the direction of the concrete flow when used on steep slopes i .
pipes or tubes use pipes or tubes to place concrete when the operation requires dropping the concrete more than num ft num m. thoroughly clean the pipes or tubes after each pour .
use pipes made of metal or other approved material and long enough to deposit the concrete as close to its final position as possible .
j. vibrators provide enough vibratory units including at least one additional standby unit in good working condition to compact concrete immediately after it is placed .
have a standby unit at the site before each pour is started .
section numconcrete structures num on projects consisting entirely of small pours num yd³ num m³ or less the engineer may waive the standby requirement .
ensure that vibrators meet the following conditions approved internal rotationtype design a power supply that constantly vibrates the concrete at frequencies of not less than num impulses per minute a vibration intensity that visibly affects a mass of concrete with a num in num mm slump through at least a num in num mm radius k. screeds do not use vibratory screeds screeds that use a transverse strikeoff motion without the engineers approval .
use screeds that are mechanically operated designed and constructed to screed with the strikeoff parallel to the center line readily adjustable capable of maintaining proper adjustment throughout the screeding operation the two screed types are num .
longitudinal screeds unless otherwise noted on the plans use longitudinal screeds only on pour lengths of num ft num m or less .
num .
transverse screeds use transverse screeds on any pour unless otherwise noted on the plans .
however transverse screeds are required on pour lengths above num ft num m. support screeds outside the pour area that will receive a surface finish .
do not use intermediate supports or guides .
adjust screeds to the camber specified on the plans .
check the camber as often as necessary .
have the engineer approve the following for screeds and their supports weight durability adjustability accuracy mechanical condition operational results furnish the equipment necessary to check screed clearances and tolerances before pouring decks .
l. underwater placement equipment place concrete under water using the following underwater placement equipment num .
tremie use a tremie when depositing concrete in water above num ft num m deep .
ensure that tremie is at least num inches in num mm diameter constructed in sections with watertight couplings num .
bottom dump bucket where the engineer permits use a bottom dump bucket in water up to num ft num m deep .
ensure that the bottom of the bucket opens only when it touches the surface that receives the charge and that the top of the bucket has a lid or cover .
section numconcrete structures num m. fogging equipment to supply additional moisture to the concrete use fogging equipment with the following characteristics a heavyduty pump capable of delivering num gal num l of water per minute to a num in num mm diameter tip at an air pressure of num psi num kpa .
an example of a suitable pump is the alemite pump numa .
the ability to consume approximately num ft³min num m³min of compressed air a num in num mm inside diameter hose long enough to reach all areas of the deck an adjustable spray gun and tip to provide various patterns of atomized spray or fog for changing finishing conditions an example of a suitable spray gun is the gun jet no .
num with a num multee jet nozzle .
if necessary substitute other equipment that is capable of equal performance .
num preparation a. prepour conference before beginning deck placement operations on each project and for individual deck pours of an unusual nature the engineer will schedule a prepour conference with project supervisory personnel and a representative of the concrete supplier if applicable .
conference topics of discussion include the following reinforcing steel support method final screed setting check anticipated placement rate personnel number equipment type curing methods adverse weather placement procedures emergency procedures other workrelated details num fabrication a .
measure materials measure materials as follows num .
cement .
weigh bulk cement on scales to plus or minus one percent of the designated weight .
if the engineer allows bag cement proportion the batch to use only whole bags .
num .
aggregates .
weigh all aggregates on scales to plus or minus two percent of the designated weight .
apply the proper corrections for aggregate surface moisture .
num .
water .
measure water by volume or weight to within plus or minus one percent .
a. construct the measuring system to be independent of water pressure fluctuation .
b .
ensure that measuring systems have outside taps and valves to facilitate plant calibrations .
c. you may use recycled wash water provided that it meets the requirements of subsection num .
num .
admixtures .
measure admixtures by weight or volume within plus or minus three percent of the required amount .
b .
control concrete batching control batching as follows section numconcrete structures num num .
mix batches of concrete according to the proportions of an approved mix design .
num .
ensure that concrete materials are from the designated sources .
num .
correct the batch weights to account for surface moisture in aggregates .
num .
conduct batching control tests according to the procedures in the sampling testing and inspection manual .
c. prestressed concrete deck panel requirements do not use prestressed concrete deck panels unless approved by the engineer .
d. add admixtures to concrete additives are required when specified herein or as directed by the engineer .
num .
airentraining admixtures a .
all bridge structure concrete uses airentraining additives except for seal concrete and nonexposed footings .
b .
the contractor may use airentraining additives in other concrete to improve workability when job or material conditions dictate .
when using airentraining additives as an option to improve workability or when required do not exceed the upper limit of the entrained air content requirement in the table numconcrete mix table .
num .
retarding admixtures use concreteretarding additives in bridge concrete when the average temperature is above num f num c the average of the expected high and the predicted low .
a .
normally concreteretarding additives are not required for bridge curbs handrails crosswalks or other appurtenances constructed separately from the decks .
b .
the engineer may waive the use of retarders in substructure concrete when concrete can be placed within one hour after batching .
num .
waterreducing admixtures the contractor may use waterreducing admixtures in class aa concrete for bridge decks when conditions do not require a retarder .
the contractor may use waterreducing admixtures in other concrete when job or material conditions dictate a reduction in water requirements or when minimal set retardation is desired .
the laboratory may allow type f waterreducing admixtures when the contractor requests it .
the contractor may construct bridge sections containing duct enclosures for stressing tendons with concrete using type f aashto m num water reducer as approved by the laboratory .
num .
fly ash the contractor may use fly ash as an additive in concrete to promote workability and plasticity .
the contractor may use fly ash as a partial replacement for portland cement in concrete if the following limits are met a .
replace no more than num percent of the cement by weight .
b .
replace cement with fly ash at the rate of num to num lbs num to num kg of fly ash to num lb num kg of cement .
c. ensure that the fly ash mix meets the requirements of subsection num.a subsection num portland pozzolan cement and subsection num.a fly ash .
d. calculate watercement ratio based on the total cementious material in the mix including fly ash .
e. do not use type ip cement in mixes containing fly ash .
num .
granulated iron blastfurnace slag if highearly strengths are unnecessary the contractor may use granulated iron blastfurnace slag as a partial replacement for portland cement in concrete if the following limits are met a .
replace no more than num percent of the cement by weight .
b .
replace the cement with slag at the rate of num lb num kg of slag to num lb num kg of cement .
c. ensure that the slag mix meets the requirements of subsection num.a.num subsection num portland blastfurnace cement and subsection num.a.num granulated iron blastfurnace slag section numconcrete structures num d. calculate the watercement ratio based on the total cementitious material in the mix including granulated iron blast furnace slag .
e. do not use type ip cement or fly ash in slag mixes .
e. mix concrete num .
centralmixed concrete mix centralmixed concrete as follows a .
establish the mixing time .
the engineer will determine the mixing time for central mixed concrete but the minimum mixing time will be one minute for stationary mixers of up to num yd³ num m³ capacity .
mixing time may be adjusted in the following situations the engineer will increase the minimum time by num seconds for each additional cubic yard meter or fraction thereof .
for mixers with a capacity above num yd³ num m³ the minimum mixing time may be num seconds if the resulting mixture is homogeneous and meets the requirements of subsection num.d.num.c mixer performance test .
the engineer may waive mixing time requirements for stationary mixers of improved types or new designs that produce homogeneous concrete in less time than that established for a particular capacity by the foregoing .
for these types of mixers the engineer may establish a minimum mixing time of one minute .
b .
start the mixing time when all cement and aggregates have been placed in the mixer .
c. add some water to the mixer before adding the cement and aggregates but ensure all water is in the mixer by the end of the first num of the specified mixing time .
num .
shrinkmixed concrete mix shrinkmixed concrete as follows a .
mix the batches as specified in subsection num.d.num.mixers and agitators .
b .
do the initial mixing in a stationary mixer for at least num seconds to thoroughly mix the ingredients .
do the final mixing in truck mixers .
c. discharge all concrete before the drum or blades exceed num revolutions .
d. do not allow truck mixing at mixing speed to exceed num drum or blade revolutions except as allowed when adding water according to subsection num.m add water to concrete .
num .
transitmixed concrete mix transitmixed concrete as follows a .
for concrete mixed completely in a truck mixer place all concrete ingredients into the mixer at the concrete plant except the quantity of water that may be withheld according to subsection num.m add water to concrete .
b .
after loading the truck begin operating at either agitating or mixing speed however start the mixing speed within num minutes after loading the truck mixer .
c. mix the concrete for num to num revolutions at mixing speed .
for revolutions above those specified for mixing speed use agitating speed .
d. discharge all concrete before exceeding num drum or blade revolutions .
num .
coloredmixed concrete a .
proportion batch and mix color additives in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
mix until color additives are uniformly dispersed throughout mixture and disintegrating bags if used have disintegrated .
b .
if mixed at batch plant schedule delivery of concrete to provide consistent mix times from batching until discharge .
section numconcrete structures num f. concrete used in construction num .
requirements use type i or type ii portland cement or type ip portlandpozzolan cement for bridge construction unless otherwise specified .
notes num .
do not use airentraining cement .
num .
do not use accelerators numhour accelerated strength concrete that contain chlorides in any bridges where the concrete containing the additive will contact the reinforcing steel .
a .
concrete types use the tabulated results from the table numconcrete mix table for the classes and specific requirements for each class of concrete .
use the appropriate class of concrete shown in the plans or specifications for each component of a structure of the type as follows class aaaprestressed concrete class aanumprecast concrete as called for on the plans if approved by the engineer you may use this class as high earlystrength concrete and may use type iii cement in concrete used for this purpose .
the engineer may also specify the rate of compressive strength development when this concrete is used note the department will not add compensation to the contractor for class aanum concrete when it is used at the request of the contractor .
b .
class aabridge superstructure concrete or precast concrete as called for on the plans c. class ageneral purposes note do not airentrain class a concrete deposited in water seal concrete .
ensure that the concrete has num percent additional cement and sufficient water to provide a num to numin num to nummm slump .
d. class bmassive sections or lightly reinforced sections or miscellaneous nonstructural concrete e. class csportland cement concrete subbase .
use this class as a subbase where required by the plans .
concrete subbase may be composed of a mixture of portland cement and graded aggregate or portland cement aggregate and sand .
num .
acceptance of design determine laboratory acceptance strength by at least num compressive test specimens prepared and cured according to aashto t num. a .
make the specimens from two or more separate trial batches .
b .
make an equal number of specimens from each batch .
c. calculate the minimum average strength or acceptance strength x as follows x fc nums where fc required minimum compressive strength for each class of concrete from the table numconcrete mix table s average standard deviation of all numday specimens made in the field representing concrete of a given class from all readymix plants use the standard deviations shown in table num section numconcrete structures num table numstandard deviations for calculating acceptance strength class of concrete standard deviation s psi mpa b num num a num num aa num num aanum num num aaa num num num construction a .
meet general responsibilities general construction responsibilities include num .
batch mix deliver and place concrete according to the specifications .
num .
have enough production and placement capacity to continuously mix place and finish the concrete in each pour unit during daylight hours .
if necessary place concrete at night when adequate lighting facilities exist and the engineer approves of the operations and facilities .
num .
if a pour can not be completed do the following a .
form an approved construction joint .
b .
remove the partial pour .
c. take other remedial measures directed by the engineer at no additional expensed to the department .
num .
schedule placement to minimize exposure of freshly poured concrete to potentially harmful drying elements such as wind and sun before curing materials are applied and protect freshly poured concrete from exposure to excess moisture and freezing for a minimum of num hours when such weather conditions exist .
b. construct falsework accept responsibility for the design construction protection and performance of falsework .
repair or remove and replace as the engineer directs concrete other material or portions of the structure that are damaged or destroyed due to falsework failure .
construct falsework for prestressed posttensioned concrete structures according to the contract special provisions .
construct falsework for structures other than posttensioned box girders as follows num .
meet design criteria ensure that falsework structural components that have similar functions in an individual permanent span have the same geometric properties and are made of the same materials .
when designing and centering formwork treat concrete as a liquid and use the following weights num lbsft³ num knm³ for vertical loading num lbsft³ num knm³ for horizontal loading num lbsft² num knm² live load for deck placement operations use the following falsework design criteria design and construct falsework logically so the bridge design office can analyze it using a commonly accepted structural design theory .
avoid exceeding safe working values for material stresses .
section numconcrete structures num provide support for the imposed loads without settling or deforming and a way to compensate for settlement if it occurs .
num .
support falsework support falsework using one of these methods support on piling driven and removed as directed found on a footing approved by the engineer num .
construct falsework construct and set falsework to provide the finished structure the specified camber and finished grade .
place telltales at locations directed by the engineer to observe how much the falsework settles .
c. meet form design criteria ensure that forms meet the following design criteria provide wet concrete and other loads and forces of construction support without bulging between the supports or bracing and without deviating from the lines and contours shown on the plans .
meet the design criteria for falsework in subsection num.b.num meet design criteria .
account for the use of retarded concrete .
ensure that bracing ties and supports are placed accurately .
if the formwork appears to be inadequately supported tied or braced before or during concrete placement the engineer may require that the work stop until the defects are corrected .
d. use acceptable form materials except as noted fabricate forms from the following materials lumber plywood metal plastic combinations of these use material free of defects that materially affect form strength or materially impair the accuracy or appearance of the concrete surface .
use the form materials as follows num .
lumber forms construct wood forms as follows a .
size and dress the lumber .
b .
use lumber at least num in num mm thick .
c. use lumber for header forms used as screed supports and for curb face forms at least num in num mm thick .
d. avoid using scrap material or doing patchwork .
e. stagger all joints but those between abutting panels .
f. line the lumber used to form outside vertical surfaces of exterior beams or girders with an approved form liner .
g. use chamfer strips millproduced from highquality lumber free of defects .
h. dress and finish chamfer strips on all three sides .
i .
size chamfer strips to the proper dimensions .
num .
plywood forms construct plywood forms as follows section numconcrete structures num a .
if plywood is the type made for general concrete forms and is at least num in num mm thick use it in place of num in num mm thick lumber to construct forms if necessary .
b .
ensure that plywood used to form open joints and to line forms is at least num in num mm thick .
c. when nailing plywood directly to form studs do not space the studs more than num in num mm apart .
d. use plywood in full sheets wherever practical .
do not do patchwork with small irregular pieces .
e. have the engineer inspect and approve plywood sheet layout .
num .
metal or plastic forms construct metal or plastic forms as follows a .
use metal or plastic to form concrete only if the engineer approves the forms and if the forms produce satisfactory results .
b .
use metal forms that produce finished concrete equal to or superior to concrete made from comparable wooden forms .
c. countersink bolts and rivets in the surfaces of metal forms that touch concrete .
d. grind welds smooth in the surfaces of metal forms to provide a smooth plane surface .
num .
other material uses use tempered fiberboard for form liners when necessary if it is at least num in num mm thick .
use tempered fiberboard num in num mm thick only to form open joints .
support the fiberboard with suitable spacers arranged properly .
use approved synthetic materials for forming open joints and for other special uses if necessary .
e. construct form supports construct form supports using metal ties anchors and hangers as follows num .
construct supports that will remain in the finished concrete so they can be removed from the concrete face to a depth of at least num in num mm without damaging the concrete .
num .
weld form supports to girder or beam flanges in continuous or cantilever spans only in the flange areas which are in compression .
num .
when ordinary wire ties or snap ties are permitted cut them back at least num in num mm from the face of the concrete .
num .
design metal tie fittings that minimize the cavities made when they are removed .
fill all cavities after removing metal tie fittings .
f. construct temporary forms construct temporary forms as follows num .
construct and maintain forms in a mortartight condition .
num .
construct forms so that they can be removed easily without damaging the concrete unless using forms that will remain in place .
num .
build line and brace forms so that the formed concrete surface conforms with the dimensions lines and grades shown on the plans .
num .
build headwall forms for skewed pipe parallel to the roadway centerline or at right angles to the radius on curves .
construct headwall forms as follows a .
lay enough pipe to extend through the headwall form .
b .
after the concrete is poured and hardened carefully cut and dress the protruding pipe ends so no ragged edges remain .
the contractor may choose as an alternate to the above method to build a circular form that exactly fits the pipe circumference and face of the headwall form .
num .
construct form liner using plywood or other approved form liner as follows a .
use form liner in large sheets .
do not do patchwork .
section numconcrete structures num b .
avoid irregular joint location in form liners .
c. have the engineer inspect and approve the proposed liner layout .
num .
bevel forms at beam copings girders and other projections to ease removal .
num .
place chamfer strips to chamfer exposed edges of the concrete by the required amount .
use ¾ in num mm chamfers unless otherwise shown on the plans .
num .
patch with tin or other metal only in those areas of the superstructure lying between and including the inside faces of the exterior beams .
num .
when shown on the plans splice water stops to form continuous watertight joints .
hold stops in position while placing concrete .
num .
immediately before erecting forms or just before placing bar reinforcement steel coat forms with a clear oil or other bond breaker to keep concrete from sticking to the forms .
a .
do not allow the substance to stain or soften the concrete surface .
b .
do not apply by reaching or pouring through previously placed reinforcement steel .
num .
wait to place concrete in any form until the department inspects and approves the form .
inspection and approval does not diminish the responsibility to produce concrete surfaces free of warping bulging or other defects .
num .
when removing forms remove chamfer strips blocks and bracing .
num .
do not leave any part of a wooden form in the concrete .
num .
if concrete surfaces do not meet finish specifications correct the problems with the following steps as directed by the engineer repair the defects using approved methods .
remove and replace the affected portion of the work .
g. reuse forms reuse forms and form material in good condition and satisfactory as determined by the engineer .
do not use forms or form materials that are warped cracked split bulging have separated plies or have unsatisfactory form liner .
ensure that used forms are mortar tight and produce a finished concrete equivalent to that produced by new forms .
h. construct permanent steel bridge deck forms for concrete deck slabs unless otherwise designated on the plans construct and use permanent steel bridge deck forms for concrete bridge deck slabs according to these specifications .
do not use permanent steel bridge deck forms in panels where longitudinal deck construction joints are located between stringers .
provide a structurally satisfactory slab when using permanent steel bridge deck forms .
num .
fabricate permanent steel bridge deck forms and supports from steel that conforms to astm a numm designation ss grade num coating designation gnumznum and astm a numm .
num .
design permanent steel bridge deck forms as follows a .
account for the dead load of the following form reinforcement steel plastic concrete b .
add num lbsft² num knm² for construction loads .
c. ensure that the unit working stress in the steel sheet does not exceed num of the specified minimum yield strength for the material furnished .
however do not allow the unit working stress to exceed num psi num mpa .
d. account for deflection under the weight of the forms the plastic concrete and the reinforcement as follows section numconcrete structures num num if deflection exceeds num of the design span or num in num mm whichever is less use intermediate supports .
num do not base deflection on a total load of less than num lbsft² num knm² .
e. base the permissible form camber on the actual dead load condition .
f. do not use camber to compensate for deflection that exceeds the above limits .
g. compute the form sheets design span using the clear span of the form plus num in num mm measured parallel to the form flutes .
h. compute physical design properties according to the requirements of the latest published edition of the american iron and steel institute specification for the design of cold formed steel structural members .
i .
ensure that all bottom reinforcement has a minimum concrete cover of num in num mm as shown in figure num figure num metric .
figure num figure num metric j .
maintain the plan dimensions of both layers of primary deck reinforcement from the top surface of the concrete deck .
k. do not use precast mortar blocks to support the deck reinforcement .
l. do not treat permanent steel bridge deck forms as lateral bracing for the compression flanges of supporting structural members .
num .
do not weld to flanges in tension or to structural steel bridge elements fabricated from nonweldable steel grades .
have welders certified by the department weld metal deck forms or supports for metal deck forms .
i .
install forms install and maintain forms in a mortartight condition and according to approved fabrication and erection plans .
place transverse construction joints at the bottom of a flute .
field drill num in nummm weep holes no less than num in num mm on center along the line of the joint .
section numconcrete structures num num .
highway bridge forms install highway bridge forms using either method num or method num method num .
place forms so the ribs of the forms align with how the bottom transverse reinforcing in the slab is spaced .
method num .
place forms with a num in num mm minimum clearance between the top of the form and the bottom of the main deck reinforcement .
see figure num figure num metric .
num .
railroad bridge forms install railroad bridge forms as follows a .
place the forms so the tops of the form ribs adjacent to the beam flange are at the bottom of the deck slab specified by the plans .
b .
maintain the full slab depth detailed on the plans .
c. do not allow form ribs to project above the plan bottom of the deck slab .
d. do not place form sheets directly on top of the stringer or floor beam flanges .
e. securely fasten form sheets to form supports using selfdrilling screw fasteners not by welding .
if the engineer approves use fastener pins driven into place by a power tool .
f. ensure that form sheets have a minimum bearing length of num in num mm at each end .
g. do not leave loose sheets or accessories on the deck at the end of a days work .
h. place form supports so that they contact the flange of the stringer or floor beam .
i .
attach form supports using welds bolts clips or other approved means .
j .
do not weld form supports to the flanges of nonweldable steel or to portions of the flange subject to tensile stresses .
k. ensure that welding and welds comply with aws d num for fillet welds .
however num in num mm fillet welds are permitted .
j .
repair damaged forms repair permanently exposed form metal to the engineers satisfaction if the galvanized coating is damaged .
num .
clean the damaged area .
num .
go over the damaged area with a wire brush .
num .
paint the area with two coats of zinc oxidezinc dust primer that meet federal specification ttpnumd type ii and has no color added .
num .
do not touch up minor heat discoloration in weld areas .
k. construct runways provide runways into a deck pour area for moving buggies .
if the engineer approves use runways to bridge a previous pour that has not reached the minimum strength or age requirements in subsection num.af.num live loadspouring equipment .
construct and support runways to protect the forms and the reinforcement steel position .
l. construct work bridges provide a work bridge on deck pours .
support the bridge outside the area of the pour receiving a surface finish .
if two or more spans will be poured on the same day the engineer may require two work bridges .
design and construct work bridges to meet the following do not allow the bridge to sag into the fresh concrete .
construct the bridge so that transverse finish and curing material can be applied easily regardless of the screed type .
section numconcrete structures num m. add water to concrete add water to the concrete at the concrete plant .
do not add indiscriminate amounts of water at the job site .
if placement conditions require concrete of a more workable consistency add small amounts of water at the job site if approved by the engineer .
add water at the job site as follows num .
determine the quantity of water required to provide the necessary consistency .
the engineer will not approve additions of water that cause the total amount of water to exceed the maximum watercement ratio established in the table numconcrete mix table .
the engineer will reject concrete with water added to it that produces a higher slump than specified in the table numconcrete mix table .
num .
do not add water to concrete that has begun to set because of excessive mixing or to concrete that has exceeded mixing or haul time limitations .
num .
when adding the water carefully control the conditions .
num .
position the delivery so the measuring operation is not affected .
num .
measure the water carefully .
num .
inject the water into the mixer forcefully to facilitate uniform mixing .
num .
add water before discharging an appreciable amount of concrete .
num .
do not add more water after concrete discharge begins .
num .
after adding the water mix the concrete an additional num revolutions .
num .
finish mixing the concrete before the total revolutions at mixing speed exceed num .
n. volumetrically proportion concrete concrete ingredients may be proportioned volumetrically when nonair entrained concrete is used in miscellaneous concrete nonexposed footings or culverts smaller than bridge culvert size .
o .
prepare for concrete placement prepare for concrete placement as follows num .
ensure that an adequate supply of concrete will be furnished and placed to meet the requirements specified in subsection num.p table numminimum placement rates .
num .
to ensure a full bond between prestressed concrete deck panels and the castinplace concrete clean the panel before placing the slab concrete .
num .
immediately before placing castinplace slab concrete saturate the prestressed concrete deck panels with water .
num .
immediately before placing concrete in the forms the concrete will be measured for acceptance tolerances .
acceptance tolerances for each class of concrete are listed in the table numconcrete mix table .
conduct the applicable tests according to the procedures in the sampling testing and inspection information .
p. meet the minimum placement rates if concrete is not produced placed and finished according to the minimum placement rates the engineer may reject the pour .
concrete pours of a similar nature and size will not be allowed until the problem is corrected and the placement rate met .
the minimum placement rates are listed in table num section numconcrete structures num table numminimum placement rates for bridges culverts and retaining walls num .
bridge substructure pour size in cubic yards meters minimum placement rate in cubic yards meters per hour num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num and over num and over num numor as designated on the plans or in the special provisions the minimum placement rate for columns shall be the same as for culvert sidewalls and wingwalls .
num .
bridge superstructure pour size in cubic yards meters minimum placement rate in cubic yards metersper hour num num num num num num num num num num num num num and over num and over num num or as designated on the plans or in the special provisions pour handrail parapet curb and barriers at a rate satisfactory to the engineer .
num .
culverts structure minimum placement rate in cubic yards metersper hour footings and slabs same as for bridge substructures sidewalls and wingwalls use placement rates so that fresh concrete is not placed on concrete that has attained its initial set .
cover all concrete with fresh concrete within num minutes .
num .
retaining walls structure minimum placement rate in cubic yards metersper hour footings same as for bridge substructures walls same as for culvert sidewalls and wingwalls q .
place concrete place concrete as follows num .
do not allow aluminum to touch the concrete while mixing transporting handling or placing it .
num .
transport handle and place concrete quickly so that it reaches its final position in the forms within the haul time limitations in subsection num.e.num haul time limitations .
num .
manipulate the delivery or conveyance unit to avoid vibration damaging to partially set concrete .
num .
immediately before placing the concrete thoroughly clean and wet the forms .
num .
place concrete as close as possible to its final position in the forms .
num .
use chutes troughs or tubes to pour the concrete in the forms without displacing reinforcement steel .
num .
modify or stop using the equipment if chutes troughs or tubes cause honeycombed or otherwise inferior concrete .
num .
when placing concrete by pumping operate the pumping equipment so that the concrete is produced in a continuous stream without air pockets .
section numconcrete structures num note convey and place concrete by pumping only when specified in the contract or when authorized by the engineer .
num .
when concrete placement requires dropping the concrete more than num ft num m use pipes or tubes to place the concrete .
do not allow concrete to freefall more than num ft num m from the pipe or tube .
num .
place concrete in horizontal layers no more than num in num m thick .
num .
place and compact succeeding batches in each layer before the preceding batch takes its initial set .
num .
place each succeeding layer before the underlying layer sets .
num .
consolidate the concrete to avoid cold joints between layers .
num .
if the forms sag or bulge while concrete is being placed remove the concrete causing the distortion and the concrete in adjoining areas if the engineer requires .
removal prevents cold joints and displaced or damaged reinforcement .
num .
work the concrete around reinforcement bars without displacing them .
num .
compact concrete using suitable tools and vibration .
num .
vibrate concrete where it is deposited and vibrate other concrete while it is fresh .
vibrate as follows a. insert and withdraw vibrators slowly .
b. manipulate vibrators to work the concrete around reinforcement and embedded fixtures and into corners of forms .
c. vibrate sufficiently to compact the concrete but avoid causing the concrete to segregate .
d. stop vibrating before local areas of grout are formed .
e. apply vibrators no farther apart than twice the radius through which the vibration is visibly effective .
f. do not use vibrators or any other means that could cause segregation to move masses of concrete in the forms .
g. do not apply vibrators to sections of concrete that are no longer plastic .
h. vibrate concretefilled steel grid floors by applying the vibrators to the steel .
i. vibrate concrete for precast or prestressed units as specified above in steps a through g unless the engineer approves alternate methods .
j .
stop vibration when a mortar line appears on the face of the form and when the coarse aggregate particles are submerged in the concrete mortar .
num .
supplement vibration with spading to ensure smooth surfaces and dense concrete along form faces and in locations difficult to reach with vibrators .
num .
after concrete sets initially do not disturb the forms or the projecting reinforcing bars .
r. create construction joints place construction joints according to the plans or as directed by the engineer .
if an emergency affects continuous placement the engineer will decide if a construction joint is allowed .
if allowed the engineer will provide instructions about where and how to make the joint .
the engineer may eliminate certain construction joints if placement finishing and forming methods can produce satisfactory results .
create construction joints as follows num .
remove mortar splashed on form surfaces and projecting reinforcement steel before concrete reaches its initial set .
a .
do not puddle dried mortar chips and dust into the plastic concrete .
b .
if excess mortar is not removed from reinforcement steel before the concrete reaches its initial set delay cleaning until the concrete is thoroughly hardened .
num .
if joining fresh concrete and hardened concrete clean the hardened surface of laitance and incompletely bonded loose or foreign material .
section numconcrete structures num ensure that laitance is completely removed from the following joints between decks and curbs tops of seal courses construction joints in concrete exposed to sea water num .
ensure that the surface of the concrete is dry before pouring the concrete against it .
num .
immediately before placing fresh concrete tighten the forms against the existing concrete .
num .
use tremies or pumps to coat areas where fresh concrete will be poured with mortar or cement grout .
num .
begin placing concrete immediately after placing the mortar or grout .
num .
apply enough vibration to blend the material with the concrete at the construction joint .
s. protect fresh concrete do not drive pile blast or perform other operations that vibrate the formwork or the concrete noticeably before the concrete reaches a strength of num psi num mpa and is num days old .
protect fresh concrete from rainfall with waterproof material such as tarpaulins or plastic film .
ensure that the waterproof material is ready before pouring and is sufficient to cover the area of the pour .
t. place bridge deck concrete do not use calcium chloride or any other admixture containing chloride salts in concrete placed on permanent steel bridge deck forms .
ensure that the tolerances are accurate for bar reinforcement placement in castinplace concrete so the top clearance to the bar reinforcement complies with subsection num.g.num bridge deck slab tolerances .
place bridge deck concrete according to the contract specifications and as follows num .
before pouring decks set substantial bulkheads or headers and shape them to the required deck surface cross section .
num .
ensure that pouring sequences procedures and mixes comply with the plans and specifications .
num .
pour the deck according to the numbered sequence as follows a .
unless otherwise shown on the plans pour each deck in one continuous operation .
b .
when dividing deck pours within any one complete unit a simple span or a continuous or cantilever unit pour and finish the concrete in the numbered sequence shown on the plans beginning with the lowest number .
c. make pours with the same number before pours with higher numbers .
make pours with the same number in any sequence .
the numbered sequence shown on the plans also applies to sidewalk pours but it need not apply to curb parapet and handrail pours .
d. pour diaphragms between steel or prestressed concrete roadway beams at least num hours before pouring the deck slab .
e. unless otherwise authorized by the engineer pour all diaphragms within a complete unit before pouring decks .
f. when constructing concrete tbeams place girder stems in uniform layers before placing slabs .
g. if tbeam spans are supported without intermediate false bents begin deck placement as soon as the first four stems are placed .
after the first four stems avoid getting more than three stems ahead of the advancing line of the deck pour and lagging by more than the space between stems .
h. if tbeam spans are supported by intermediate false bents place decks and stems the same as for tbeam spans supported without intermediate false bents .
however ensure that the slab is placed before a cold joint develops between the stem and slab .
num .
do not make the deck pour until any previously poured concrete in the complete unit has set for num hours .
this requirement may be waived under certain conditions if the succeeding pour can be completed except for final finishing within four hours of the initial placement of the day .
the engineer must give written approval for this requirement to be waived .
section numconcrete structures num unless otherwise shown on the plans do not place handrail sidewalks parapets and curbs in a complete unit until all the deck slabs in the unit have been poured .
num .
ensure that the pour is the same as the overlap direction as shown in the shop drawings .
num .
use the following deck pour method a .
if there is superelevation begin deck pours on either the high or the low side .
b .
dump each batch against previously placed concrete .
c. pour at a rate that ensures fresh concrete along the advancing line of the pour .
d. vibrate or tamp concrete dumped on fresh concrete to make the grout flow as follows forward with or slightly ahead of the concrete along the bottoms and sides of the forms around the reinforcement steel num .
once the concrete is poured vibrate it enough to avoid honeycomb and voids especially at the following locations construction joints expansion joints valleys and ends of form sheets screed the concrete as follows a .
use finishing devices operating parallel to the center line .
as pouring proceeds keep the concrete surface screeded to the required grade .
b .
fill depressions ahead of the screed and keep a small roll of grout on the leading edge of the screed .
perform further screeding with minimum disturbance to the surface already brought to the grade .
c. take care during the placement and screeding to obtain sound concrete at the construction joint located where the slab joins the curb parapet or sidewalk .
d. do not place excess grout on the leading edge of the screed and do not allow it to remain in this area .
e. use either a longitudinal screed or a transverse screed .
longitudinal screed before doing the final screeding place enough concrete in front of the screeding position to deflect the dead load .
transverse screed on beam or girdersupported spans with skew angles of num or less place and operate the truss or beam supporting the strikeoff parallel to the skew and make the advancing pour line parallel to the skew .
on beam or girdersupported spans with skew angles between num and num position the screed either on the skew or at right angles to the bridge center line .
on superstructures supported by nondeflecting falsework and on beam or girdersupported spans with a total dead load deflection no more than num in num mm position the screed at right angles to the bridge center line and make the advancing line of pour at right angles to the bridge center line .
f. as the pouring proceeds keep the concrete surface screeded to the required grade .
g. fill depressions ahead of the screed .
keep a small roll of grout on the leading edge of the screed .
h. continue to screed without disturbing the surface already brought to the required grade .
i .
avoid producing unsound concrete where the slab joins the curb parapet or sidewalk .
remove excess grout from the leading edge of the screed at these construction joints .
num .
edge joints to be sealed including dummy joints as follows a .
edge before the initial set or after the final set .
b .
if edging before the initial set use edging tools of the proper radius as shown on the plans .
c. carefully remove concrete from pouring operations on adjacent pours to achieve the required rounded edge .
d. if edging after the final set allow the joints to harden .
after at least num hours grind joints to approximate the plan radius either by hand or by mechanically operated grinding stones .
e. to achieve full and uniform bearing finish areas that are recessed for receiving joint members .
section numconcrete structures num num .
finish bridge decks as follows a .
as soon as the concrete is hard enough and standing water and moisture sheen disappear give the concrete a final finish by belting brooming or dragging .
belt longitudinally using a wet canvas belt .
limit belting to spans no longer than num ft num m. drag transversely or longitudinally with a wet burlap drag .
broom transversely using a stiffbristled broom .
b .
finish the following areas carefully gutter lines joints drains c. after belting dragging or brooming and when shown on the plans groove the bridge deck and approach slabs perpendicular to the center line as follows num do not begin grooving until the bridge deck is cured according to subsection num.z cure concrete .
num if necessary groove in conjunction with planing required to make the surface corrections specified in subsection num.d bridge deck surface check .
wait until the concrete is hard enough to support the equipment without distorting .
num cut grooves into the hardened concrete using a mechanical saw device capable of producing grooves num in num mm wide num in num mm deep and num in num mm apart centertocenter .
num extend the grooves across the slab to within numft num mm of the gutter lines .
u .
place concrete parapet on bridge decks place concrete barrier or parapets on bridge decks .
the slip form method with an approved selfpropelled extrusion machine as specified in section num is optional .
v. place seal concrete deposit concrete in water only when required by the plans or when considered necessary by the engineer .
when depositing the seal concrete follow these guidelines keep the water as motionless as possible .
place the concrete continuously from beginning to end .
ensure that the concrete surface remains as horizontal as possible .
place seal concrete as follows num .
place seal concrete carefully in a compacted mass as near to its final position as possible using a tremie a bottom dump bucket or other approved means .
a .
use tremies to place seal concrete as follows num support tremies so that the discharge end can move freely over the entire top surface of the work .
num support tremies so that they can lower rapidly to stop or retard the flow of concrete .
num at the beginning of the work close the discharge end to keep water out of the tube .
num keep the tube sealed .
num keep the tremie tube full to the bottom of the hopper .
num when dumping a batch into the hopper induce concrete flow by slightly raising the discharge end and keeping it within the previously deposited concrete .
this maintains a seal and forces the concrete to flow into position by hydraulic head .
b .
use bottomdump buckets to place seal concrete as follows num ensure that the bottomdump bucket is level full .
num open the bucket only when it rests on the surface that will receive the charge .
section numconcrete structures num num in lowering and raising the bucket do not move the water unnecessarily .
c. when approved by the engineer place seal concrete by pumping .
num .
wait at least num hours after placement to begin dewatering seal concrete unless the engineer determines a longer waiting period is necessary .
num .
remove laitance from the seal concrete before placing the footing .
num .
bore seals under spread footings the entire depth of the seal as specified for foundations in subsection num.c boring of foundations and seals .
num .
if laitance buildup on seals under spread footings exceeds num inft num mmm of seal depth the engineer may decide to core the seal to determine acceptability .
num .
when placing concrete exposed to sea water control the water content to produce concrete of maximum density and create construction joints and prepare their surfaces according to the requirements of subsection num.r create construction joints .
w. pour cs concrete pour cs concrete as follows num .
meet cs concrete depth and surface finish requirements .
ensure that the minimum depth is the same as shown on the plans .
do not vary the depth variation more than num in num mm .
ensure that the surface finish is generally smooth and uniform .
smooth or fill float marks voids and other deformities exceeding num in num mm before placing approach slabs .
num .
to prevent bonding a .
lay clean polyethylene sheeting uniformly over the cs concrete in the approach slab area before placing the slabs .
b .
use new unused polyethylene sheeting free of holes rips and tears .
c. use polyethylene bondbreaking material at least num mils num mm thick with an overlap of at least num in num mm .
num .
maintain polyethylene sheeting in good condition throughout the construction process .
repair or replace sheeting deemed unsatisfactory as directed by the engineer .
num .
cure cs concrete with the polyethylene sheeting used for bond breaking .
x. pour concrete in cold weather when pouring concrete in cold weather keep the concrete temperature at the point of delivery at least num f num c. do not use acceleratorcontaining chlorides .
mix and pour concrete in cold weather as follows num .
keep concrete materials at the right temperatures .
do not use materials in concrete mix that contain frozen lumps .
do not incorporate water and aggregates into the mix with temperatures more than num f num c. if aggregates or water temperatures are above num f num c discharge the aggregates and water into the mixer and allow the temperatures to equalize before adding the cement .
heat aggregate with steam hot water coils or other methods that do not damage the aggregates .
do not heat aggregates with direct flame .
num .
protect the poured concrete .
keep concrete above num f num c for at least num hours after placement .
protect concrete from freezing for num days after placement .
section numconcrete structures num y. pour concrete in hot weather reduce hazards and difficulties related to placing and finishing concrete in hot weather before pouring the engineer may require measures to prevent concrete workability reduction losses from cement hydration evaporation drying or elevated concrete temperatures .
num .
place concrete cool forms and reinforcement with water immediately before placing concrete .
meet the minimum placement rates specified in subsection num.p table numminimum placement rates .
num .
keep concrete cool keep concrete cool as follows a .
keep the concrete used for construction at no more than num f num c when measured at the point of discharge from the delivery unit .
b .
if the concrete temperature might exceed num f num c during concrete placement begin placement when the air temperature cools if the engineer requires .
c. cool the aggregates by fogging or other means that do not affect moisture content .
d. use chipped or crushed ice in the mix as a portion of the mixing water on a pound kilogram basis .
if using ice ensure that the ice melts before the batch is discharged from the mixing unit .
e. if necessary cool water by refrigeration to provide a lower concrete temperature .
num .
finish concrete do not splash on water to aid screeding or finishing operations .
for bridge decks fog the surface when required according to subsection num.z.num bridge deck curing .
if needed use wind screens to prevent thermal or shrinkage cracks caused by rapid concrete surface drying .
z .
cure concrete concrete curing is an integral part of the concrete placement operation .
improperly cured concrete will be considered defective .
if the engineer determines that curing procedures do not comply with these specifications stop placing concrete .
resume concrete placement after taking remedial measures to ensure proper curing .
begin curing unformed surfaces when the water sheen disappears from the surface or immediately after applying the surface finish .
continue curing for num days .
cure the formed surfaces after removing the forms .
remove them within num days after placing concrete .
continue curing until the concrete is num days old from the time it is poured .
cure concrete surfaces exposed to air using methods that prevent premature drying or moisture loss .
ensure that curing conditions are the same throughout separate curing areas .
use either or a combination of the two methods specified for curing concrete except bridge decks .
cure bridge decks as described in subsection num.z.num bridge deck curing .
cure colored concrete in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
num .
general curingsupplying additional moisture do not use a method that causes the concrete to be alternately wet and dry .
cure concrete properly by supplying additional moisture through ponding sprinkling or fogging and then retaining the moisture as follows a .
use cotton mats burlap sand hay or straw coverings .
cover with at least num in num mm of sand .
cover with at least num in num mm of hay or straw .
b .
do not use sawdust or coverings that cause unsightly discoloration of concrete .
c. place coverings after completing the finishing operations when there is no danger of surface damage .
section numconcrete structures num d. keep coverings moist continuously .
num .
general curingpreventing moisture loss keep concrete moist before and during the rubbing from the type iiirubbed finish .
start curing immediately after the rub using approved waterproof paper plastic sheets or membraneforming curing compounds except when curing compounds are prohibited .
a. waterproof paper or plastic sheets ensure that the sheets and paper meet the requirements of aashto m num and use them as follows use the widest possible widths .
lap adjacent sheets at least num in num mm .
seal the laps with tape mastic glue or other approved methods to form a waterproof cover of the entire area .
keep the curing material from being displaced by wind .
immediately replace or repair sheets or paper that tear break or become damaged during the curing period .
b. membraneforming curing compounds use as the curing agent aashto m num membraneforming curing compounds type numd class a or b or type num class a or b white pigmented .
use the curing agent as follows do not use membraneforming curing compounds on bridge decks or prestressed concrete bridge members or in construction joint areas .
when the water sheen disappears from the concrete surface apply the curing compound uniformly to unformed areas .
apply the compound to formed surfaces if the forms are removed during the numday curing period .
cure the areas to be rubbed with liquid membraneforming compounds for curing concrete typenumd class a or b nonacrylic .
apply curing compound with finespraying equipment .
thoroughly agitate the compounds just before using them .
spray the surface again immediately after the first application at right angles to the first application .
apply at least num gal num l for each num ft² num m² of surface .
do not apply curing compound to the following joints where a concrete bond is required reinforcement steel joints where joint sealer will be placed close the surface to pedestrian or vehicular traffic for num days unless the surface is protected by planks plywood or a layer of sand at least num in num mm thick .
do not place this protection until at least num hours after applying the curing compound .
num .
bridge deck curing cure bridge deck concrete as follows a .
immediately after the water sheen disappears and the surface finish is applied fog the surface to keep a film of water on the surface .
b .
if surface damage occurs delay fogging .
c. keep the surface wet until after applying the sheet curing covers .
d. thoroughly soak curing covers on the fabric side .
e. as soon as the concrete sets enough to prevent damage apply the covers with the whitepoly side up .
f. use twolayer sheet curing material for bridge concrete according to aashto m num .
section numconcrete structures num for the bottom layer use a polyethylene film .
for the top layer use a white burlap polyethylene sheet or a white copolymercoated absorbent nonwoven synthetic fabric .
g. ensure that sheet curing material for bridge concrete meets specification requirements for reflection and moisture retention and has no holes or tears .
h. use enough sheet curing material to cover the deck surface .
i .
place the curing covers so that adjoining sheets overlap at least num in num mm .
j .
weight all laps and side edges to prevent cover displacement before curing is completed .
k. weight and overlap covers so the curing sheets maintain intimate contact with the concrete surface .
l. if there is no moisture under the curing covers during the numday curing period apply additional moisture .
num .
parapet sidewalk end post and curb face curing the surface of parapets sidewalk end post and horizontal and vertical faces of curbs are not considered part of the bridge deck .
cure these structures using the general curing methods in subsections num.z.num general curing supplying additional moisture and num.z.num general curingpreventing moisture loss unless the surfaces will receive a special surface coating subsection num.ab.num type iiispecial surface coating finish .
do not cure surfaces receiving a special surface coating with membraneforming curing compounds .
do not cure surfaces receiving protection surface treatment num percent boiled linseed oil and num percent mineral spirits solution with membraneforming curing compounds that contain acrylics .
aa .
prevent plastic shrinkage cracking take precautions to prevent plastic shrinkage cracking of concrete by doing the following provide wind screens provide fogging equipment apply temporary wet coverings before moisture loss begins the engineer will evaluate the effects of plastic shrinkage cracks and will require repair of cracks that create structural defects and corrode reinforcement steel .
ab .
finish concrete concrete surface finishes are classified according to whether the surfaces are formed or unformed .
refer to table num .
when other sections of the specifications for concrete work state that the requirements of section num apply finish the concrete according to the other sections .
table numconcrete finish types surface finish type formed type iordinary formed surface finish type iispecial formed surface finish type iiirubbed finish type iiispecial surface coating finish unformed type ivfloated surface finish type vsidewalk finish type vistair tread finish except for bridge deck finishes which are covered in subsection num.t place bridge deck concrete step num finish all structural concrete surfaces with one or more of the finishes described here unless otherwise shown on the plans .
section numconcrete structures num num .
type iordinary formed surface finish complete formed concrete surfaces with this finish .
however leave concrete exposed directly to sea water undisturbed unless the engineer requires additional work .
see subsection num.v place seal concrete step num .
achieve a type i finish as follows a .
immediately after removing the forms remove fins and surface irregularities .
b .
fill or point up the following cavities produced by forms or ties holes broken corners or edges defects honeycombed edges c. remove and patch honeycombed areas to sound concrete .
d. use patch mortar that consists of the same sand and cement as the concrete .
use the sand and cement in the same ratio as in the concrete .
use epoxy mortars in areas where heat generation and moisture will not decrease patch performance .
e. cure the patches using one of the general curing methods specified in subsection num.z.num general curingsupplying additional moisture and num.z.num general curingpreventing moisture loss .
f. produce a sound and uniform finish .
g. if the type i finish is not satisfactory give the surfaces a type iiirubbed finish where the engineer considers it necessary to achieve a uniform and pleasing appearance .
num .
type iispecial formed surface finish give a type ii finish to the following exposed portions of pipe headwalls and culverts parapets and wingwalls ends of culvert slabs and walls achieve a type ii finish as follows a .
use a form liner unless the forms are made of plywood or steel .
b .
rub only when necessary if the surface has a pleasing uniform appearance after completing the type i finish and blending all pointed and patched areas .
c. if the surface finish is not satisfactory give surfaces the type iiirubbed finish where the engineer considers it necessary to achieve a uniform and pleasing appearance .
num .
type iiirubbed finish apply a type iii finish to bridge areas checked in the table of bridge areas requiring a type iii finish below and to exposed areas of retaining walls unless the plans specify otherwise .
achieve a rubbed finish as follows a .
begin the first rub immediately after removing forms completing the type i finish and ensuring that all patches are thoroughly set but before applying the required curing compound .
if finishing is postponed or there is not enough labor to keep it uptodate the engineer will order a stop to any other work until the finishing is satisfactory .
b .
rub chamfered surfaces only once but not during the first rubbing .
rub chamfered surfaces during either the second or the final rubbing .
c. to rub wet the moist concrete on the curing surface with a brush and rub with a mediumcoarse carborundum stone or equal abrasive until a paste comes to the surface .
keep the entire concrete surface moist during rubbing to assure adequate curing .
section numconcrete structures num d. continue rubbing until all form marks and projections disappear leaving a smooth dense surface with no pits or irregularities .
e. spread the paste material carefully and uniformly over the entire surface and leave it .
f. no earlier than num hours after the first rub do the final rub with a fine carborundum stone or equal abrasive leaving a smoothly textured surface that is uniform in color .
g. finish the final rub before applying protective surface treatment required by the plans .
h. do not whitewash finished areas by using separately mixed grout or paste on the rubbing stone or by spreading it on the surface to be rubbed .
i .
thoroughly clean and blend into the surrounding surfaces any areas that are disfigured by drips from concrete placement or rubbing .
num .
type iiispecial surface coating finish a type iiispecial surface coating finish may be substituted for a type iiirubbed finish .
section numconcrete structures num the special surface coating finish consists of either a class a or a class b coating system applied to produce a masonrylike textured finish on concrete surfaces .
for contiguous structures whether in the same contract or in separate contracts use the same brand of special surface coating .
if contiguous structures are in separate contracts coordinate the work with the other contractor so that coating is applied as near as possible to the same time .
if contractors can not coordinate work the one who finishes the work last shall use the same brand or shall recoat all contiguous areas to provide a uniform appearance .
achieve a special surface coating finish as follows a .
ensure that surface coating material meets the requirements of section num .
select coating material from the qpl num. b .
do not use form oils that affect the bonding of surface coatings .
c. do not use waxbased or other curing compounds incompatible with surface coatings .
have the coating manufacturer or the laboratory determine compatibility .
d. use the coating color required in section num. e. on surfaces that will receive a coating finish do not cure with membranecuring compound or remove forms with bondbreaking agents or excessive oil .
f. apply coatings as follows class a coatings at a rate that develops a num in num mm thick coating .
apply class b coatings at a maximum rate of num ft² per gallon num m² per liter .
ensure that the temperatures of the air concrete and compound are above num f num c. apply a test section as directed by the engineer to determine the acceptance of a coating under field conditions .
apply the coatings using a method that produces an acceptable finish such as spraying rolling or a combination of these .
g. protect coated surfaces from rain or freezing temperatures for num hours after application .
h. ensure that the final coating produces a smoothly textured surface that is uniform in color thickness and appearance .
i .
remove and reapply coatings that chip crack blister peel or present an unsatisfactory appearance .
j .
if the final appearance is unsatisfactory apply a rubbed finish to slipformed and formed walls and barriers .
num .
type ivfloated surface finish use a type iv finish only on the horizontal surfaces of the following curbs and sidewalks tops of caps and footings surface of slope paving other similar structures apply the type iv finish as follows a .
after compacting the surface and screeding to the correct cross sections float the surface with a wood float .
b .
while floating the surface bring enough mortar to the surface to achieve the desired finish but do not reduce the wearing quality of the surface .
c. make the final finish with a wood float or stiffbristle broom .
d. if brooming make the marks transverse to the traffic .
num .
type vsidewalk finish apply a type v finish as follows a .
after placing and compacting the concrete strike it off and give it a type iv finish .
section numconcrete structures num b .
use an edging tool on all edges and along expansion joints unless the plans require chamfers .
c. mark off sidewalk surfaces in blocks with suitable grooving tools when required by the plans or the engineer .
d. extend the rubbed finish on the traffic face of the curb to include the horizontal area of sidewalk between the curb corner and the longitudinal sidewalk groove .
num .
type vistair tread finish achieve a type iv finish using a stiffbristled broom .
ac .
remove forms do not remove forms and their supports including falsework until the engineer approves .
use a removal method approved by the engineer .
approval does not relieve responsibility for the safety of the work .
num .
form removal time use a removal time shown on the plans or specified by the engineer .
use table num to help establish when forms can be removed safely .
however do not count days where the temperature at any time during the day is at or below num f num c unless the cold weather concrete protective measures described in subsection num.g cold weather concrete curing and protection plan were used .
table numestimate of form removal time form time required bottom of beams num days bottom of caps trestle pile bents num days bottom of all other caps num days overhangs and slabs including culverts num days columns and retaining walls num to num hours sides of beams posts rails caps footings wingwalls and parapets num to num hours bottoms of castinplace rails and diaphragms num hours front face of curbs num hours if using highearly strength concrete the engineer may reduce the time limitations if the concrete develops satisfactory strengths .
num .
form removal method remove forms and falsework without injuring the concrete surface or overstressing the concrete members .
ensure that the stress from the weight of the removal process is transferred gradually and uniformly to the concrete .
at the contractors request time of removal may be controlled by field tests on cylinders subject to the following conditions a .
no tests will be performed until concrete is a least num day s old .
b .
required strengths will be shown on the plans as noted elsewhere in these specifications or as determined by the engineer .
c. the engineer may specify a minimum time in conjunction with minimum strength requirements .
d. falsework and forms for culverts may be removed at such time as num of the concrete design strength is achieved .
ad .
apply protective surface treatment when the plans specify a protective surface treatment apply a boiled linseed oil mixture of num percent boiled linseed oil and num percent mineral spirits by volume to the concrete surfaces .
section numconcrete structures num use linseed oil that meets the requirements of astm d num type i or type ii .
use a quality commercial mineral spirit that passes infrared spectroscopic analysis to the satisfaction of the laboratory .
unless otherwise noted on the plans or the manufacturers recommendations apply the mixture as a preservative seal coat to the top surfaces of bridge decks curbs and sidewalks and to the inside vertical faces of curbs parapets and end posts .
protect metal handrailing and metal handrail posts from treatment .
apply the protective surface treatment as follows caution because the linseed oilpetroleum spirits mixture has a low flash point and is readily flammable protect the mixture from fire especially cigarettes and sparks .
prohibit traffic from the treated area until the engineer determines the concrete has regained its dry appearance .
num .
do not place the protective surface treatment until concrete work including final rubbing is completed and expansion joint sealing compound is placed .
num .
do not apply the treatment until the concrete is at least num days old .
num .
unless otherwise permitted by the engineer apply the treatment when the temperature of the concrete and air is at least num f num c. num .
apply in time to allow the treatment to dry thoroughly before allowing traffic including haul traffic on the structure .
if the structure meets the following exceptions apply the treatment after using the structure for hauling .
temperature limitations prohibit application .
the engineer will send a written notification to the contractor or bridge contractor if temperature requirements prohibit application .
the structure is absolutely required for hauling to complete a contract .
request a written approval from the engineer if hauling across a structure before the treatment is placed .
num .
if applying the treatment after using the structure for hauling thoroughly clean the surfaces to be treated to allow the treatment to penetrate completely .
num .
if there are separate bridge and roadway contracts have the roadway contractor clean the surfaces immediately upon request by the engineer .
num .
prepare the surface for the treatment as follows a .
clean off oil grime and loose particles that prevent the mixture from penetrating .
b .
ensure that the concrete surfaces have at least num hours to dry after rainfall or wet cleaning operations .
c. immediately before applying the treatment direct an air blast over the surfaces to remove dust .
d. mask the exposed plates of joints .
num .
apply the mixture by hand or by spraying in one application at the rate of num gal num l of mixture per num yd² num m² .
a .
thoroughly clean the inside of spraying equipment before putting the surface treatment in .
b .
keep spray nozzles within num in num mm of the concrete unless otherwise directed by the engineer plans or manufacturer .
ae .
apply graffitiproof coating when the plans specify a graffitiproof coating apply the coating system to concrete surfaces or over special surface coatings .
use material that complies with section num .
apply the coating as follows num .
clean loose particles dirt grease oil and other foreign particles off the surface .
num .
apply the coating according to the manufacturers recommendations for weather conditions material preparation section numconcrete structures num coating application number of coats af .
expose new concrete to loads prohibit dead or live loads during or after construction except as described in this section .
if using high early strength concrete the engineer may reduce time limitations if the concrete develops adequate strength .
num .
dead loads on the substructure after pouring footings do not begin work on columns or piers for at least num hours .
after pouring columns do not begin cap construction for at least num hours .
do not place beams on caps or place falsework and forming for concrete tbeam construction before the cap concrete reaches a minimum strength of num psi num mpa .
num .
dead loads on the superstructure if necessary stockpile construction materials on decks within a complete unit a simple span or continuous or cantilever unit if the following conditions exist the deck concrete of the complete unit reaches its numday cylinder strength .
the deck concrete is at least num days old .
the curbs are at least num days old .
the engineer must approve the location height and spread of the loads .
on compositedesign bridges those that have prestressed concrete beams or steel beams with shear connectors do not pour curbs parapets or sidewalks until the deck concrete reaches a minimum strength of num psi num mpa or is at least num days old .
num .
dead loads on concrete box culverts do not backfill any section of a concrete box culvert until the last concrete placed in that section is at least num days old unless early cylinder breaks indicate otherwise .
if early cylinder breaks indicate that design strength has been achieved backfill sections of culverts when the concrete placed last is at least num days old .
num .
live loadspouring equipment do not allow poweroperated concrete buggies to cross a deck until the concrete reaches a minimum strength of num psi num mpa or is at least num days old .
allow handoperated buggies to cross after the concrete is num hours old .
num .
live loadsmixing and lifting equipment do not place mixers on a deck in a complete unit a simple span or continuous or cantilever unit until the deck concrete of the complete unit reaches its numday cylinder strength and is at least num days old .
when deck concrete reaches its numday cylinder strength and is at least num days old allow mixer trucks on the unit during the curb concrete pour only if the pour is completed within num minutes of being started .
do not allow any equipment on the unit for num days after curb pours .
the engineer may allow concrete placement procedures that use heavy lifting equipment on the decks if the following conditions exist the deck concrete reaches its numday cylinder strength .
the deck concrete is at least num days old .
the curbs on the deck are at least num days old .
num .
live loadshauling over bridges use a new bridge for hauling only if no other practical haul routes are available and only if the engineer permits it .
a .
govern hauling by the restrictions and requirements listed in table num .
if any of the restrictions and requirements are violated the engineer will limit loads to the following section numconcrete structures num single num lb num num kg axle when the bridge design loading is hs num andor military loading single num lb num num kg axle when the bridge design loading is hs num or h num table numweight limits for hauling on new bridges axle criteria bridge design loading hs num andor military loading hs num or h num maximum axle load per axle num lbs num num kg num lbs num num kg maximum axle load on dual axles per axle num lbs num num kg num lbs num num kg maximum total load num lbs num num kg num lbs num num kg b .
ensure that bridge concrete including curbs parapets barriers and sidewalks is at least num days old and has a minimum compressive strength of num psi num mpa .
c. apply the linseed oil special protective treatment if required see subsection num.ad apply protective surface treatment .
d. . after applying the protective treatment if required apply waterrepellent silicone materials to the handrail handrail posts end posts and curb faces before hauling begins .
e. do not allow more than one vehicle at a time on a simple or multiplespan unit .
f. ensure that vehicle speeds loaded or unloaded do not exceed num mileshr num kmhr when the following loads occur bridges designed for hs num andor military loading loads on single axles exceed num lbs num num kg loads on each dual axle exceed num lbs num num kg bridges designed for hs num or h num loading loads on single axles exceed num lbs num num kg loads on each dual axle exceed num lbs num kg when axle loads do not exceed these loads ensure that vehicle speeds are num mph num kph or less .
g. place temporary guides on beams so wheels will track directly .
h. keep earth approaches smooth and level with the bridge floor or approach slab to minimize impact .
stabilize sandy and other unstable soils at no expense to the department with crushed stone or other suitable material for at least num ft num m from the end of the bridge or approach slab .
i .
protect the ends of bridges or approach slabs with a timber strip at least num in num mm wide cut to rest on either the paving rest of the bridge end or the pavement subgrade at the end of the approach slab .
keep the strip in place for protection during incidental hauling .
remove it before constructing the adjacent pavement .
keep the top of each timber strip flush with the top of the concrete surface .
fit the strip tightly against the end of the bridge or approach slab .
if the timber strip is displaced stop hauling until the strip is reset or replaced .
j .
clean spills off the bridge floor .
ag .
complete corrective work after the department gives the deck surface a ride quality test described in subsection num.e ride quality test complete corrective work at no cost to the department and before doing the final surface texturing .
complete corrective work as follows num .
plane the deck according to section num .
num .
limit concrete removal by planing so that the final bar cover is not less than the plan cover minus num in num mm .
num .
if the final bar cover limits can not be met perform the corrective work as directed by the engineer .
section numconcrete structures num num .
ensure that the final riding surface complies with this specification and the requirements for a grooved finish .
num .
if necessary use a bump grinder to correct bumps with a profile base line of num ft num m or less .
num .
have planed decks retested as described in subsection num.e ride quality test to ensure that the ride quality meets the requirements of this specification .
ah .
plane the deck schedule the ride quality test at least num days before needed by contacting the office of materials .
ensure that the area to be tested is clean and clear of obstructions .
when possible delay expansion joint installation and temporarily bridge the joint to operate lightweight profiler and planning equipment across the joint .
planning responsibilities are shown in table num table numplanning responsibilities area planed person responsible bridge decks bridge contractor approach slabs constructed under the bridge contract bridge contractor approach slabs constructed under the roadway contract roadway contractor ai .
perform retaining wall incidentals retaining wall incidentals are as follows num .
drainage unless otherwise shown on the plans or in the special provisions ensure that drainage for retaining walls is either alternate a or alternate b on georgia standards num and numl .
ensure that the number num concrete sand complies with subsection num fine aggregate for portland cement concrete of all types and for mortar and has a permeability coefficient of at least num ft num m per day .
the engineer may waive the grading requirement for number num concrete sand if the permeability coefficient of the material does not exceed num ft num m per day .
omit the drainage blanket and stone for retaining walls only when the height does not exceed num ft num m. when the plans specify different drainage details furnish place or build the various items according to the plan requirements .
num .
waterproofing and dampproofing when waterproofing and dampproofing are specified in the plans comply with the requirements of sections num and num .
aj .
place utility installation hardware when the plans require placing utility installation hardware the utility company involved will furnish the items .
place the items as directed on the plans or shop drawings .
all other work including painting as required is the utility companys responsibility .
ak .
widen bases and pavement when using narrow sections of portland cement concrete to widen existing bases or bases and pavements use class b concrete as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
al .
open the structure to traffic open a structure to traffic other than haul traffic after all concrete in the decks parapets or curbs sidewalks reaches its numday cylinder strength and is at least num days old .
section numconcrete structures num num quality acceptance a .
strength requirement tests when job site test specimens fail to meet the strength requirements in the table numconcrete mix table determine the final acceptance or rejection of concrete in place by coring or nondestructive testing .
at the contractors request the department will determine the removal time for forms by conducting field tests on cylinders .
tests are subject to the following num .
tests will be performed when the concrete is at least three days old .
num .
the plans will show the required strengths .
num .
at the contractors request the engineer may specify a minimum time with minimum strength requirements .
b. honeycombed area check if there are honeycombed areas that extend beyond the reinforcement steel the engineer may reject the entire pour with the honeycombed area .
c. bridge deck slab concrete inspection the engineer will carefully observe the construction methods used during all phases of the bridge deck slab construction .
these phases include the following metal form installation reinforcement location and fastening concrete item composition mixing procedures concrete placement and vibration bridge deck finishing provide the needed facilities for the engineer to safely and conveniently inspect the concrete .
the concrete inspection procedure is as follows num .
after the deck concrete has been in place for at least two days the engineer will sound a hammer on at least two areas of the deck for each slab pour .
this test checks for concrete soundness and form bonding .
the two areas will encompass at least num percent of the total area of the deck pour .
num .
the engineer will sound other areas of the deck randomly .
num .
if the engineer doubts the soundness of an area or if the engineer decides that the concrete placement procedures used call for an inspection of the underside of the deck remove at least one section of the forms for each span in the contract .
num .
remove the form section after the pour is strong enough and when the engineer desires to provide visual evidence that the concrete mix and the placement procedures are acceptable .
num .
remove another form section if the engineer decides changes in the concrete mix or in the placement procedures warrant additional inspection .
num .
where form sections are removed do not necessarily replace the forms but repair the adjacent metal forms and supports neatly and securely .
num .
when the form is removed the engineer will examine the concrete surfaces for cavities honeycombing and other defects .
num .
if the engineer finds irregularities but determines that the irregularities do not justify rejection of the work repair the concrete as the engineer directs and give it an ordinary surface finish according to the contract specifications .
section numconcrete structures num num .
if the concrete where the form is removed is not acceptable remove additional forms as necessary to inspect and repair the slab .
num .
modify the construction methods as required by the engineer to create satisfactory slab concrete .
num .
remove or repair all unsatisfactory concrete as the engineer directs .
if the construction methods used and the inspection results indicate that the slabs have sound concrete the engineer may moderate the amount of random sounding and form removal after a substantial amount of slab has been constructed and inspected .
d. bridge deck surface check after the final strikeoff of the concrete and as close behind the final strikeoff as possible the engineer will check the surface with a num ft num m straightedge .
attach the straightedge to a broomtype handle for easy control and use .
bridges and approach slabs must meet a num inch in num ft num mm in num m straightedge check made longitudinally and transversely .
e. ride quality test after the bridge decks and approach slabs are completed the department will perform a ride quality test using the lightweight profiler and a profile index value determined according to gdt num .
the department will conduct the test as follows num .
obtain profile index values for bridge decks and approach slabs for state roads with four lanes or more state roads with num lanes where the current traffic count is num vehicles per day or higher other roads designated on the plans bridges and approach slabs must meet the straightedge check limits described in subsection num.d bridge deck surface check .
num .
obtain profiles in the wheel paths and in safety areas to within num ft num m of barrier or curb lines .
num .
average the profile index values for bridge decks including the approach slabs for the left and right wheel path for each lane .
the average value must not exceed num inmile num mmkm for each lane .
after the test is complete correct individual bumps or depressions that exceed num in num mm from the blanking band on the profiler trace .
the deck surface must then meet a num inch in num ft num mm in num m straightedge check made transversely .
correct bridge decks and approach slabs that do not pass the ride quality test as described in subsection num.ag complete corrective work .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work is measured for payment either per cubic yard meter per lump sum or per linear foot meter whichever is shown on the plans .
seal concrete .
the quantity of seal concrete to be measured for payment is calculated using the horizontal seal dimensions specified on the plans .
grooving .
grooving on bridge decks and approach slabs completed acceptably according to subsection num.t place bridge deck concrete step num.c will be measured and paid for by the square yard meter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing the necessary equipment and performing the work .
section numconcrete structures num class b concrete .
class b concrete used for base and pavement widening will be measured and paid for by the cubic yard meter complete in place and accepted .
num limits a .
measurement for separate payment there will be no separate measurement and payment for the following num .
on permanent steel bridge deck forms for concrete deck slabs extra reinforcing extra concrete other costs incurred because of the requirements of this specification all costs are included in the lump sum prices bid for superstructure concrete and superstructure reinforcement .
b .
payment per cubic yard meter measurement limits on payment per cubic yard meter are num .
bridges concrete culverts headwalls and retaining walls the quantity of concrete measured for payment is the algebraic summation of the base pay quantity and authorized quantity changes .
if additional quantities are necessary because of any of the following these quantities are measured separately for payment rocks were removed carefully but additional quantities are needed because footing depth and keyway dimension are irregular from unanticipated rock removal .
voids or crevices exist within the spread footing area .
the engineer authorized filling trenches cut in rock outside footing areas to ease dewatering .
these additional quantities will be paid as filler concrete per cubic yard meter .
num .
seals when the plans do not require a seal but a seal becomes necessary or when the plans do not show seal dimensions the maximum pay dimensions in each direction will be the plan dimension of the structural footing plus num ft num m with num in num mm on each side .
if the contractor uses lesser dimensions measurement is based on the lesser dimensions .
concrete placed beyond the maximum pay limits are not measured .
c. payment per lump sum for lump sum payment determine the quantities required before submitting the bid .
the concrete quantity must conform to the plan dimensions .
measurement is made as a unit complete in place and includes the following diaphragms sidewalks concrete parapets measurement does not include concrete in the following items that will be paid for separately concrete handrailing barriers prestressed bridge members .
payments for parapets placed by slipform method is included in the lump sum price bid for superstructure concrete .
section numconcrete structures num unless otherwise shown on the plans the cost of steel joints and metal bearing assemblies used in structures where there is no structural steel pay item are included in the contract price for superstructure concrete .
d. retaining wall incidentals retaining wall incidentals will be measured for payment as follows num .
drainage systems drainage items required by special plans are measured for payment by the unit specified on the plans only when they are set up as specific pay items and are paid for separately .
otherwise their costs are included in the contract price for concrete .
payment is full compensation for the costs of excavation and backfill necessary to place the drainage items required by special plans .
the following are not measured for separate payment .
costs are included in the contract price for concrete .
sand blankets crushed or broken stone weep holes num .
miscellaneous the following are not measured for separate payment .
costs are included in the contract price for concrete .
expansion material rubber or polyvinyl plastic water stops e. utility installation hardware the cost of placing utility hardware items is included in the contract price for the class of concrete the items are placed in .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per cubic yard meter per lump sum or per linear foot meter each complete in place and accepted .
payment is full compensation for all things including incidentals and direct and indirect costs to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
item payment num superstructure concrete class_____ bridge no._____ per lump sum num concrete handrailing designation per linear foot meter num class_____concrete per cubic yard meter num class_____concrete highearly strength per cubic yard meter num seal concrete per cubic yard meter num class b concrete base or pavement widening per cubic yard meter num class_____concrete including reinforcement steel per cubic yard meter num class a concretefiller per cubic yard meter num class_____concreteretaining wall per cubic yard meter num grooved concrete per square yard meter num concrete barrier per linear foot meter section numconcrete structures num num adjustments a .
contractor costs assume the following costs num .
costs related to rejected concrete and removing rejected concrete num .
costs of forming an approved construction joint removing a partial pour or completing other remedial measures requested by the engineer unless the fault lies solely with the department num .
costs of repairing removing and replacing falsework as directed by the engineer num .
costs of repairing removing or replacing forms num .
costs of airblown mortar to repair honeycombed areas if required by the engineer num .
costs of using a higher class of concrete to widen existing bases or bases and pavements b .
ride quality testing the department will conduct ride quality testing of bridge decks and approach slabs only twice per bridge at no cost to the contractor .
the department will conduct additional ride quality testing at the cost of num per test .
c. plastic shrinkage crack repair the engineer will determine how to repair cracks caused by plastic shrinking .
repair cracks at no cost to the department .
d. plan quantities for all bridges except seal concrete concrete culverts headwalls and retaining walls the quantities shown on the contract plans including standard plans will be considered the base pay quantity .
for seal concrete the plan quantities are approximate and are for estimating purposes only .
the quantities will not be considered as base pay quantities .
calculated additions or deductions will be applied to the base pay quantity when the engineer makes authorized changes .
changes include but are not limited to authorized changes in the following footing dimensions lengthening or shortening of concrete culverts correcting plan quantities dimension errors multibarrel culvert wall thicknesses lengthening or shortening bridge columns raising or lowering foundations calculations of the base pay quantity and any changes will be made as follows num .
no deductions will be made for the volume of concrete used by scorings panels and chamfers if the individual areas are less than num in² num mm² .
the volume of concrete in fillets of the same area will be neglected .
num .
the volume of structural steel and of steel and concrete piling encased in concrete will be deducted .
num .
the volume of timber piling encased in concrete will be deducted on the basis of num ft³linear foot num m³linear meter of pile .
num .
no deduction will be made for the volume of concrete displaced by the following steel reinforcement shear connectors section numconcrete structures num floor drains unless they are paid for as separate pay items incidentals such as expansion material joint sealing compound utility thimbles and hangers e. filler concrete filler concrete measured as described in subsection num.b.num bridges concrete culverts headwalls and retaining walls will be paid at num percent of the contract price per cubic meter for class a concrete or class aa concrete .
f. seal concrete if there is no contract price for seal concrete payment will be per cubic yard meter measured as described in subsection num.b.num seals and will be paid at num percent of the contract price per cubic yard meter for class a concrete .
g. lump sum payment adjustments adjust the payment as follows num .
authorized change adjustments when authorized changes are made as described in subsection num.d plan quantities the lump sum payment may be adjusted on a pro rata basis or according to section num and as determined by the engineer .
the plans show tabulated quantities as a service .
this does not relieve any responsibility to conform to plan details .
num .
optional plan feature adjustments if exercising an optional plan feature the base pay quantity will not be changed if it is the only quantity change involved .
however if other changes are necessary the quantity change resulting from the optional feature will be considered in the necessary quantity adjustments .
num .
falsework for posttensioned box girder bridge adjustments when the falsework is completed for posttensioned box girder bridges num percent of the lump sum superstructure concrete price will be paid .
additional payments made as the concrete is placed must be adjusted for the payment for falsework .
in other words payment for concrete placed will be based on num percent of the superstructure bid price .
num .
when metal deck forms are used and have been placed payment in the amount of num of the lump sum superstructure concrete price will be made .
for posttensioned box girder bridges this percentage num will apply to that part of the superstructure concrete in the top slab of the box only .
section numsteel structures num general description this work includes furnishing and building with structural steel and miscellaneous metals to the lines grades and dimensions shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
the work does not include bearing devices for prestressed concrete bridge members utility installation hardware or any metal covered under another pay item .
num definitions hts bolts high tensilestrength bolts .
section numsteel structures num num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numconcrete structures section numshear connectors section numpainting structures section numstructural steel section nummiscellaneous steel materials section numcastings and forgings section numbronze bushings bearings and expansion plates section numpaint section numfabrics section numelastomeric bearing pads b. referenced documents ansiaashtoaws d num aisc manual of steel construction ansi bnum class numa ansi num num num num num num num part num num astm a numa numm astm anuma numm astm a num a numm astm a num anumm astm a num astm f numm class num num submittals a. preinspection documentation furnish documentation required by the latest ansiaashtoaws d num under radiographic ultrasonic and magnetic particle testing and reporting to the states inspector before the quality assurance inspection .
b .
shop drawings prepare shop drawings for structural steel and other metal materials to be fabricated .
show the details necessary for shop fabrication and field erection .
num .
description .
use the standard sheet size of the departments bridge office .
submit at least two complete sets of preliminary prints marked not for field use to the departments bridge and structural design engineer the bridge engineer for review before fabricating materials .
as an option shop drawings may be submitted on plan sheet sizes of num x num num mm x num mm or num x num num mm x num mm for review and approval .
information contained on these sheets must be legible .
section numsteel structures num after shop drawings have been approved submit an electronic file that is compatible with bentley microstation j version num cadd operating system or an electronic file in adobe acrobat portable document format .pdf to the engineer .
for bridges carrying railroads only after shop drawings have been approved submit one full size set of reproducible drawings to the department .
num. review process .
after the preliminary prints have been reviewed and revisions have been made submit num or more complete sets of the final drawings to the bridge engineer .
the bridge engineer will mark each drawing with a conditional approval stamp and return one stamped set to the fabricator .
furnish the bridge engineer with as many additional sets of final prints as required .
the bridge engineers review and conditional approval of shop drawings is a service for the contractor .
the department assumes no responsibility for the accuracy of the drawings and the contractor will not be relieved of any responsibility for conforming to the specifications and plans .
num .
railway structures .
for structures carrying railway traffic and for other structures when specifically designated furnish the bridge engineer a full set of permanent reproducibles of the final shop drawings .
num .
welded construction .
on shop drawings for welded construction use the standard welding symbols of the american welding society .
explain special conditions in notes or details .
show the sequence and techniques for areas where shrinkage stress and distortion control is necessary .
num .
changes and substitutions .
do not change a shop drawing after it has been conditionally approved unless the bridge engineer gives written consent .
list and symbolize revisions on each drawing .
obtain written consent from the bridge engineer before substituting materials with dimensions and weights other than those shown on the plans .
make changes associated with an approved substitution at no expense to the department .
num .
alternate locations of splices and connections .
if splices or connections are desired at locations other than those shown on the plans submit a proposal and shop drawings to the bridge engineer to get written approval before proceeding .
num .
steel identification .
upon request furnish an affidavit certifying the identification of steel is maintained throughout fabrication .
on the shop drawings show the grade of steel to be used and identify each piece .
give pieces made of different types or grades of steel different assembly or erection marks .
maintain the identity of the mill test report number when assemblymarking individual pieces and when giving cutting instructions to the shop .
c. fabrication schedule ensure that the fabricator submits a proposed fabrication schedule to the state materials engineer that includes the following correct project number including county bridge number starting date estimated completion date d. quality control program before fabrication begins submit the fabricators written quality control program to the office of materials for approval .
this program and its personnel will be subject to verification when the departments materials engineer deems necessary .
even with a state inspection continue to perform quality control qc on all nonfracturecritical and fracturecritical members and components .
section numsteel structures num e. mill orders and shipping statements furnish the number of copies of mill orders and shipping statements covering fabricated materials and related miscellaneous materials the engineer directs .
show the weights of individual members on the statements .
f. mill test reports furnish the engineer two certified legible copies of mill test reports that show the results of physical tests and complete ladle analyses for each heat and grade of steel ordered .
refer to the astm designation of tests used .
furnish mill test reports at no expense to the department .
g. welding procedures before structural steel fabrication begins submit welding procedures to the engineer for review and approval .
h. electrode testing furnish a manufacturers certification showing that the material requirements used for manufacturing the tested electrodes and furnished electrodes were the same for each lot of electrodes on the project .
i. falsework if required prepare and submit falsework plans for the engineers review .
continue to assume the responsibility to produce safe falsework .
when erection is completed remove falsework to the engineers satisfaction .
j. camber diagram furnish the engineer a diagram showing the camber at each splice point for each girder .
base the diagram on measurements taken during shop assembly .
in the case of partial shop assembly base the camber diagram on theoretical calculated values .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section structural steel num coldfinish carbon shafting num steel castings num paints num steel bolts nuts and washers num anchor bolts num high tensilestrength bolts nuts and washers num shear connectors num elastomeric pads num plain cotton duck num rubberimpregnated cotton duck num selflubricating bronze bearing and expansion plates galvanizing and bushings num astm a numa numm num .
fasteners .
use fasteners in their lubricated asdelivered condition .
use black bolts oily to the touch .
with galvanized assemblies use nuts with a clean dry lubricant that contrasts with the color of the zinc coating .
section numsteel structures num num .
selflubricating bronze plates .
use castbronze plates of the type shown on the shop drawings unless otherwise shown on the plans .
num delivery storage and handling a .
fasteners store fasteners to protect them from dirt and moisture .
take from storage only enough fasteners to install and tighten during a work shift .
return unused fasteners to protective storage at the end of the shift .
b .
structural steel members num .
delivery load transport and unload girders without excessive stress or damage .
the engineer will observe the delivery of beams or girders and will immediately notify the contractor of damaged or unsatisfactory material before the material is unloaded or as soon as the damage is discovered .
if members are improperly handled the inspector may withhold or remove the final stamp of approval .
use figure num figure num and the following loading specifications and shipping details for truck rail or barge transportation .
a .
use chains and chain binders to secure beams and girders during shipping only if using a protective shield to prevent gouging flanges and if providing adequate bracing to prevent bending the top flanges .
b .
keep the center of gravity of beams girders and heavy haunch sections as low as possible .
c. use access roads to safely deliver beams and girders to the site .
section numsteel structures num figure num figure num metric c over num ft num ft num reqd restraints label top flange c over num ft last support numc numc numc numc numc num ft max .
c t l c numl min .
c numl max .
for short beams or girders supported on a flat bed the min .
c may be disregarded .
if c over num ft use additional restraint here .
if c over num ft use another restraint here .
numc may be increased to num ft to cut down or restraint length or where angle is too flat .
beam of overhang ends shall be restrained against flapping horizontally and vertically .
c over num m num mm num reqd restraints label top flange c over num m last support numc numc numc numc numc num m max .
c t c numl min .
c numl max .
for short beams or girders supported on a flat bed the min .
c may be disregarded .
if c over num m use additional restraint here .
if c over num m use another restraint here .
numc may be increased to num m to cutdown or restraint length or where angle is too flat .
beam of overhang ends shall be restrained against flapping horizontally and vertically .
section numsteel structures num figure num section numsteel structures num figure num metric section numsteel structures num num .
storage handle structural steel during storage in the same manner as during fabrication .
see subsection num.b.num.a general and subsection num.b.num handling .
a .
general place beams and girders with their webs vertical .
shore brace or clamp beams and girders to resist lateral forces during storage .
keep steel free from dirt oil grease or other contaminants and protect it from corrosion .
pitch trough sections to provide water drainage .
do not stack beams and girders on each other .
place long members on supports close together to prevent damage from deflection .
the engineer will observe the storage and handling of beams or girders and ensure that they are satisfactory before erection .
b .
supports the material on which the beams and girder supports are placed shall be firm welldrained unyielding and not allow excessive or uneven settlement when the supports are loaded .
store beams and girders on platforms skids or other supports on the ground above highwater elevation .
shore supports with firm welldrained unyielding material .
use material that settles evenly when the supports are loaded .
support beams and girders adjacent to the bearings and at intervals of no more than num ft num m. use enough intermediate supports to prevent damage from deflection .
num .
handling handle steel members with clamps plate hooks or devices to avoid nicks gouges or depressions .
do not use chains and chokers to handle steel members unless using a protective shield between the chain or choker and the member .
a. beam and girder pick up use spreader bars to lift beams and girders over num ft num m in length .
onepoint pick ups are allowed for beams and girders less than num ft num m long .
use twopoint pick ups so the amount of overhang and distance between hooks does not exceed the distances in the following table beam size num in num mm wf num in num mm wf num in num mm wf plate girders numpoint pickup distance between hooks linear feet meters maximum num num num num num num num numpoint pickup overhang linear feet meters maximum num num num num num num num num wf wide flange if using pickups that cause long overhangs attach lines at beam ends to control movement .
b. beam and girder protection keep webs of beams and girders vertical while handling .
never drop throw or drag beams and girders .
do not allow beams or girders to bend about the weak axis even under their own weight .
when shipping beams or girders upsidedown use caution when turning them over for shipment and turning them rightside up at their destination .
use enough blocking and pickup points to prevent excess stress on the girder .
section numsteel structures num num construction requirements num personnel a. fabricators employ structural steel fabricators certified under the aisc certification program category iiimajor steel bridges .
b. welders qualify field welders according to ansiaashtoaws d num .
employ certified welders who possess a current welding certification card issued by the departments office of materials .
num equipment a .
tension measuring device have a tension measuring device at all job sites where high tensilestrength bolts are installed and tightened .
use the tensionmeasuring device to confirm the proper snug tight and final installation bolt tension calibrate wrenches properly ensure the bolting crew understands the importance of proper bolt tensioning at least once a year have an approved testing agency calibrate the tensionmeasuring device to confirm its accuracy .
b. wrenches if using the calibrated wrench method to tighten hts bolts calibrate the wrench at least once each working day for each diameter length and grade of bolt to be installed .
recalibrate the wrench when adding or deleting the air hose changing compressors or performing similar tasks .
use the wrench in jobsite tightening under the exact conditions that it was calibrated .
recalibrate wrenches if a significant difference is noted in the surface condition or level of lubrication of the bolt threads nuts or washers .
c. ovens use electric drying ovens approved by the engineer to dry electrodes according to ansiaashto aws d num .
d. lifting equipment use proper lifting equipment that can carefully handle steel members without bending twisting damaging or excessively stressing parts .
use cranes that have at least a twopart line for lifting .
the department will terminate shop inspection if lifting equipment is operated or maintained in a hazardous manner .
e. erection equipment proposed erection equipment is subject to the engineers review .
even with this review assume responsibility for providing adequate and safe equipment and for carrying out the work according to the plans and specifications .
begin erection only after the engineers review .
num preparation a .
installation method testing for bolted construction before beginning the bolting operation the engineer will verify the contractors installation method .
verification will determine if the method used calibrated wrench or turnofnut will produce the correct bolt tension in the hts structural bolts of the completed connection .
section numsteel structures num if the method is successful the total clamping force of bolts will be transferred to the connected members and will resist slipping through friction .
do not use bolts tightened during installation method tests or use other previously used hts structural bolts in the work .
num .
verification procedures for both methods test both methods of tightening calibrated wrench or turnofnut with the following procedures a .
select three assemblies bolt nut and washer from each diameter length and grade to be installed .
b .
install each bolt nut and washer into the tensionmeasuring device .
c. install enough spacers or washers so that at least num but not more than num full threads are between the nut face and the underside of the bolt head .
d. use the same type of element nut or bolt head as will be used in the work .
place a hardened washer under the turned element .
e. snug tighten each assembly using the procedure that will be used in the work .
f. after snug tightening place appropriate marks on the end of the bolt stick out and nut bolt head and tension calibrator or drive socket and tension calibrator .
num .
calibrated wrench method verification a .
impact wrench when using an impact wrench num tighten each of the three assemblies beyond snug tight .
num adjust the wrench to cut out at a tension no less than num to num percent higher than the appropriate tension shown in table a required fastener tension .
bolts tightened to this cutout point should consistently develop the required minimum tension .
this cutout point shall be the actual jobsite setting .
b. manual torque wrench when using a manual torque wrench num tighten each of the three assemblies beyond snug tight .
num note the torque required to induce a bolt tension num to num percent higher than the appropriate tension shown in table a required fastener tension .
num measure torque with the nut in rotation .
num average the three tests to find the minimum torque to use for jobsite installation tightening .
num if the torque wrench produces erratic results do not use that wrench .
num .
turnofnut method verification when using the turnofnut method tighten the three assemblies beyond snug tight to the appropriate rotation shown in table b nut rotation from snug tight .
ensure that at this rotation the minimum bolt tension is num to num percent higher than the appropriate tension shown in table a required fastener tension .
table a required fastener tension nominal bolt diameter and thread pitch minimum tension num in kips kn astm anum a nummbolts astm anum a numm bolts num num num num m num x num num num num num section numsteel structures num table a required fastener tension nominal bolt diameter and thread pitch minimum tension num in kips kn astm anum a nummbolts astm anum a numm bolts num mnum x num num num num num num mnum x num num num num num num mnum x num num num num num mnum x num num num num num num mnum x num num num num num num num mnum x num num num num num num equal to num percent of specified minimum tensile strengths of bolts as specified in astm specifications for tests of fullsize a num a numm and a num a numm bolts with unc metric threads loaded in axial tension rounded to the nearest kip kn .
table b nut rotationnum from snug tight bolt length measured from underside of head to end of bolt both faces normal to bolt axis one face normal one faced sloped not more than num both faces sloped not more than num num x bolt diameter or less num turn num turn num turn greater than num but no more than num x bolt diameter num turn num turn num turn greater than num but no more than num x bolt diameter num turn num turn num turn num nut rotation is relative to bolt regardless of the element nut or bolt being turned .
for bolts installed by num turn or less the tolerance of plus num degrees minus num degrees applies .
for bolts installed by num turn and more a tolerance of plus num degrees minus num degrees applies .
num fabrication a. straightening material ensure that rolled material is straight to the mill tolerances provided in astm a numa numm before it is laid off or worked .
use straightening methods that do not injure the metal .
sharp kinks and bends will be cause for rejection the material .
b .
using stock material the fabricator may use stock materials for minor items whose quantity for the project is less than the minimum required for mill rolling if the following requirements are met num .
mill test reports show that the stock material meets the requirements of the specifications .
num .
the stock material is identifiable by heat number and mill test report so the inspector can determine if the material meets the required specification .
instead of these requirements the engineer may take representative stock samples and test them at the contractors expense .
section numsteel structures num c. identifying steel provide a system of assemblymarking individual pieces and the issuance of cutting instructions to the shop that will maintain identity of the mill test report number .
before cutting or placing individual pieces of steel in stock for later use mark the pieces with the following mill test report number heat number color code if any transfer heat numbers and color codes only in the presence of the inspector .
color code steel pieces according to astm a numa numm specification identification .
establish and record an individual color code for steels not included in the a numa numm specification .
if steel is subject to fabrication that might erase a painted color code mark before assembly stamp it with a steel die or attach a tag .
d. general procedures num .
marking steel .
mark finished beams or girders with the following erection mark or match mark according to the erection diagram on the shop drawings .
weight if a member weighs more than num tons num mg. num .
edge planing .
plane sheared edges of plates more than num in num mm thick to a depth of num in num mm .
num .
reentrant cuts .
fillet reentrant cuts notch free to a radius of at least num in num mm .
num .
oxygen cutting .
steel may be oxygencut if the following is obtained smooth surface free of notches and cracks accurate profile using a mechanical guide ensure that oxygen cutting conforms with aws d num .
oxygencut by hand only where approved .
after cutting round the corners of oxygencut surfaces to a num in num mm radius by grinding .
num .
cambering .
the camber shown on the plans is that required after completely fabricating the member including attaching cover plates and shear connectors .
do not use cambering methods that will induce stresses that may impair the service life of the member .
a .
obtain camber for plate girders by cutting both edges of the web after the shop web splices are complete and have been inspected .
b .
apply heat no hotter than num f num c to adjust deviations from the camber ordinates shown on the shop drawings caused by web distortion from either of the following oxygen cutting weld metal shrinkage c. obtain camber for rolled beams with approved heatcambering methods .
num .
finishing bearing surfaces ensure that the surface finish of bearings base plates and other bearing surfaces in contact with each other or with concrete meets the ansi surface roughness requirements defined in ansi b num part num as follows section numsteel structures num surface finish requirement steel slabs ansi num num µm heavy plates in contact in shoes to be welded ansi num num µm milled ends of compression members and milled or ground ends of stiffeners and fillers ansi num num µm bridge rollers and rockers ansi num num µm pins and pin holes ansi num num µm sliding bearings ansi num num µm finish surfaces that contact metal or masonry as specified below .
a .
sole and bearing plates .
ensure that sole and bearing plates have full contact when assembled .
straighten warped or deformed plates before machining then do one of the following to the surfaces of plates contacting masonry num machine the surfaces to an ansi num num µm surface roughness rating value .
num straighten the surfaces so that the maximum clearance under a straightedge placed across the bearing surface in any direction is num in .
num mm b .
cast pedestals and shoes .
machine the surfaces of cast pedestals and shoes that contact metal surfaces .
c. bearing assemblies .
finish fabricated bearing assemblies according to subsection num.d.num finish bearing surfaces .
perform final machining after the assembly is completely fabricated .
if the completed assembly must be heat treated perform final machining after the heat treatment .
d. plates in contact with elastomeric pads .
ensure that the plates are straight and free of loose mill scale .
do not machinefinish the surface in contact with the elastomeric pad .
e. direction of cut .
machine the faces of movable surfaces and their opposing contact surfaces so that the finish cut is in the direction of the expected movement unless using non directional finishing equipment .
f. abutting joints .
in compression members and tension members when specified on the plans face the abutting joints and bring them to even bearings .
when facing joints is not required ensure an opening of num in num mm or less .
num .
annealing and stress relieving after heat treatment machinefinish bore and straighten the structural members required by the plans to be annealed or normalized .
perform full annealing and normalizing according to astm a num and the following a .
during heating and cooling keep the furnace temperature uniform so the temperature difference between any two points on a member does not exceed num f num c. b .
record each furnace charge to identify the pieces in the charge and show the temperatures and schedule used .
the method of recording the treatment operation procedures is subject to the inspectors approval .
c. provide proper instruments including recording pyrometers to determine member temperatures in the furnace .
d. when the contract requires stressrelieve welded bridge shoes pedestals and other similar weldments according to aws specifications .
num .
component fabrication a. beam and girder ends fabricate the ends of beams and girders to be vertical in the final erected position unless otherwise shown on the plans .
section numsteel structures num b .
end connection angles build end connection angles to the exact length shown on the plans measured between the heels of the connection angles .
the allowed tolerance is plus num to minus num in plus num to minus num mm .
where continuity is required face end connections .
ensure that the connection angle thickness after facing is no less than num in num mm or the amount shown on the plans .
c. steel joints at the shop shape the plates angles or other structural shapes to conform to the section of the concrete deck .
ensure that painting and other fabrication requirements conform to the specifications for these items .
d. bent plates ensure that unwelded coldbent loadcarrying rolled steel plates meet the following requirements num the bend lines are at right angles to the rolling direction .
num the plate will not crack during bending .
minimum bend radii measured to the concave face of the metal for all grades of steel used in this specification are shown in the following table thickness t in inches millimeters minimum bend radii up to ½ num num t over num to num num to num num t over num to num num to num num t over num to num num to num num t over num to num num to num num t lowalloy steel in thicknesses over num in num mm may require hot bending for small radii .
if a shorter radius is essential bend plates hot at num f num c or less .
ensure that hotbent plates have bend lines at right angles to the rolling direction .
num round the corners of plates to a radius of num in num mm before bending .
e. stiffeners ensure that bearing stiffeners and stiffeners used as supports for concentrated loads have full bearing on the flanges they transmit load to or the flanges they receive load from .
mill or grind the bearing surfaces of stiffeners .
on weldable steel in flange compression areas the contractor may weld stiffeners as shown on the plans .
ensure that stiffeners not located at points of concentrated loads fit tightly enough to keep water out after painting unless otherwise shown .
f. pins turn pins accurately to the dimensions shown on the shop drawings .
ensure that pins are straight smooth and flawless .
the pins may be forged and annealed or of coldfinished carbon steel shafting .
furnish two pilot nuts and two driving nuts for each size of pin unless otherwise specified .
g. pin holes bore pin holes in members so they are true to the specified diameter smooth straight at right angles to the axis of the members parallel with each other unless otherwise required section numsteel structures num produce the final surface with a finishing cut .
bore holes in builtup members after completing bolting or welding .
ensure that pin hole diameters meet the following requirements pin diameter pin hole diameter num in num mm or less must not exceed pin diameter by more than num in num mm larger than num in num mm must not exceed pin diameter by more than num in num mm h. threads for structural steel construction use threads for bolts and pins that conform to the unified screw threads ansi bnum metric screw threads ansi b numm class numa for external threads and class numb for internal threads except pin ends with a diameter of num num in num mm .
i .
unfinished and turned bolts num bolts do not use ribbed bolts .
use unfinished bolts or turned bolts that conform to astm f numm class num .
use bolts with single selflocking nuts or double nuts unless otherwise shown .
use turned bolts with an ansi surface roughness rating of num num µm .
num washers use beveled washers when bearing faces have a slope of more than num to num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis .
num heads and nuts use hexagonal heads and nuts with standard dimensions for bolts of nominal size specified or of the next larger size .
provide a washer under the nut .
use threads with a diameter equal to the body or nominal diameter of the bolt specified .
for turned bolts threads shall be entirely outside of the holes .
j. anchor bolts use anchor bolts of the size and shape specified on the plans .
num .
coating machinefinished steel surfaces coat the following with rustinhibiting grease or with other approved corrosionpreventive compounds opposing surfaces of sliding bearings mating convex and concave surfaces of curved plates and rocker bearing assemblies sliding surfaces opposite selflubricating bronze surfaces pins and pinholes coat other machined surfaces with one coat of the shop primer specified on the plans .
include convex faces of rockers and sole plates at fixed bearings of spans that have line bearings on steel plates .
num .
shop painting perform shop painting according to section num especially subsection num.c paint new steel structures step num .
e. bolt holes produce bolt holes as follows num .
fullsize punched holes the contractor may use fullsize punched holes if these conditions exist a member is composed of num or less separate thicknesses of metal and section numsteel structures num the metal thickness of any one part is num in num mm or less for structural steel or num num in num mm or less for highstrength steel .
poor hole matching will be cause for rejection .
punch holes as follows a. punch holes num in num mm larger than the nominal diameter of the bolts .
b .
do not punch fullsized holes on field connections of main members .
c. ensure that the die diameter for punched or subpunched holes does not exceed the punch diameter by more than num in num mm .
d. cut holes clean to avoid torn ragged edges .
e. enlarge holes by reaming .
num .
subpunched and subdrilled holes subdrill holes num in num mm smaller than the nominal diameter of the bolts .
after assembly ream the holes if any one of the conditions exists a member is composed of more than num separate thicknesses of metal .
the metal thickness of any one main part is greater than num in num mm for structural steel or num in num mm for highstrength steel .
when required according to subsection num.e.num normal assembly step b .
instead of subpunching and subdrilling the contractor may drill holes from the solid after assembly .
however whether drilling from the solid or subdrilling and subpunching ensure the following a. holes are no more than num in num mm larger than the nominal diameter of the bolts .
b. holes for turned bolts are subpunched or subdrilled .
c. holes are carefully reamed after assembly to provide a lightdriving fit with the bolt .
num .
accuracy of punched subpunched and subdrilled holes accurately fullsize punch subpunch or subdrill holes so that after assembly but before reaming holes meet the following requirements a cylindrical pin num in num mm smaller than the nominal diameter of the punched hole can enter perpendicular to the face of the member in at least num percent of the adjacent holes in the same plane without drifting .
a pin num in num mm smaller than the nominal diameter of the hole can pass through the hole .
if either of these requirements is not met the faulty pieces will be rejected .
num .
reamed and drilled holes ensure that reamed and fullsized drilled holes are cylindrical perpendicular to the member and num in num mm larger than the nominal diameter of the bolts .
ream and drill holes as follows a .
direct reamers using mechanical means when practical .
b. ream and drill with twist drills .
c. remove burrs on outside surfaces .
disassemble parts if required to remove burrs caused by drilling or reaming .
d. for connecting parts that require reamed or drilled holes do the following num assemble the connecting parts .
num hold them securely while reaming or drilling .
num matchmark them before disassembling .
num .
accuracy of reamed and drilled holes after drilling and reaming holes ensure that at least num percent of the holes in any group have no offset greater than num in num mm between adjacent thicknesses of metal .
make sure the remaining holes are not elongated or show an offset greater than num in num mm between the adjacent thicknesses of metal .
section numsteel structures num num .
fitting up before reaming drilling or bolting ensure that the pieces forming builtup members are straight closefitting clean true to the required dimensions free from twists bends open joints burrs and other defects resulting from faulty fabrication or workmanship wellpinned firmly drawn together before shop bolting material with fullsize punched holes a .
ensure that holes are no more than num in num mm larger than the nominal diameter of the bolt .
holes may be spearreamed if necessary to clear and clean them for entering bolts .
b .
carefully adjust end connection angles and similar parts to the correct position and firmly hold them in place until bolted .
c. fit up connections securely before placing bolts .
d. ream or drill unfair holes holes that prevent the bolt from entering .
f. high tensilestrength bolt connections this section covers the shop and field connections of structural joints using high tensilestrength bolts tightened to a specified tension .
use hts structural bolts that meet the requirements of subsection num high tensilestrength bolts .
furnish the bolts nuts and washers according to subsection num .
to seat parts solidly keep joint surfaces including those adjacent to the bolt heads nut or washers free of scale except tight mill scale dirt burrs metal spatters and other defects .
ensure that joint contact surfaces are free of oil grease paint lacquer galvanizing rust and other matter .
refer to the requirements of subsection num.c paint new steel structures step num .
install fasteners with a hardened washer under the nut or bolt head whichever is the element turned in tightening .
when the slope of the boltedpart surfaces contacting the bolt head and nut do not exceed num with respect to a plane normal to the bolt axis use a flat washer .
when the slope of an outer face of the bolted parts exceeds num use a smooth beveled washer .
if necessary clip washers on one side to a point no closer than num percent of the bolt diameter from the center of the washer .
when a joint assembly is complete ensure that each bolt has a tension num to num percent above the required minimum value shown in table a required fastener tension .
g. high tensilestrength bolt tightening methods tighten hts bolts with either the calibrated wrench method or the turnofnut method .
for both methods conduct the final rotation of the nut or bolt whichever is the turned element from a snugtight condition according to table b nut rotation from snug tight .
snug tight is the tightness achieved when the plies of the joint are in firm contact .
obtain this with a few impacts of an impact wrench or with full effort using an ordinary spud wrench .
ensure that the snug tightening procedure produces num to num percent of the required fastener tension shown in table a required fastener tension .
num .
calibrated wrench method install bolts in the connection holes with a hardened washer under the turned element and bring the bolts up to snug tight described above as follows section numsteel structures num a. snug tighten systematically from the most rigid part of the connection to the free edges as follows num start the tightening pattern at the center of the pattern near the end of each member being spliced .
num work toward the edges of the splice plate .
b .
after the initial snug tightening systematically tighten the bolts again as necessary using a similar tightening pattern until all bolts are simultaneously snug tight and the connection is fully compacted .
c. following snug tightening tighten the bolts in the connection using a calibrated wrench either air impact or manual torque .
systematically tighten from the most rigid part of the joint to its free edges .
d. after the first pass systematically tighten the bolts again to ensure that bolts that may have relaxed from tightening adjacent bolts are tightened to the prescribed amount .
e. operate impact wrenches until the wrench cuts out at the setting established by calibration .
if using a manual torque wrench measure the target torque with the turned element in motion .
f. during installation in the assembled steel work verify that the wrench adjustment selected by the calibration does not rotate the nut or bolt head from snug tight more or less than that permitted in table b nut rotation from snug tight .
num .
turnofnut method when bolts are too short to fit in the tension calibrating device use the turnofnut method in the actual work .
install bolt connection holes with a hardened washer under the turned element and bring the bolts up to snug tight described above as follows a. snug tighten the bolts using steps a and b of the calibrated wrench method .
b .
following snug tightening tighten the bolts in the connection by the applicable amount of rotation specified in table b nut rotation from snug tight .
c. during the tightening operation do not rotate the part not turned by the wrench .
d. tighten systematically from the most rigid part of the joint to its free edges as follows num start the tightening pattern at the center of the pattern near the end of each member being spliced .
num work toward the edges of the splice plate .
h. welded construction ensure that welded construction conforms to the requirements below .
electroslag or electragas welding is prohibited .
num .
insufficient welds .
repair remove or replace welds that do not meet the requirements of the specifications using methods permitted by num of ansiaashtoaws d num specifications .
if the weld is unacceptable the engineer will reject the entire piece .
after welding repairs are made the engineer will have the repaired areas retested to determine if the repairs meet specification requirements .
num .
unauthorized welds .
obtain the engineers approval before making temporary or permanent welds not shown on the plans or permitted by the specifications .
i. alterations to aashto paragraphs ensure that welded construction conforms to the american welding society aws bridge welding code ansiaashtoaws d num including revisions except as modified by these specifications and aashto .
exceptions to the ansiaashtoaws specifications are noted below .
num .
paragraph num .
instead of paragraph num apply the following requirements a .
before cutting ends to length shop assemble ends of members to be field connected by welding in the laydown position placed to grade from bearing to bearing .
section numsteel structures num b .
to align field splices vertically matchcut adjoining ends while in the laydown position and matchmark the ends at the center point of the web section .
c. check rolled shapes with ends to be field welded before beginning fabrication in order to take into consideration allowed mill tolerances on webcenterlinetoflange measurements .
pair shapes to provide the best possible alignment .
num .
paragraph num .
instead of paragraph num apply the following requirements a .
remove slag from welds immediately after completing each weld .
do not further clean or paint welds to be encased in concrete .
b .
for welds connecting swaybracing members to steel piling that are to be painted according to subsection num.e paint steel hpiling metal shell piling and steel swaybracing and subsection num.f apply special protective coatings to steel piling steel swaybracing and concrete piling remove the slag and do not clean any further .
c. clean and paint other welds as specified below .
d. after removing slag and after completing visual ultrasonic or magnetic particle inspection either blastclean or scrub welds with water and a stiff brush .
ensure that weld areas are clean and free of spatter rust loose scale oil and dirt .
e. prime welds on the same day they are cleaned using the prime coat specified on the plans or in the special provisions .
when using water to clean ensure that the surface is dry before painting .
clean and prime welds as soon as practical after the weld is accepted and before the weld area rusts .
num .
paragraph num .
instead of paragraph num apply the following requirements after welding studs to beams visually inspect the studs and give a random number of them a light blow with a hammer .
strike the following with a hammer and bend them num degrees from the correct installation axis studs that do not show a full numdegree weld fillet .
studs that do not ring when given a light blow with a hammer .
studs that have been repaired by welding .
in case of a defective or repaired weld bend the stud num degrees in the direction that places the defective portion of the weld in the greatest tension .
replace studs that crack either in the weld base metal or the shank during inspection or subsequent straightening .
see paragraph num .
on studs that must be replaced the contractor may manually weld the stud with the following fillet welds stud size fillet weld num in num mm full num degreesnum in num mm num in num mm full num degreesnum in num mm num in num mm full num degreesnum in num mm num construction a. straightening material the engineer may permit straightening of plates angles other shapes and builtup members if the straightening is minor and can be accomplished in the field .
use only methods that do not injure the metal .
num .
heat straightening .
when the engineer allows it heatstraighten metal as follows a .
ensure that parts to be heatstraightened are free of stress and external forces .
the exception is stresses from the mechanical means used to apply the heat .
b .
carefully apply a limited amount of localized heat under supervision section numsteel structures num num heat the area to no more than num f num c as measured by temperatureindicating crayons liquids or bimetal thermometers .
num cool the metal slowly after heating .
after the metal cools naturally to num f num c the contractor may use airmist spray cooling .
c. after straightening a bend or knuckle have the engineer carefully inspect the metal surface for evidence of fracture and for general acceptability .
b. erection proposed erection methods are subject to the engineers review .
even with this review assume responsibility for providing adequate and safe methods and for carrying out the work according to the plans and specifications .
begin erection only after the engineers review .
num .
assemble parts in the field before assembly clean surfaces that will permanently contact each other .
assemble parts accurately following the match marks according to the plans and the erection diagram shown in the shop drawings .
do not hammer if it will injure or distort the members .
ensure that fittingup and drifting done during field assembly and connection meet the requirements of subsection num.e.num fitting up .
num .
erect beam and girder before making field connections bolting or welding on continuous beams or girders adjust splice joints to the correct elevations and slopes and properly align the beams .
the contractor may make beam and girder splices on the ground if using the proper blocking to give adjoining sections the correct relative slopes .
num .
place anchor bolts and adjust nuts unless otherwise shown on the plans provide formed holes for anchor bolts .
set the bolts using an approved nonshrinking mortar .
place anchor bolts as follows a .
after erecting structural steel drop the bolt into the dry hole to ensure that it fits properly .
b .
remove the bolt and fill the hole approximately twothirds full with an approved nonshrinking mortar the consistency of thick paint .
c. with even pressure or light hammer blows force the bolt down until num mortar rises to the top of the hole .
num the anchor bolt nut and washer rest firmly against the metal flange plate shoe or pedestal .
num the bolt has the correct projection above the top of the concrete bearing area .
d. remove excess mortar flushed from the hole down to the concrete bearing area .
e. clean holes or slots and metal surfaces in order to field paint surfaces properly and to allow moving parts to expand and contract without restraint .
f. tighten nuts on anchor bolts that pass through beam and girder flanges or through sole plates attached to flanges as follows num at both fixed and expansion ends tighten nuts and bolts to bear on the washer and then back off one full turn .
num draw nuts on other anchor bolts down to a tight fit .
num do not burr anchor bolt threads .
section numsteel structures num g. adjust the horizontal locations of the anchor bolts relative to the midpoint of slotted holes in bottom beam flanges according to the ambient temperature at bolt placement .
this allows the beam and its attached bearing components to expand or contract in the future .
h. do not grout anchor bolts within a complete unit until beam splicing within the unit is complete .
num .
erect steel joints erect steel joints so that the surface in the finish grade plane laterally and longitudinally is true and free of warping .
keep joints from moving out of their correct position during concrete placement .
cut loose temporary connections as soon as possible to avoid restraining expansion and contraction .
note that openings shown on the plans are based on an erection temperature of num f num c. make corrections in the opening size for the actual erection temperature and maintain the required opening .
num .
connect pins furnish pilot and driving nuts at no additional cost to the department .
drive pins so that members take full bearing .
provide pin nuts and run them up tight .
burr the threads at the face of the nut .
num .
misfits correct misfits by reaming cutting and chipping during erection .
immediately report to the engineer errors that occur in shop fabrication or deformations from handling and transportation that prevent assembling and fitting up parts properly .
the engineer must approve the correction method .
assume responsibility for misfits errors in fabrication and damage .
make corrections or replace parts at no additional cost to the department .
c. finishing bearing areas num .
steel on concrete unless otherwise required level and finish bearing areas with a type ivfloated surface finish according to subsection num.ab.num type ivfloated surface finish .
a .
finish so that steel joint members shoes and bearing plates have full and uniform bearing .
b .
correct improperly finished areas by approved means .
c. ensure that shoes and plates are on the correct alignment and elevation .
d. unless otherwise provided place shoes and plates on layers of canvas cotton duck and red primer that conforms with subsection num.a.num no .
numa red primer as follows num coat the bearing area surface with red primer .
num place three layers of at least num oz num g duck and coat each layers top surface with red primer .
num position shoes or plates on the top layer of duck while red primer is still plastic .
num instead of red primersaturated duck the contractor may substitute thin pads of an approved type and thickness .
num .
steel on steel prepare bearing areas as follows a .
ensure that sole and bearing plates rockers and shoes that are designed to bear on one another fit with full bearing .
b .
keep contact areas free of dirt grit and other foreign matter .
c. prepare machined surfaces that have been shopcoated according to subsection num.d.num coating machinefinished steel surfaces and that will be exposed after erection as follows num remove the shop coating .
section numsteel structures num num replace the coating with the same paint system used on structural steel components .
num .
steel on selflubricating bronze plates prepare machined surfaces that have been shopcoated according to subsection num.d.num coating machine finished steel surfaces and that will be in contact with selflubricating bronze plates or bushings as follows a .
remove the shop coating .
b .
coat the surface with stick lubricant or liquid furnished by the manufacturer of the selflubricating bronze material .
num .
steel on elastomeric pads place elastomeric pads on concrete bearing areas that have the type ivfloated surface finish specified in subsection num.ab.num type ivfloated surface finish unless otherwise required .
ensure that plates that will contact elastomeric pads meet the no paint requirements of subsection num.c.num.e plates that touch elastomeric pads .
d. field painting field paint according to section num using the paint system required by the plans or special provisions .
see also subsections num.c.num steel on steel and num.c.num steel on elastomeric pads .
e. assembly allow only enough drifting during assembly or field connections to bring the parts into position .
ensure that drifting does not enlarge or distort holes .
follow these requirements when shop assembling components .
num .
normal assembly do normal shop assembly as follows a .
unless otherwise specified and before reaming assemble each individual fulllength continuous beam tower face bent rigid frame or plate girder in the shop .
b. subpunch or subdrill and ream bolt holes in field connections and splices according to subsection num.e.num fullsize punched holes and subsection num.e.num subpunched and subdrilled holes while assembled in the shop .
c. obtain approval of the assembly including the camber alignment accuracy of holes and faced joints .
d. on holes for the field connections of the ends of floor beams and stringers do one of the following while members are assembled subpunch and ream the holes ream to a steel template num .
complete assembly when the contract requires make the complete shop assembly of an entire structure or a portion of it including the floor system .
num .
partial assembly when authorized by the engineer or inspector modify the shop assembly requirements above to permit partial shop assembly as follows a .
for plate girders continuous beams rigid frames and columns of bents and towers assemble at least three abutting sections .
b .
when the plans require that the ends of compression members be faced assemble these members with faced ends in full bearing .
section numsteel structures num num .
reaming and drilling through templates ream and drill through templates as follows a .
use steel templates with hardened steel bushings in holes accurately dimensioned from the center lines of the connection inscribed on the template and from the finished end of the template .
b .
use center lines to accurately locate the template from the milled or scribed ends of members .
c. use exact duplicate templates to ream matching members or the opposite faces of any one member .
d. accurately locate templates for connections on like members so that like members are duplicates and require no matchmarking .
e. fullsize ream or drill field connections through templates after locating the templates by position and angle and bolting the templates firmly in place .
f. when using templates to ream field connections of web members of a bent tower or girder do the following num face or scribe at least one end of each web member normal to the long axis of the member .
num accurately set the templates at both ends from the faced or scribed end .
num .
matchmarking according to the erection diagram matchmark connecting parts assembled in the shop to ream holes in field connections .
num quality acceptance a .
testing and inspection num .
heat number testing the department will sample and test each heat number that structural steel is furnished from to fabricate main members .
to facilitate this testing ship one piece from each heat of main member structural steel to the fabrication site .
provide pieces long enough to take a properly oriented representative num x num in num x num mm sample .
this may require that the extra length pieces be num or num in num or num mm longer depending on testing orientation requirements .
num .
fastener assembly testing upon receiving hts fastener assemblies bolts nuts and washers notify the inspection services branch of the office of materials .
the branch will verify that the contractor has the documentation required by subsection num high tensilestrength bolts and sample the assemblies as necessary .
num .
bolted construction inspection the inspector will check the following before or during the bolting operation .
provide the inspector easy access to the areas of the member to be inspected .
the inspector will a. verify that bolt tension calibrators have been calibrated within the last year .
ensure that the manual torque wrenches have been calibrated at least daily for each diameter length and grade as shown in this specification .
b .
ensure that bolts are routinely installed to the proper tensions .
after inspection no further evidence of proper bolt tension is necessary .
if installation tension verification is necessary subsequent to installation and tightening of bolts notify the inspection services of the office of materials .
c. monitor the surface condition and storage of bolts nuts and washers .
see subsection num.a fasteners for storage requirements .
d. ensure that each bolting crew member understands the procedure for snugtightening the joint and can demonstrate this knowledge by tightening a fastener in a bolttension calibrator .
section numsteel structures num e. witness the installation method verification procedure and ensure that the same conditions exist during the job site tightening .
f. witness fastener installation to ensure proper tightening .
this monitoring will verify that plies of connected material are drawn together and that the procedure for snug tightening is followed .
g. witness the final tightening procedure and mark at least two bolts in each connection to verify that further tightening from the snug tight position produces the rotation specified in table b nut rotation from snug tight .
num .
material application and traceability verification in addition to the requirements specified in subsection num.c identifying steel the fabricator shall demonstrate by written procedures and by actual practice a material application and traceability method for the main stresscarrying elements of a shipping piece .
the method must be visible at least through the fitup operation .
the traceability method shall verify proper material application as it relates to the following material specification designation heat number material test reports for special requirements num .
mill and shop inspection give two weeks notice to the departments state materials engineer the materials engineer before beginning mill or shop work so that inspection arrangements can be made .
inspection at the mill or shop is intended to facilitate work and avoid errors and does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for imperfect material or work quality .
do not roll or fabricate material until you inform the materials engineer where the orders have been placed .
the inspection is arranged or waived .
furnish the facilities necessary for the inspection of materials and work quality in the mill and shop .
allow inspectors free access to the necessary mill and shop locations and cooperate with the inspector during inspection .
shop inspection is required for steel and other metal materials being fabricated .
inspectors will do the following a .
determine if steel members member components or other fabricated steel components meet the plans and specifications .
b .
identify the steel by color code and correlate its heat numbers obtained from certified mill test reports note do not cut steel or apply prime paint until the inspector completes this step .
c. check fabrication especially the grade of steel dimensions welding and bolting d. perform necessary nondestructive testing to determine conformance with the specifications and plans .
e. reject materials or work that does not meet the specifications .
note even if the inspector accepts materials or members they can be rejected later if found defective .
promptly replace or repair rejected material or members at no additional cost to the department .
b .
quality of work and finish provide quality work and finish on shop work .
ensure that shearing flame cutting and chipping are neat and accurate .
neatly finish all parts of the work .
section numsteel structures num c. welded construction num .
inspection an inspector will be assigned to the fabrication shop for as much time as the state materials engineer deems necessary .
the states inspector or authorized representative will inspect fabrication phases that include but are not limited to the following certification and transfer of heat numbers and grade steel dimensions and assembly inspection and testing of shop welds nondestructive testing painting random sampling stamp of shop inspection num .
quality control assume the following quality control responsibilities for nonfracture critical and fracture critical members and their components a .
perform numpercent nondestructive radiographic or ultrasonic testing of full penetration welds before offering the welds to the state for quality assurance inspection .
b .
perform magnetic particle testing of fillet welds according to ansiaashtoaws d num .
num .
qualification qualify shop weld procedures and welders according to ansiaashtoaws d num .
the engineer may accept tests conducted by other states as evidence of qualification .
in the absence of approved shop weld procedures welding operator and welder qualifications qualify with the state materials engineer as follows a .
in the presence of the engineers representative prepare test plates according to ansiaashtoaws d num. b. requalify according to ansiaashtoaws d num or whenever the engineer requires .
a new welding procedure qualification is not needed at the start of each new project .
num .
testing furnish labor and equipment to do the following position welds for magnetic particle testing help transport ultrasonic equipment provide the inspector easy access to testing areas the inspectors access to work in the shop and field is top priority .
the department of transportation in its routine quality assurance inspection will ultrasonic or magneticparticle test approximately num percent of the welds .
if testing indicates faulty work the inspector will immediately notify the contractor of the necessary corrective work .
ensure that welders are available to repair faulty work as soon as practical .
a. nondestructive testing .
if weld cracking occurs nondestructive testing for final acceptance of fillet and groove welds may be delayed to within num hours after welding has been completed for material num in num mm or less within num hours after welding has been completed for material over num in num mm .
the fabricator may use at its expense nondestructive testing methods other than those specified to examine weld passes or completed welds .
refer to ansiaashtoaws d num. b. ultrasonic testing .
unless otherwise specified on the plans or in special provisions test butt welds in main members by the ultrasonic method .
section numsteel structures num in addition to the testing requirements of the plans specification and special provisions the engineer may require ultrasonic testing if the quality of the work warrants it .
num .
walkways for field testing when field testing provide a continuous walkway between the centermost line of stringers from one of the approach fills to the farthest row of splices as follows a .
provide crosswalks connecting with the center line walkway at each buttwelded splice or bolted connection on each row of stringers .
b .
rest working platforms on the top side of the bottom flange with supporting braces fitting flush against the web .
c. provide at least num in num mm of clearance on each side of the welded splice or bolted connection .
ensure that the top of the working platform is no more than num in num mm above the top side of the bottom flange .
d. construct walkways and working platforms of sound materials .
if constructing with wood use wood free of excessive knots or knots that could cause an unsafe condition .
e. construct walkways at least num in num mm wide and long enough to permit each end to rest on a fixed part or member of the bridge .
f. ensure that walkways have a vertical support at least every num ft num m. g. construct working platforms at least num in num mm wide and long enough to permit each end to rest on a fixed part or member of the bridge .
h. when a deck already exists from the end bent out to the splices do not construct a separate walkway unless the deck reinforcement steel has been put in place .
i .
do not allow deck forms to be placed within num in num mm of splices until the welds or bolted connections have been inspected and accepted .
num .
tolerances for builtup members the requirements of paragraph num of ansiaashtoaws d num as modified apply except at ends to be field connected by welding .
the combined warpage and tilt tolerances shall be onehalf that specified .
for rolled shapes apply mill practice tolerances astm a numa numm except at ends to be field connected by welding .
the combined warpage and tilt tolerances shall be onehalf that specified .
use the above tolerances unless there are deviations that are additive when measured at the toe .
in this case ensure that the maximum offset between adjoining flanges does not exceed num in num mm .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement structural steel will be measured either per pound kilogram or per lump sum .
per pound kilogram basis .
the quantity of structural steel to be measured for payment will be the net weight of metal in the completed and accepted structure .
a unit weight of num lbsft³ num kgmnum will be used to calculate the net weight of steel .
the weights of rolled shapes or plates will be computed based on their nominal weight per foot meter as listed in standard handbooks such as the aisc manual of steel construction .
lump sum basis .
when the plans specify a lump sum basis this work will be measured as an accepted lump sum quantity complete in place .
tabulated quantities are shown on the plans as a service but they do not relieve the contractor of conforming to plan details .
if the plan details and tabulated quantities differ the plan details will govern .
the contractor shall determine the actual quantities required before submitting a bid .
section numsteel structures num num limits a. qualification assume the cost of qualification tests and test sample preparation required under these specifications .
this cost is considered incidental to the work .
b .
testing ultrasonic or magneticparticle testing by the department of transportation under its quality assurance inspection rate of approximately num percent of welds will be performed at no cost to the contractor .
the contractor shall assume the cost of additional ultrasonic or magneticparticle testing above the num percent rate to determine the extent of weld defects and to check corrected work .
the rate for this extra testing will be num per hour for the inspector equipment travel and subsistence .
if the contractor is equipped with satisfactory ultrasonic or magneticparticle inspection equipment the contractor may test the work corrected in the shop at no additional expense to the department but the engineer will interpret the ultrasonic and magneticparticle inspection .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per pound kilogram of structural steel or per lump sum each complete in place .
the contract price for structural steel includes the costs of labor and equipment and the direct or incidental costs of furnishing easy access for inspection and testing .
payment will be made under item no .
num structural steel bridge no._____ per lump sum item no .
num structural steel per lb kg item no .
num structural steelswaybracing per lb kg num adjustments a .
payment conditions the cost of steel joints and metal bearing assemblies used in structures with no structural steel pay item shall be included in the contract price for superstructure concrete unless otherwise shown on the plans .
when authorized changes are made the lump sum payment will be adjusted on a negotiated basis .
on projects with multiple bridges payments will be applied on an individual bridge basis .
upon satisfactory completion of the erecting bolting and welding of structural steel for the bridge num percent of the contract price either per lump sum basis or per pound kilogram basis will be included for payment on the next statement .
steel spans are considered satisfactorily erected when they are placed in their final positions on the substructure properly spaced and anchored down .
bolting is considered satisfactorily complete when defective welds are repaired and found satisfactory by additional inspection .
upon satisfactory completion of field painting the remaining num percent of the contract price will be included for payment on the next statement .
material allowance payments of structural steel will be determined and paid for in accordance with the requirements of section num .
num section numtimber structures num general description this work consists of constructing timber bridges and other timber structures complete in place .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numsteel structures section numpiling section numrepair of galvanized coatings section nummiscellaneous steel materials b. referenced documents awpa standard mnum standard for the care of preservative treated wood products num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials all materials shall meet the requirements of the following specifications material section lumber and timber num piling and round timber num preservative treatment of timber products num miscellaneous metals num structural steel num plain cotton duck num miscellaneous steel materials num paint num insofar as practicable all cutting framing and boring of treated timber shall be done before treatment .
a. miscellaneous hardware galvanize the following items according to subsection num.b.num galvanizing bolts nuts washers all hardware including but not limited to special couplings dowels and spikes repair damaged galvanized coatings according to section num .
section numtimber structures num nails may be black or galvanized .
b .
structural purposes and grades lumber and timber meeting the requirements given in table num of section num lumber and timber shall be used for the structural purposes shown therein .
num delivery storage and handling a .
handling timber handle timber carefully without dropping it breaking the outer fibers bruising it or piercing it with tools .
handle timber with nonmetallic slings .
b. storing materials place all stored material in welldrained locations and keep these locations free from weeds and rubbish .
comply with the following materialspecific storage guidelines num .
untreated timber and piling store untreated materials as follows a .
open stack the materials at least num in num mm above the ground .
b .
pile the materials so water can run off them to prevent warping .
c. protect the materials with durable waterproof covering approved by the engineer .
num .
treated timber and piling close stack treated materials at least num in num mm above the ground and pile them to prevent warping .
num .
timber after fabrication store this timber so the members do not change dimensions before they are assembled .
num .
hardware and miscellaneous metal place metal material in covered storage and protect it from rust and other damage .
num construction requirements general provisions num through num .
num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
making field repairs and applying treatments and coatings make field repairs and apply treatments and coatings as follows num .
repair and apply treatments to treated timber carefully trim cuts and abrasions in creosoted timber or piles and treat them with either of the following section numtimber structures num two hot applications of num percent creosote oil mixed with num percent roofing pitch two thorough brush coats of hot creosote oil followed by a covering of hot roofing pitch for field treatment of other preservatives see awpa standard mnum entitled standard for the care of preservative treated wood products .
a. bolt holes treat bolt holes with creosote oil using an approved manufacturerrecommended pressure bolt hole treater .
after the treatment plug unfilled holes with creosoted plugs .
b .
temporary holes when the approved use of temporary forms or braces results in nail or spike holes in treated timbers or piles fill these holes by driving galvanized nails or spikes flush with the surface or by plugging as specified in subsection num.a.num.a bolt holes .
c. countersunk holes treat these holes with hot creosote oil before placing the bolts .
after placing the bolts fill the holes with hot roofing pitch .
num .
apply treatment to pile heads see subsection num.j repair and treat timber piling step num .
b. framing cut and frame lumber and timber to a close fit so the joints will have an even bearing over the entire contact surface .
the department does not permit shimming or open joints .
matchmark timbers requiring an exact fit .
num .
meet workmanship requirements ensure that workmanship meets the following standards a. nails and spikes drive nails and spikes hard enough to set their heads flush with wooden surfaces .
replace bent nails or spikes .
the department considers deep hammer marks on wooden surfaces poor workmanship .
the department may reject the work with these characteristics .
b .
steel plates and structural shapes workmanship on steel plates and structural shapes shall meet the requirements of section num .
num .
drill holes for bolts dowels rods and lag screws drill holes with the following diameters to receive these hardware items hardware hole diameter round drift bolts and dowels num in num mm smaller than the diameter of the hardware square drift bolts and dowels same as the smallest dimension of the hardware machine bolts same as the diameter of the hardware rods num in num mm larger than the diameter of the hardware lag screws no larger than the body of the screw at the base of the thread countersink holes wherever smooth faces are required .
num .
use bolts and washers use washers of the size and type specified on the plans under bolt heads and nuts to prevent them from contacting the wood .
after completely adjusting the nuts do the following a .
cut the excess length off of bolts projecting more than num in num mm beyond the nuts .
section numtimber structures num b. burr the bolt threads .
c. coat the bolt ends with galvanizing repair compound according to section num .
c. constructing timber substructures construct the timber substructure as follows num .
drive the pile bents .
see section num.e drive piling .
num .
place the caps .
place timber caps so the bearing on their supports is evenly secured and their ends are evenly aligned .
drift bolt the caps to piles and posts .
num .
bolt the bracing .
bolt timber braces where they intersect with piles and posts .
d. constructing timber superstructures construct the timber superstructure as follows num .
install stringers .
install stringers using these guidelines where stringers bear over the width of floor beams and caps size the stringers to a uniform grade .
ensure that lapped ends of treated stringers contact each other .
neatly and accurately frame crossbridging between stringers .
securely toenail the cross bridging by driving at least two nails in each end .
num .
lay single plank floors .
lay these floors using these guidelines lay planks with the adjacent planks drawn together tightly .
lay the plank so the thickness of adjacent planks varies by no more than num in num mm .
spike each plank to each joist or nailing strip using at least two spikes .
the spike length shall be at least num in num mm greater than the thickness of the planks .
carefully grade the plank thickness .
num .
lay laminated or strip floors .
lay these floors using these guidelines dress strips to a uniform thickness of no more than num in num mm and to a uniform width when specified on the plans .
place strips on the edge and at right angles to the roadway center line .
spike each strip to the adjacent strip at num ft num mm intervals by staggering succeeding spike locations num in num mm from preceding locations .
ensure that the spike length is sufficient to pass through two strips and at least halfway into the third .
toenail strips to the stringers with num d num mm nails .
instead of toenailing the contractor may drive spikes vertically through the strip if they penetrate the stringer at least num in num mm .
num .
frame and erect hub guards and railings .
accurately frame and erect hub guards scupper blocks joist blocks and railings to true line and grade .
use these guidelines when erecting hub guards and railings dress hub guards scupper blocks railings and rail posts on all four sides .
securely spike the scupper blocks in place .
bolt the hub guards through the scupper blocks floor planks and if required through the outside joists or nailing pieces .
lay hub guards in sections at least num ft num m long .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
section numtimber structures num num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a .
structural metal plates and structural shapes required on the plans will be measured for payment as specified on the plans only when set up as a specified pay item .
measurement will then be made as provided in subsection num measurement and the cost shall not be included in the contract prices for lumber and timber .
otherwise no separate measurement for payment will be made and the cost shall be included in the contract prices for lumber and timber .
b .
lumber and timber lumber and timber will be measured per thousand feetcubic meter board measure mbm .
quantities in the structure will be computed based upon nominal sizes and the actual length in place .
num limits a .
timber piling timber piling shall be furnished driven and measured as a pay item under section num unless otherwise specified .
b. splices no additional measurement will be made for splices except for overlaps shown on the plans .
c. hardware no separate measurement for payment will be made for items such as the following ubolts vbolts oval head bolts special couplings bolts nuts washers dowels nails spikes other hardware .
the cost of these items shall be included in the contract unit price bid for timber .
num payment a .
structural metal the quantity of structural metal determined as described below in subsection num.a structural metal will be paid at the contract price according to subsection num payment for steel structures .
section numtimber structures num b .
lumber and timber lumber and timber will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per thousand feet board measure mbm cubic meter complete in place and accepted .
the payment will be full compensation for material labor and equipment necessary to complete the work as shown on the plans and as described in this specification .
payment includes incidentals and all costs both direct and indirect .
payment will be made under item no .
num bridge timber untreated per mbm cubic meter item no .
num bridge timber treated per mbm cubic meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numfour hour accelerated strength concrete num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numtwentyfour hour accelerated strength concrete num general description this work consists of manufacturing and placing accelerated strength concrete designed to produce a compressive strength of num psi num mpa within num hours .
except as modified in this specification the provisions of section num shall apply to concrete produced and placed under this specification .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numconcrete structures b. referenced documents aashto m num type e table i num submittals a .
approve chemical admixture for concrete ensure that the manufacturer submits an affidavit that the chemical admixture for concrete meets the requirements of aashto m num type e table i .
section numtwentyfour hour accelerated strength cocrete num b .
establish concrete mix proportions choose one of the following two procedures for establishing concrete mix proportions for concrete placed under this specification .
notify the engineer of the chosen procedure at least num days before placing the concrete .
num .
concrete mix proportions established by the contractor the contractor may propose specific concrete mix design proportions for concrete placed under this specification .
in this case the contractor shall meet these requirements a .
ensure that all materials are from approved sources or from materials stored or stockpiled at the site .
b .
have all materials tested before they are used .
c. have the laboratory verify that the proposed proportions will produce concrete that develops num psi num mpa within num hours .
proposed mixes may be approved without laboratory design study when they include commonly used material combinations .
num .
concrete mix proportions established by the department the contractor may choose to have the department establish the concrete mix proportions .
however the departments approval of the design mix does not relieve the contractor of the responsibility to produce concrete with the specified compressive strength of num psi num mpa .
the department will establish the proportions as follows a .
the contractor shall notify the office of materials of the proposed sources of all materials .
b .
the department will establish the job mix proportions from materials representative of the materials proposed for use provided all materials conform to their respective specifications .
c. the office of materials will determine the following based upon materials intended for use minimum cement content required water content quantities of aggregate addition rates of admixtures d. the department will make the proportions available as public information within one month after the contractor proposes the material sources .
e. the department will not allow materials to be substituted after releasing an approved design unless the office of materials approves of the substitution .
the department will base job mix design proportions upon the following table minimum cement cwtcu yd kg mnum maximum water cement ratio lbs lbs kgkg minimum compressive strength at num hours psi mpa air content slump range inch mm num num num num num num to num num to num to num the department will accept initial design admixture meeting the requirements of materials established in this specification .
however the department will not approve any combination of admixture and cement that produces undesirable characteristics of set time or strength development .
num materials all materials shall meet the requirements of the following specifications section numtwentyfour hour accelerated strength cocrete num material section portland cement type i or type iii num airentraining admixtures num coarse aggregate class a or b gravel or stone num fine aggregate size no .
num num chemical admixtures num calcium chloride num water num the concrete acceleration admixtures may be either of the following calcium chloride a chemical admixture the engineer must authorize chemical admixtures before they are used for concrete .
admixtures will be approved only if an acceptable concrete design is established in the laboratory with materials representative of those proposed for use .
do not use accelerators containing chlorides in prestressed concrete or in bridges or box culverts when the concrete containing the additive will contact the reinforcement steel num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements general provisions num through num .
num personnel a .
quantity of personnel provide enough labor to place consolidate and screed each batch of concrete within one hour after introducing the cement and first mixing water into the mix .
do not place concrete when there are not enough personnel to meet this requirement .
num equipment a .
quantity of equipment provide enough equipment to place consolidate and screed each batch of concrete within one hour after introducing the cement and first mixing water into the mix .
do not place concrete when there is not enough equipment to meet this requirement .
b .
portable mixers the engineer may approve portable mixers when placement quantities at a given location are less than one cubic yard meter .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numtwentyfour hour accelerated strength cocrete num num construction a. batch and mix materials num .
transitmixed concrete when transitmixed concrete is used for concrete containing an acceleration admixture do the following a .
at the plant mix the concrete ingredients excluding the acceleration admixtures and num gal num l of withheld water per cubic yard meter of concrete at mixing speed for num revolutions of the drum .
b .
mix the concrete enroute to the job site at an agitating speed of no more than three revolutions per minute .
c. at the job site add the acceleration admixture and withheld mixing water to the concrete according to these requirements num the engineer will approve the method of adding the acceleration admixture and withheld mixing water .
num the contractor shall measure the admixture into the concrete with an accuracy of plus or minus three percent .
num the contractor shall not add accelerating admixture to concrete that has attained the age of num minutes as measured from the beginning of the initial mixing at the plant .
d. mix the concrete for num additional revolutions at mixing speed .
num .
centralmixed concrete when centralmixed concrete is used for concrete containing an acceleration admixture do the following a. shrinkmix all concrete ingredients excluding acceleration admixture and num gal num l of withheld water per cubic yard cubic meter in the central mixer .
b .
mix the above ingredients enroute to the job site at agitating speed .
all other provisions of subsection num.a.num transitmixed concrete shall apply for adding the acceleration admixture and mixing the concrete at the job site .
b .
cure concrete cure the concrete according to subsection num.z cure concrete except that the engineer may waive the concrete curing period when test results indicate the compressive strength exceeds num psi num mpa .
all provisions of subsection num.x pour concrete in cold weather shall apply except that the protection requirements in step num of subsection num.x may be suspended when test results indicate the compressive strength exceeds num psi num mpa .
num quality acceptance a. compressive strength testing compressive strength testing are conducted as follows num .
georgia dot personnel will cast four test cylinders for each day of concrete placement .
num .
georgia dot personnel will store the cylinders on or adjacent to the pour in a moist condition .
num .
minimum compressive strength shall be according to either of the following for an average of two specimens strength development at num hours num psi num mpa strength development at num days num psi num mpa num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement twentyfourhour accelerated strength concrete will be measured for payment by the square yard meter or cubic yard meter as indicated on the plans and in the proposal .
section numtwentyfour hour accelerated strength cocrete num square yard meter measurements shall be as defined in section num .
for structure concrete cubic yard meter measurements will be the algebraic summation of the plan quantity and any authorized quantity changes .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment twentyfourhour accelerated strength concrete will be paid for at the contract unit price bid either by the cubic yard meter or square yard meter as shown on the plans or in the proposal .
payment will be made under item no .
num twentyfourhour accelerated strength concrete per cubic yard meter item no .
num twentyfourhour accelerated strength concrete per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numcorrugated steel bridge plank num general description this work consists of installing bridge flooring of corrugated steel complete in place and according to the plans and specifications .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numsteel structures section numpainting structures section nummiscellaneous steel materials section numpaint b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials all materials shall meet the requirements of the following specifications section numcorrugated steel bridge plank num material section corrugated steel plank for bridges num paint num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication a. inshop fabrication requirements fabricate plank from steel plate of the thickness shown on the plans .
form the plank to a minimum size of at least num in num mm wide by num in num mm deep with at least two complete corrugations .
the section modulus per inch millimeter shall be equal to or greater than that shown on the plans .
num .
holes for welded attachment to beams shoppunch holes for welded attachment to beams and space the holes as shown on the plans .
num .
painting shop painting shall be of the paint type and the number of coats shown on the plans .
num construction a .
installing plank install the corrugated steel bridge plank as follows num .
place the plank as shown on the plans .
num .
ensure that the bottom corrugations have full bearing on supporting members .
num .
hold the bottom corrugations in full contact with the supporting members until they are securely connected according to the details shown on the plans .
b. welding all welds shall be of the type and size and be placed at the location shown on the plans .
all welding shall meet the requirements of subsection num.c welded construction .
c. field painting apply the type of paint and the number of coats shown on the plans according to section num .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
section numcorrugated steel bridge plank num num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work will be measured for payment in square feet meters including laps of accepted planks .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per square foot meter for corrugated steel bridge plank complete in place .
payment will be made under item no .
num corrugated steel bridge plank per square foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numexpanded mortar num general description this work consists of making and placing expanded mortar composed of a special portland cement concrete and an aluminum powder additive .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcoarse aggregate section numfine aggregate section numportland cement section numaluminum powder section numwater b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials all materials shall meet the requirements of the following specifications section numexpanded mortar num material section portland cement type i num coarse aggregate class a or b stone size no .
num num fine aggregate size no .
num num water num aluminum powder num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a .
using expanded mortar for shear keys when using expanded mortar for shear keys on precast bridge decks thoroughly clean and saturate the recesses in the precast decks with clean water before placing the mortar .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction mix and use expanded mortar according to the following a .
proportion expanded mortar ensure that the expanded mortar consists of a fresh mixture of the composition given in the following table proportions for expanded mortar pounds kilograms of portland cement lbskgs of saturated surface dry aggregate per bag of cement maximum water per bag of cement quantity of aluminum powder fine coarse num num num num num num num gal num l num level tsp .
num ml b .
mix expanded mortar mix the materials as follows num .
mix the materials dry either in a clean mixer or in a clean tight box until a uniform mixture is produced .
num .
add enough water to produce the desired consistency but do not add more water than specified in the proportions for expanded mortar table in subsection num.a .
c. use expanded mortar begin using the expanded mortar according to the temperature requirements in the following table section numexpanded mortar num temperature required action num f num c use mortar within num minutes after mixing .
num f to num f num c to num c use mortar within num minutes after mixing .
num f to num f num c to num c use mortar within num minutes after mixing .
mortar may require additional aluminum powder to secure the required expansion .
additional amounts shall range from num at num f num c to num at num f num c in a straightline proportion .
d. place expanded mortar place the expanded mortar as follows num .
expanded mortar for shear keys a .
completely fill the shear key with mortar .
b. rod the mortar into a dense homogenous mass .
c. float the mortar off flush with the surface of the precast decks .
d. moist cure the mortar continuously for a minimum of three days .
num .
placement restrictions do not place the mortar until after the entire bridge has been erected and all units are in final alignment .
do not allow traffic on the bridge decks until num days after the expanded mortar is placed .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement expanded mortar is not measured for separate payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment expanded mortar will be paid for at the contract price for concrete of the same class as the concrete the mortar comes in contact with and the contractor shall include the cost of expanded mortar in the contract price for such concrete .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numprestressed concrete bridge members num general description this work consists of furnishing prestressed concrete bridge members complete in place except as noted for piling in this specification .
the work includes all items and work necessary to complete the erection according to the plans and specifications .
all prestressed concrete bridge member nominal lengths shown on the plans are horizontal dimensions .
the contractor will be responsible for adjusting the lengths as necessary to account for the final erected position of the member .
fabricate the ends of all members to be vertical in the final erected position .
slope bearing assemblies to accommodate the erected position of the member .
num definitions psc prestressed concrete .
prestressed concrete may be designated psc in specifications and on plans and other documents .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numconcrete structures section numsteel structures section numexpanded mortar section numpiling section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals a. erection drawings furnish erection drawings to the department only when the units are not interchangeable with respect to the following transverse placement within a span longitudinal reversal within a span the drawings shall cover superstructure unit placement including bearing components .
b .
shop drawings submit shop drawings to the department on standard plan size num in x num in num mm x num mm sheets showing complete beam details of the following nonprestressed reinforcement the method of retaining depressed strands in place calculations for determining the strand elongation required to produce the specified pretensioning force detensioning schedule increased length of beam due to vertical alignment section numprestressed concrete bridge members num as an option shop drawings may be submitted on plan sheet sizes of num x num num mm x num mm or num x num num mm x num mm for review and approval .
information contained on these sheets must be legible .
after shop drawings have been approved submit an electronic file that is compatible with bentley microstation j version num cadd operating system or an electronic file in adobe acrobat portable document format .pdf to the engineer .
for bridges carrying railroads only after shop drawings have been approved submit one full size set of reproducible drawings to the department .
num materials all materials and manufacturing methods shall meet the requirements of section num .
reference is also made to the following material section plain steel barsthreaded ends num anchor bolts num bronze bushings bearings and expansion plates num structural steel num elastomeric pads num plain cotton duck num rubber impregnated cotton duck num paint num substitute materials according to subsection num.b.num substitution of reinforcement and subsection num.b.num substitution of strands .
num delivery storage and handling a .
general delivery storage and handling see subsection num prestressed concrete bridge members .
replace members damaged in handling or storage at no additional expense to the department unless the engineer determines that the member is usable .
b .
handling psc beams in handling psc beams the contractor shall ensure that beams maintain an upright position at all times and shall pick up beams at their pickup and support points see subsection num.b.num.e beams .
disregarding this requirement could cause a bridge member to collapse .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication see subsection num.b fabrication .
section numprestressed concrete bridge members num num construction a .
prepare bearing areas requirements for preparing steel bearing areas for psc bridge members will be the same as those specified in section num for steel structures listed below .
other requirements are also noted below num .
steel on concrete see subsection num.c.num steel on concrete .
num .
steel on steel see subsection num.c.num steel on steel .
num .
steel on selflubricating bronze plates see subsection num.c.num steel on selflubricating bronze plates .
num .
steel on elastomeric pads see subsection num.c.num steel on elastomeric pads .
num .
concrete on concrete for concrete caps that psc deck units will bear directly on prepare bearing areas as follows a .
finish the concrete caps with the type ivfloated surface finish specified in subsection num.ab.num type ivfloated surface finish .
b .
cover the caps with asphaltsaturated felt as noted on the plans .
the contractor may use felt of a lighter weight than that required on the plans by increasing the number of layers proportionally .
num .
concrete on timber piling for treated timber piles that will support psc caps prepare bearing areas as follows a .
cut off the pile heads .
b .
have the piles field treated as specified in subsection num.j repair and treat timber piling .
c. protect the piles according to the applicable specifications .
b. erecting psc bridge members erect bridge members according to the handling requirements in subsection num delivery storage and handling and as follows .
refer questions concerning structural requirements to the engineer .
num .
beams erect beams as follows a .
erect beams in conformity with true longitudinal alignment and transverse placement as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
b .
ensure that the locations of fixed and expansion ends are as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
c. do not weld in place structural steel bearing devices that will rest directly upon elastomeric pads while the devices are bearing against the pads .
num .
caps erect psc caps as follows a. align and grade the caps according to the plans .
b .
drift the caps to the timber pile heads according to the plans .
c. proportion and mix expanding mortar according to section num .
section numprestressed concrete bridge members num an approved mortar may be substituted for the expanded mortar as long as it is nonshrinking and commercially produced .
d. fill the drift pin holes with the expanding mortar according to section num .
num .
deck units erect psc deck units such as flat slabs and double tees that will bear directly on caps so that all sections have a smooth uniform bearing on the caps .
a. aligning deck units .
base the final deck unit alignments on the alignment of the traffic faces of the exterior section curbs .
b. shimming .
if shimming is necessary to achieve proper riding surface grade or proper bearing uniformity use steel shims and cut them to the following dimensions the same shape as the area to be shimmed the thickness required to produce the required elevation and load distribution c. restrictions .
if the engineer approves deck erection procedures that involve placing heavy lifting equipment on the decks do not place the equipment until the cap drift pin mortar reaches num psi num mpa .
num .
shear keys pour expanding mortar into shear keys between deck units as follows .
the mortar shall meet the requirements of section num. a .
erect the entire bridge .
b .
ensure that all units are in final alignment .
c. pour the mortar in the shear keys .
d. continuously moist cure the keys for at least three days .
e. keep traffic off the structure for at least num days .
num .
anchor bolts and nut adjustment place anchor bolts and adjust nuts according to subsection num.b.num place anchor bolts and adjust nuts .
num .
deck grading make sure psc bridge members are num days old before grading the bridge deck for screeding .
c. tighten diaphragm bars tighten diaphragm bars as follows num .
bring the diaphragm bar nuts to a snug fit against the beams .
num .
pour the diaphragm .
num .
allow the diaphragm concrete to age at least num days and reach at least num psi num mpa .
num .
tighten the nuts fully .
num .
cut off the excess bar length .
num .
place an approved grout in the recessed area provided for the bars nut and washer .
d. concrete finish use the type iiispecial surface coating finish on psc bridge members according to subsection num.ab and as follows beams outside faces of certain exterior beams as indicated on the table of bridge areas bridge areas requiring a type iii finish in subsection num.ab .
section numprestressed concrete bridge members num deck units traffic and top faces of curbs on exterior units and the outside faces of certain exterior beams as specified in the table of bridge areas requiring a type iii finish in subsection num.ab .. num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. prestressed concrete piling prestressed concrete piling shall be furnished driven and measured as a pay item under section num .
b. beams accepted psc beams will be measured in linear feet meters of each different type designation of beam .
linear measurements will be the nominal lengths shown on the plans .
beam type designations will be shown on the plans and will be related to any of the following cross sectional area and prestress tendons aashto type special design c. deck units accepted psc deck units such as flat slabs and double tees will be measured for payment per span of each different nominal span length .
d. caps accepted psc caps will be measured for payment per each cap .
e. prestressed concrete box beams psc box beams will be measured for payment by the linear foot meter of beam of each vertical depth and by the number of strands in the beam .
num limits no separate measurement will be made for any of the following painting rubbing anchor and bearing components as well as diaphragm bar assemblies on accepted psc beams individual deck units on which curb sections are located material used in anchor components shear key pours and construction expansion joints drifting components anchor components and asphaltsaturated felt for psc caps grouting between psc box beams furnishing and installation of diaphragm bar assemblies and anchor and bearing components num payment payment will be made under section numprestressed concrete bridge members num item no .
num psc beam type per linear foot meter item no .
num box beam depthstrands per linear foot meter item no .
num psc deck units_____ foot meter span per span item no .
num psc caps per each a. beams the quantity of beams determined as provided in subsection num measurement will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter of each different type designation complete in place .
b. psc box beams the quantity of psc box beams will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter .
payment shall be full compensation for furnishing and erecting the beam .
c. deck units the quantity of deck units will be paid for at the contract price per span of each different nominal span length complete in place .
d. caps the quantity of caps will be paid for at the contract price per each complete in place .
e. partial payments material allowance payments for bridge beams will be determined and paid for according to the requirements of subsection num partial payments .
num adjustments upon completion of the erection in its final manner and position num percent of the contract price will be paid on the next statement .
if there is no field rubbing or painting required the num percent may be increased to num percent of the contract price .
if this work is required the remaining num percent will be included on the next statement after the contractor satisfactorily completes the work .
section numasphalt plank bridge floor num general description this work consists of laying asphalt plank slabs as a wearing surface on a prepared bridge deck .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numwaterproofing fabrics section numasphalt plank bridge floor num b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section premolded asphalt plank num cutback asphalt num asphalt cement num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction construct the wearing surface of asphalt plank on a concrete base timber base or waterproofed base as follows a .
concrete base when laying the plank on a concrete base construct the plank floor as follows num .
ensure that the concrete is dry and free from dust and rubbish .
num .
remove surplus talc and other powder from the base .
num .
apply approximately num gal num l of cold cutback asphalt to each num ft² num m² of surface .
num .
brush the cutback asphalt coat out well and allow it to dry .
num .
mop the surface with approximately num lbs num kg of hotapplied asphalt cement for each num ft² num m² of surface .
imbed the plank in the cement as follows a. mop and lay the plank simultaneously before the cement cools .
b .
lay the plank straight and smooth with staggered joints .
ensure that the plank is free of irregularities .
c. crowd each plank snugly against adjacent planks so that seams and spaces between planks are completely filled with asphalt cement .
b .
timber base when laying the plank on a timber base construct the plank floor as follows section numasphalt plank bridge floor num num .
securely spike the wooden floor upon which plank will be laid .
num .
ensure that the surfaces of adjacent planks do not vary by more than num in num mm .
num .
remove nails dirt rubbish etc .
before laying the asphalt plank .
num .
lay the plank the same as for a concrete base see subsection num.a concrete base .
c. waterproofed base when laying the plank on a waterproofed base see section num lay the plank with the final mop of hot asphalt or tar described in subsection num.a.num .
num .
mop the surface and lay the plank simultaneously before the asphalt or tar cools .
num .
lay the plank as specified in subsection num.a.num steps b and c. num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the work is measured for payment in square yards meters of accepted plank the length calculated is measured along the surface .
the width calculated is the width of surface laid .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per square yard meter for asphalt plank bridge floor complete in place .
payment will be made under item no .
num asphalt plank bridge floor _____ in mm thickness per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num general description this work consists of prestressing concrete by posttensioning castinplace concrete .
the work includes furnishing placing and tensioning prestressing steel according to the plan details and these specifications .
num definitions working force and working stress the force and stress remaining in the prestressing steel after the following losses creep and shrinkage of concrete elastic compression of concrete creep of steel loss in posttensioned prestressing steel from the sequence of stressing section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num friction and anchor set see subsection num.j posttension the tendons steps num to num other losses peculiar to the method technique or system of prestressing see subsection num.j posttension the tendons step num num related references a .
standard specifications section numsteel structures section numpainting structures b. referenced documents aashto specifications for highway bridge article num aashto specifications for highway bridge article num astm c num astm a num astm a num astm c num num submittals a. coupler use and location the use and location of couplers in bars entering into the prestressing work is subject to the engineers approval .
b. alternate stressing or anchorage block drawings and calculations when using stressing or anchorage blocks not shown on the plans submit shop drawings and calculations for the blocks to bridge and structural design when submitting the prestressing system calculations and shop drawings .
c. design calculations submit design calculations for the proposed posttensioning system to bridge and structural design for department review and approval .
design calculations may be on letter size sheets .
submit calculations for the size and spacing of the reinforcing around the ducts as shown in figure num to bridge and structural design .
include the following in the calculations required jacking force and elongation of tendons during tensioning using the initial jacking force design the reinforcing to prevent ducts from pulling out because of the effects of web curvature and slope .
stresses in anchorages and distribution plates ensure that the calculations account for reinforcing to prevent the peeling of anchorages from the top and bottom slab .
see figure num for minimum reinforcing requirements for tying ducts to the deck reinforcing .
stressstrain curves typical of the prestressing steel to be furnished seating losses temporary overstresses reinforcing in the concrete to resist tensioning loads determine bearing offsets and expansion joint gaps and adjust for construction sequence prestress shortening and temperature .
section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num figure num figure num section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num d. certificates of compliance the department will accept certificates of compliance for cements to be used .
the department reserves the right however to sample and test the cement before its use and at any time during the progress of the work .
e. certified mill test reports submit certified mill test reports for high tensile prestressing steel to the project engineer .
f. shop drawings submit shop drawings for review and approval according to subsection num.b shop drawings .
place a title block in the lower righthand corner of the drawings that includes the following project number sheet numbering for the shop drawings structure name contractor and fabricator names submit shop drawings on num in by num in num mm by num mm sheets with a num in num mm left margin and a ½ in num mm top bottom and right margins .
the shop drawings shall include the following num .
fully dimensional views showing all projections recesses notches openings blockouts and pertinent design details num .
details of mild steel reinforcing showing size spacing and location including special reinforcing required as determined by the design calculations but not shown on the plans num .
details of ducts for posttensioning tendons showing size type and horizontal and vertical profiles num .
details of duct supports grout tubes and vents showing size type and location num .
details of the relative positions of reinforcing steel ducts and anchorages num .
details of the anchorage systems for the proposed posttensioning system num .
a table giving jacking sequence jacking forces and initial elongation of the tendons at each erection stage for post tensioning num .
details and a complete description of the posttensioning system to be used for permanent tendons num .
details of the prestressing including method sequence and procedure for prestressing and securing tendons procedure for releasing tendons equipment supplier and type tendon size and properties anchorage plates and assemblies num .
information on grouting including grout mix design method of mixing and placing the grout type and capacity of grouting equipment num .
working drawings and bar schedules for each prestressing system num .
details of reinforcing or coil ties under anchorage plates num .
details for usage of highstrength steel bar furnished by the bar manufacturer num .
friction factors used in the prestressing system of deformed bars section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num as an option shop drawings may be submitted on plan sheet sizes of num x num num mm x num mm or num x num num mm x num mm for review and approval .
information contained on these sheets must be legible .
after shop drawings have been approved submit an electronic file that is compatible with bentley microstation j version num cadd operating system or an electronic file in adobe acrobat portable document format .pdf to the engineer .
for bridges carrying railroads only after shop drawings have been approved submit one full size set of reproducible drawings to the department .
g. ram calibration charts before using rams in the work furnish the engineer with a certified chart from the calibration for each ram .
h. designs and details of distribution reinforcing steel the department plans for anchorages show only a minimum amount of distribution reinforcing steel .
design and detail the reinforcement needed to prevent bursting peeling and splitting .
submit the designs and details to the engineer for review and approval .
i .
gauge readings and elongations keep a record of gauge pressures or readings and elongations at the end of each jacking operation and submit it to the engineer for review and approval .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section steel wire strand num structural steel for anchorage devices distribution plates and incidental parts required to be of steel num grout num.c cement num admixtures num water num do not use strands from more than one source within the same tensioning operation .
strands that differ in size from astm a num are to be submitted for prior approval .
high strength steel bars shall meet astm a num type ii and snum through snum supplemental requirements and have manufacturers details for their use .
ensure all bars within any member are of same grade .
bar couplers and locations are to be approved prior to use and shall have tensile strength not less than manufacturers minimum for strength of bar .
allow the department num calendar days before installing prestressing steel to test the steel and approve the materials furnished .
use the anchor devices and distribution plates recommended by the manufacturer of the prestressing system .
section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num have the engineer approve grout for filling recesses or encasing anchoring devices .
use a type recommended by the manufacturer for highly stressed steel .
num delivery storage and handling a .
protect prestressing steel protect prestressing steel against physical damage rust and corrosion .. reject all damaged rusted or corroded prestressing steel .
see subsection num quality acceptance .
b .
package prestressing steel package prestressing wire or strand in containers or shipping forms to protect steel from physical damage and corrosion during shipping and storage .
comply with these packaging requirements num .
place a corrosion inhibitor to protect against rust and corrosion as follows a .
place the inhibitor in the package or form .
b .
incorporate the inhibitor in a carriertype packaging material .
c. apply the inhibitor directly to the steel .
ensure that the corrosion inhibitor does not damage the steel grout or bond strength of the steel to the grout .
num .
immediately replace or restore to original condition damaged packaging or forms .
num .
clearly mark the shipping package or form with the following a statement that the package contains highstrength prestressing steel handling instructions the type kind and amount of corrosion inhibitor used including the date placed safety orders and instructions for use c. ducts num .
place all prestressing steel tendons in openings or ducts .
num .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer use only rigid galvanized ferrous metal that is mortar tight for all longitudinal prestressing steel ducts .
num .
fabricate the ducts with an inside area that is at least double the effective area of the prestressing steel in the duct .
a. fabricate ducts that encase single highstrength prestressing steel bars with an inside diameter at least num in .
num mm larger than the diameter of the bar to be used .
b .
use a minimum wall thickness of num in num mm .
num .
rigid ducts may be fabricated with either welded or interlocked seams .
there is no need to galvanize the welded seam or the transition couplings that connect the ducts to anchoring devices .
num .
weld transition couplings to the anchor plate .
num .
prebend all ducts that must be curved to match the roadway alignment andor tendon profile .
shape the ducts without crimping or flattening them .
num construction requirements num personnel a .
representative of the posttensioning system supplier if the engineer requires provide a representative of the posttensioning system supplier at no additional cost to the department .
section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num provide a representative who is skilled in using posttensioning systems supervises or provides surveillance of the work provides information about the posttensioning system to the engineer as needed num equipment a. prestressing equipment provide the following equipment for construction and prestressing num .
tensioning jacks use tensioning jacks equipped with the following long enough stroke to perform stressing in a minimum number of strokes provide a positive means of marking each elongation increment where two or more strokes are required ports or windows to exam and measure tendon movement slow stress release capability to allow the jack to relax from overstress to the proper seating force num .
tensioning equipment use tension prestressing tendons equipped with the following equipment that allows direct elongation measurement hydraulic ram that determines the tensioning force applied measure the tensioning force applied by the ram using either of the following gauges a .
gauge that measures either the internal hydraulic pressure in the ram or the force exerted by the ram b. springtype dynamometer used with the tensioning force applied directly convert the readings from either of these gauges to actual tensioning forces using calibrated values from a calibration chart .
use gauges with a diameter of at least num in num mm that allow accurate readings of load increments of one percent of the total capacity of the ram used not to exceed two percent of the tensioning force used .
num .
load cell ensure that the range of the load cell does not use the lower num percent of the manufacturers rated capacity to determine the jacking stress .
b .
sampling and inspecting prestressing steel the department will identify sample test and approve all prestressing steel as follows num .
identification a .
assign a lot number to all strand and all bars of each size from each mill heat shipped to the jobsite .
b. tag the lots so that each such lot can be positively identified at the job site .
c. assign and tag each lot of anchorage assemblies and bar couplers .
d. the engineer or department inspector will reject all unidentified prestressing steel couplers or anchorage assemblies received at the site and any items without positive identification .
num .
sampling a .
give to the engineer samples from each size and each heat of prestressing bars and prestressing steel strand and from each lot of anchorage assemblies and bar couplers .
b .
submit with each sample of prestressing strand or bar the manufacturers certification stating the minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the sample furnished .
section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num c. submit enough samples to make up two assembled test units from each heat complete with end fittings and anchoring devices .
test units shall be at least num ft. num m long .
d. if the engineers tests indicate the necessity of retests submit twice the number of previous specimens without cost to the department .
identify the samples by heat number .
e. submit samples to the engineer in ample time to allow for testing tabulating results and in case of unsatisfactory findings to call for and test substitute samples .
f. the department will not pay the contractor additional compensation because of the delay while waiting for approval of the material furnished for testing .
num .
tendon modulus of elasticity a .
submit to the engineer for approval the apparatus and test methods you propose to use to determine the modulus of elasticity .
b .
run bench tests on two samples of each size and type of longitudinal strand andor wire tendon prior to stressing the initial tendon .
c. stress the tendon at an anchor assembly with the dead end consisting of a load cell .
d. apply num percent of the ultimate tension to the test specimen in num increments and record the gage pressure elongation and load cell force for each increment .. e. detension the test specimens back to num in num increments and record the gage pressure elongation and load cell force for each increment .
f. submit the test data to the engineer .
g. reevaluate and correct as necessary the theoretical elongations shown on the posttensioning working drawings based on the results of the tests .
h. submit any revisions to the theoretical elongations to the engineer .
i .
after the initial testing the engineer may require five more tests .
space these tests evenly throughout the duration of the contract .
num .
inplace friction test a .
submit to the engineer for approval the apparatus and test methods you propose to use to measure the inplace friction .
b .
after receiving approval for the apparatus and method test the first draped continuity strand andor wire tendon in place of each size and type .
c. apply num percent of the ultimate tension to the test specimen in num increments and record gage pressure elongation and load cell force for each increment .
d. detension the tendon back to num in num increments and record the gage pressure elongation and load cell force for each increment .
note you only need to run one friction test for each type and size of a tendon for the project .
e. submit the results of the tests loss due to friction and modulus of elasticity to the engineer .
c. grouting equipment use grouting equipment capable of the following continuously grouting the largest tendon on the project in num minutes or less pumping the mixed grout according to the requirements of this specification provide the following grouting equipment section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num mixer capable of continuous mechanical mixing and of producing a grout that is free of lumps and undispersed cement accessory equipment that provides accurate solid and liquid measures to batch materials positive displacement pump able to produce an outlet pressure of at least num psi num mpa gauge pump seals that do the following keep oil air or other foreign substance out of the grout prevent loss of grout or water pressure gauge with a maximum full scale reading of num psi num mpa installed at some point in the grout line between the pump outlet and the duct inlet to establish grout pressure at the pump standby flushing equipment capable of pumping at num psi num mpa gauge and flushing out partiallygrouted ducts a different power source for the flushing equipment than the grouting equipment screen with num in num mm maximum clear openings to screen the grout before it is introduced into the grout pump hopper placed directly over the pump inlet attach the hopper to the pump inlet using a gravity feed .
keep the hopper at least partially full of grout during the pumping operation to prevent air from being drawn into the posttensioning duct .
d. rams twenty days before using rams and their gauges or reading devices in the work have them calibrated by an approved laboratory .
recalibrate the equipment every three months during the work or when the engineer observes erratic results .
for each calibration furnish a calibration chart certified by the laboratory to the engineer .
the engineer may extend the nummonth interval if there are no performance changes .
however recalibrate at least every num months .
num preparation a .
test tendon modulus of elasticity to determine the tendon elongations while stressing bench test two samples of each size and type of longitudinal strand andor wire tendon using the following procedure num .
propose apparatus and methods used to perform these tests for approval by the engineer .
num .
stress the tendon at an anchor assembly with the dead end consisting of a load cell .
num .
tension the specimen to num of ultimate in num increments .
num .
detension the specimen from num of ultimate to num in num increments .
num .
record the gage pressure elongation and load cell force for each increment .
provide this data for the engineer .
num .
reevaluate the theoretical elongations shown on the posttensioning working drawings using the results of the tests .
correct the results as necessary .
num .
submit revisions to the engineer for approval .
num .
perform five more tests after the initial testing if required by the engineer .
space these tests evenly throughout the duration of the contract .
section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num b .
test friction to accurately determine the friction loss in a strand andor wire tendon test in place the first draped continuity tendon of each size and type using the same procedure described for the modulus of elasticity test .
only one friction test for each type and size of a tendon is required for the project .
submit the results of the tests to the engineer .
c. test anchorages before construction test prestressing anchorage blocks of the type indicated in figure num using the proposed jacking system as follows num .
construct and test anchorage test blocks for the following each different radius of bend of the duct into the anchorage each different number of strands per duct arrangement num .
if anchorages reinforcing anchorage geometry anchor plate and duct bend radius are the same within a project or bridge test only the anchorage with the largest jacking force .
num .
assemble a test block with these features same concrete dimensions of the structure cross section at the points of anchorage in the proposed system tendon geometries anchor plates and anchorage reinforcing steel proposed for use in the structure num .
place the tendons .
num .
stress the tendons to the full force required by the design using the proposed jacking system and stressing procedures .
anchorages are acceptable to the department if no concrete cracks wider than num in num mm develop within num days under full force .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
contractor options the contractor may choose from these options when constructing the structure according to the department plans num .
alternative prestressing systems the contractor may use posttensioning systems other than those shown on the plans .
the alternative system may use wires bars or strands anchored with friction grips or bearings .
unless the plans allow do not use prestressing systems that incorporate deadend anchorages .
choose alternative systems that can be stressed from either end unless the construction staging does not allow room to stress tendons from both ends .
in this case use anchorage systems with compression plates or fittings to seat anchor wedges .
num .
alternative stressing or anchorage blocks stressing or anchorage blocks for the structure may deviate from those shown on the plans .
alternate stressing or anchorage blocks must be located inside the box .
place the blocks in any of the following locations at the juncture of the bottom of the top slab at the juncture of the top of the bottom slab and the web walls within fillet areas in reinforced stressing blocks in partial depth diaphragms section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num permanent or temporary stressing blockouts are allowed in the top of the top slab when posttensioning ducts do not have a moistureretaining low point .
b .
install the ducts install ducts for prestressing steel as follows num .
support ducts at intervals of no more than num ft num mm .
the horizontal tolerance for longitudinal ducts in the top or bottom slab is plus or minus num in num mm .
the vertical tolerance for longitudinal ducts is plus or minus num in num mm .
num .
join rigid duct sections using positive metallic connections .
connect the sections carefully to prevent misaligning the ducts at the joints .
num .
use waterproof tape at the connections .
num .
make duct splices so that the nose of the tendon being pushed into the duct goes from a male end into a female end .
this prevents tendons from catching on a duct end .
num .
stagger splices in ducts to prevent splices in the same location in a row of ducts .
stagger the splices to give a num ft num mm longitudinal spacing from row to row .
num .
carefully cut and deburr the ends of ducts .
num .
use ducts or anchorage assemblies with pipes or other connections as grout ports for injecting grout after the prestressing .
ports are required at each tendon anchorage .
num .
place continuousdraped longitudinal ducts in the web in one vertical row at the center of the web .
num .
tie the ducts securely to the saddles which shall hold the duct in position during concrete placement and hardening .
num .
ensure that the clear distance between the ducts is num times the maximum size aggregate in the concrete mix or num in num mm whichever is greater .
num .
do not bundle ducts .
num .
see figure num below for an illustration of how to tie duct support saddles .
num .
if needed place ducts in the top or bottom slab in one of these ways horizontally at the variable spacings in closely and uniformly spaced groups the minimum horizontal clear spacing between ducts must be num in num mm .
num .
install at least one more continuity duct than needed in each web throughout the length of the structure .
this duct will be used during blockage and excessive prestress losses during construction .
num .
position the ends of the additional ducts to use anchorage blocks if necessary .
num .
vent continuity ducts over each intermediate support .
provide vents with a diameter of at least num in num mm and made of either steel or polyethylene .
num .
provide vents at the low point of every duct to drain off water in the duct .
num .
connect vents to ducts using approved metallic structural fasteners .
num .
ensure that the vents are mortar tight taped as necessary sealable capable of allowing grout to be injected through them num .
immediately before installing the prestressing steel demonstrate to the engineer that ducts are unobstructed and free of water and debris .
section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num num .
after installing ducts in the forms keep the duct ends sealed to keep out water and debris .
num .
after posttensioning the steel fill ducts with or without strands full of grout .
num .
after the grout has set remove the ends of the vents flush with the concrete surface .
figure num partial web view c. install reinforcing steel fabricate reinforcing steel and place it according to the plans and shop drawings .
do not cut and remove reinforcing steel to align stressing ducts properly .
replace bars that can not be fabricated to clear the ducts with bars with an adequate lap length .
where bars are extended by the use of couplers the assembled units shall have a tensile strength of not less than the manufacturers minimum guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the bar .
submit revised drawings indicating the proposed bar to the engineer for review and approval .
section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num d. install anchorages secure posttensioned prestressing steel at the ends using permanent anchoring devices recommended by the prestressing steel manufacturer and meeting the requirements herein .. use anchoring devices that hold the prestressing steel at a load producing a stress of at least num percent of the guaranteed minimum tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
e. install distribution devices distribute the load from the anchoring device to the concrete using devices that conform to the following the final unit compressive stress on the concrete directly underneath the plate or assembly does not exceed num psi num mpa or num fci whichever is less .
bending stresses in the plates or assemblies induced by the pull of the prestressing steel do not exceed the yield point of the material or distort the anchorage plate as determined by the engineer when num percent of the load is applied .
the contractor may omit steel distribution plates or assemblies when furnishing large anchoring devices used with a steel grill embedded in concrete to distribute the compressive stresses to the concrete .
install distribution devices as follows num .
place steel distribution plates if used inside the end surface of the member .
num .
recess anchoring devices so that the ends of the prestressing steel and all of the anchoring devices are embedded in concrete .
num .
after posttensioning and grouting the duct clean foreign and loose material off the surfaces of the concrete .
do not clean the concrete until the duct grouting operations are complete .
num .
fill anchoring device recesses with an approved nonshrink grout .
num .
cover the anchoring devices and ends of the prestressing steel with at least num in num mm of grout unless the plans specify more .
f. have the engineer inspect have the engineer inspect and approve the placement of reinforcement ducts and anchorages before pouring concrete into the forms .
g. pour the concrete pour concrete according to section num .
h. install the tendons install tendons in the ducts after pouring the top deck or when the engineer approves .
before installing the tendons demonstrate to the engineer that the ducts are unobstructed and free of water .
install the tendon in the duct as approved by the engineer .
i .
follow weld restrictions the engineer will not allow welds or welding equipment grounds on the forms or near the prestressing steel after the steel has been installed .
j. posttension the tendons posttension the tendons as follows section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num num .
before posttensioning tendons ensure that the deck slab thickness and deck reinforcement cover comply with the plan requirements .
num .
unless otherwise noted on the plans or approved by the engineer wait to prestress castinplace concrete until the compressive strength of all the concrete placed reaches the required numday strength and the concrete is at least num days old .
if the engineer approves the contractor may apply a portion of the prestressing force to a member with a concrete strength less than the value shown on the plans .
even with this partial prestressing the contractor must successfully construct the members .
num .
conduct the tensioning process so that the applied tension and the elongation can be measured .
num .
tension the prestressing steel using hydraulic jacks .
num .
tension the prestressing tendons in continuous posttensioned members by jacking at each end of the tendon .
jacking of both ends does not need to be done simultaneously .
num .
when approved by the engineer and if shown on the plans tension bent cap tendons by jacking from one end only .
num .
tension the prestressing tendons in simple span posttensioned members by jacking from one end only .
num .
when tensioning from one end of the tendon only tension half of the prestressing steel in each member from one end and the other half from the opposite end of the span unless otherwise shown on the plans .
num .
unless allowed on the plans do not use prestressing systems that incorporate deadend anchorages .
num .
where construction staging does not allow room to stress tendons from both sides use anchorage systems with compression plates or fittings to seat anchor wedges .
num .
ensure that the prestressing steel force does not drop below the value shown on the plans .
num .
ensure that the tendon force measured by gauge pressure is within num percent of the force calculated by elongation movement .
num .
if the measured elongation at the jacking stress varies more than num percent from the theoretical elongation or if the unbalanced force about the section center line exceeds num percent a .
check the entire operation and determine the error .
b .
correct the error to the engineers satisfaction before proceeding with the work .
num .
do not allow the total force at each section to drop below the total prestressing force specified .
however the prestressing force may vary plus or minus num percent per tendon .
num .
unless otherwise specified on the plans ensure that the average working stress in the prestressing steel does not exceed num percent of the yield point stress of the prestressing steel .
num .
to determine the amount of steel required ensure that the maximum temporary tensile jacking stress in prestressing steel does not exceed num percent of its specified minimum ultimate tensile strength unless the plans indicate a lower jacking stress .
num .
anchor the prestressing steel at stresses initial stress that will retain working forces at or higher than the minimum values shown on the plans or approved by the engineer .
do not allow the initial stress to exceed num percent of the specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel .
num .
check that the loss of elongation from anchor set agrees with the anticipated value used in the stress calculations .
a .
adjust measured elongation to account for the actual measured anchor set .
b .
maintain num percent agreement between the elongation and the stressing force .
section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num num .
to compute the prestress losses from friction use the formula in the aashto specifications for highway bridge article num .
the total friction losses at any section will be the sum of the effects for each tendon depending on its anchorage location for each tendon .
num .
to compute other prestress losses use the aashto specifications for highway bridge article num .
num .
after stressing and anchoring tendons and after the engineer approves trim projecting tendons by sawing as shown in the approved working drawings .
k. mix the grout grout for prestressing concrete bridge members grout for use with prestressing concrete bridge members includes a mixture of portland cement water and an approved expansive admixture as follows wateruse potable water or other water that meets the requirements of subsection num .
portland cementuse portland cement that meets the requirements of subsection num .
standard usage is type ii portland cement but the engineer may allow type i or iii .
the engineer may require type iii for cold weather grouting .
submit to the department certificates of compliance for the cements used .
however the department reserves the right to sample and test the cement before its use and at any time during the work .
admixtureuse admixtures that meets the requirements of subsection num.a .
note do not use sand in grout used for prestressing concrete bridge members .
num .
before grouting select the material proportions based on the following tests made on the grout documented experience with similar materials equipment and field conditions weather temperature etc .. num .
select admixtures used in grout for prestressing concrete members .
if used and approved by the engineer use admixtures that demonstrates low water content good flowability and minimum bleed .
you may use the following either liquid or solid admixtures enough fine aluminum powder to obtain num to num percent unrestrained expansion of the grout do not use the following thixotropic additives without prior approval from the engineer admixtures that have ingredients corrosive to steel or chemicals in quantities that may have a harmful effect on cement admixtures with chloride ions in excess of num percent by weight of the admixture assuming num lb num kg of admixture per num lbs num kg each of cement florides sulphites and nitrates a .
at least num days before using the admixture submit to the engineer at least num num lbs num kg of a proposed dry type admixture or num quart num l of a proposed liquidtype admixture .
b .
send with the sample a description of the content recommended proportions to be used and the manner and sequence of adding to the mix .
num .
ensure that the water content is the minimum necessary for proper placement and does not exceed a watercement ratio of num approximately num gal num l of water per bag of cement .
num .
add the grout components to the mixer in the order listed or as required by the admixture manufacturer and mix the dry materials in a mixer or clean tight box until the mixture is a uniform consistency water portland cement section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num admixture num .
mix the grout long enough to thoroughly blend it without excessively increasing the temperature or losing admixture expansion properties .
num .
agitate the grout continuously until it is pumped .
num .
do not add water to increase grout flowability that has decreased because grout use is delayed .
the engineer may determine grout pumpability according to the astm c num .
when using this method efflux time for the grout sample immediately after mixing must be at least num seconds .
l. prepare ducts for grouting prepare the ducts for grouting by flushing the metal ducts as determined by the engineer .
num .
use water to flush ducts that contains at least num lbgal num gl of slaked lime calcium hydroxide or quicklime calcium oxide .
num .
use oilfree compressed air to blow out ducts .
m. grout the duct bond prestressing steel to the concrete by filling the space between the duct and the tendon with grout .
grout the duct as follows num .
open the grout and vent openings .
num .
ensure that the pumping pressure at the tendon inlet does not exceed num psi num mpa gauge .
num .
allow grout to flow from the first vent after the inlet pipe to remove residual flushing water or entrapped air .
num .
once water or air is removed cap or otherwise close the vent .
close the remaining vents in sequence in the same manner .
num .
if the grouting pressure exceeds num psi num mpa gauge inject grout at a vent that has been or is ready to be capped .
a .
maintain a oneway grout flow while injecting .
b .
fit the vent used for injection with a positive shutoff .
c. if a oneway flow of grout can not be maintained immediately flush the grout out of the duct with water .
num .
pump grout through the duct and waste it continuously at the outlet pipe until the following happens no visible slugs of water or air are ejected .
the efflux time of the ejected grout is at least num seconds .
num .
to ensure that the duct remains filled with grout a .
close the outlet .
b .
hold pumping pressure for an additional num seconds and then close the inlet .
c. do not remove or open plugs caps or valves used to close off the outlet or inlet until the grout has set .
n. place rust inhibitor if prestressing and grouting are not completed within num consecutive days after installing steel strands in the ducts or within num days in the case of bars use rust inhibitor in the ducts .
prestressing steel installed but not grouted within the specified number of consecutive days is subject to the limits in subsection num.c rust limits .
if the engineer directs remove rejected tendons at no cost to the department .
do not reuse prestressing steel that has been detensioned .
replace detensioned prestressing steel .
section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num o .
paint steel parts paint steel parts exposed in the completed structure as follows num .
field clean the parts according to subsection num.a clean new steel structures .
num .
field paint the parts according to system iv of section num .
num .
paint the ends of strands according to system iv of section num .
num quality acceptance a .
for prestressing concrete bridge members use grout that has a minimum compressive strength of num psi num mpa at num days as determined by astm c num .
b. tendon standards individual wires in a numwire strand or wires in a parallel wire tendon may fail if the total area of wire failure is not more than num percent of the total crosssectional area of tendons in any member .
failure of an entire strand will be subject to structural review .
c. rust limits prestressing steel will be rejected when the opened package pak of prestressing steel has an even coating of rust or rust film over the entire pak .
one or more wires in a strand are rusted throughout their length .
a length of strand or bar contains clinging rust pits or other faults .
prestressing steel will be accepted when rust film can be removed by light rubbing leaving light streaks or spots but no pitting .
rust forms during the num consecutive days or num consecutive days for bars between the installation of steel in the ducts and the prestressing and grouting .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement prestressing castinplace concrete is measured as an accepted lump quantity complete in place .
the contract lump sum price paid for prestressing castinplace concrete will be full compensation for the following furnishing labor materials tools equipment and incidentals doing work to furnish place and tension the prestressing steel in castinplace concrete structures complete in place and as specified on the plans and in these specifications num limits a .
tests tests performed by the contractor will not be paid for separately but will be considered incidental to the project .
no additional payment will be made for testing prestressing anchorage blocks .
costs associated with performing the test including materials equipment and labor will be included in the bid price for prestressing .
section numprestressing concrete by post tensioning num b .
additional compensation no additional compensation will be made for the following furnishing and placing additional deformed bar reinforcing steel ducts anchoring devices saddles distribution plates or assemblies and incidental parts furnishing samples for testing performing testing grouting recesses pressure grouting ducts full compensation will be included in the contract lump sum price paid for prestressing castinplace concrete .
num payment payment will be made under item no .
num prestressing castinplace concrete bridge no._____ per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numprotective platforms num general description this work consists of furnishing materials erecting maintaining removing and disposing of protective platforms that provide additional safety for underpassing traffic during construction of grade separation structures .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references general provisions num through num .
num submittals a .
location of vertical clearance signs the engineer will approve the exact location of vertical clearance signs .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
section numprotective platforms num num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction construct and maintain the protective platform so that no object or liquid will fall from the bridge superstructure or the platform to the roadway below .
this protection is the contractors liability and responsibility .
place protective platforms under spans that pass over pedestrian or vehicular traffic lanes .
place the platforms immediately after setting the beams and before working on the span .
place the platforms immediately after the beams are set and before performing other work on the span .
a .
meet platform specifications construct protective platforms to meet the following specifications num .
platforms shall extend at least num ft num m beyond each side of the outside limits of the structure .
num .
platforms shall completely cover the length of the spans over the traveled ways .
num .
platforms shall maintain the minimum vertical clearance shown on the plans over the traffic lanes .
b. construct and remove protective platforms construct and remove the platforms as follows num .
post w num signs stating low clearance the dimension shown on the plans in the following locations so traffic approaching the bridge site from both directions can see them .
approximately num and num ft num and num m from each side of the bridge on the exterior sides of the bridge superstructure num .
construct the protective platforms to meet the specifications listed in subsection num.a meet platform specifications and follow these requirements a .
keep protective platforms in place until all superstructure work including painting final rubbing and cleanup is complete .
b .
if the platforms fail to provide the required protection stop operations on the spans affected and take remedial action .
do not begin operations again until the platforms are repaired .
num .
remove the protective platforms and the w num signs .
the platforms remain the contractors property .
c. consider other protective platforms the following may be considered satisfactory protective platforms under the following conditions num .
stayinplace metal deck forms .
stayinplace metal deck forms are satisfactory protective platforms between girders .
below the deckform elevation however protective platforms are required for edge beam diaphragm or other construction .
num .
precast prestressed concrete deck panels .
precast prestressed concrete deck panels are satisfactory protective platforms under the same conditions as stayinplace metal deck forms .
num .
overhang brackets .
overhang brackets are satisfactory protective platforms under the following conditions section numprotective platforms num a .
the brackets are floored at least num in num mm beyond the outside edge of a slab with a handrail .
b .
the brackets have a num in num mm curb board .
c. the contractor uses temporary mobile or hanging protective platforms when erecting and removing the overhang from the work .
num quality acceptance a. enforcing compliance if the contractor fails to comply with the requirements in this specification the engineer will shut down the contractors operations .
the engineer may also withhold any monies until these requirements are met .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work is not measured separately for payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the cost of protective platforms will be included in the overall bid submitted .
this price includes furnishing materials and erecting maintaining removing and disposing of the platforms .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numreinforcement steel num general description this work consists of furnishing and placing bar reinforcement steel and superstructure reinforcement steel .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numreinforcement and tensioning steel b. referenced documents qpl num qpl num astm a numa numm astm a numa num m astm d num astm d num section numreinforcement steel num manual of standard practice prepared by the concrete reinforcing steel institute and the western concrete reinforcing steel institute num submittals a .
mill orders and shipping statements furnish three copies of mill orders and shipping statements for fabricated reinforcement steel bars both black and epoxy to the office of materials .
the purchase orders shall include the following complete state project number including the names of the countyies company name and order number of the contractor name and address of the fabricator bar sizes and total weight b .
bar lists and calculated weights furnish the engineer with copies of the fabricators bar lists and calculated weights .
the engineer will compare these copies to the plan quantity .
num materials a .
bar supports requirements bar reinforcement shall meet the requirements of the following specification unless specified otherwise on the plans or in the special provisions .
for a list of bar support sources see qpl num .
material section steel bars for concrete reinforcement num num .
wire supports make wire bar supports from one of the following materials a. galvanized wire use colddrawn wire that is hotdipped and zinccoated to meet the requirements of astm a numa num m table num class d weights of zinc coatings .
b .
stainless wire num for nominal heights of num in num mm and under the legs may be fabricated from colddrawn weldable stainless steel wire containing at least num percent chromium .
ensure that the wire provides a minimum tensile strength of num psi num mpa for bolsters and of num psi num mpa for high chairs .
num for nominal heights exceeding num in num mm the legs may be fabricated from colddrawn carbon steel wire nonstainless steel with stainless steel extensions attached to the bottom of each leg .
c. bright basic wire you may use bright basic wire no corrosion protection for any support placed at least num in num mm clear from a formed surface .
use the same wire sizes as that specified for galvanized wire in subsection num.a.num.a galvanized wire above .
d. plastic protected for bar supports that come in contact with a removable form use colddrawn carbon steel wire .
protect the wire with plastic and use only in these types of bar support configurations sb bb jc hc bc and chc see num if using plastisol for dipping ensure that it meets the following criteria tensile strength num to num psi num to num mpa shore a hardness num to num durometers num if molding plastic legs of polyethylene to the top wire use polyethylene that meets astm d num .
section numreinforcement steel num e. epoxy powder coated wire use epoxy powder that has satisfactory flexibility adhesion and does not conduct electrical current .
f. plastic supports plastic bar supports may be fabricated from virgin or recycled plastic .
supports shall be molded into a configuration that does not restrict concrete flow and consolidation around and under the supports .
the supports shall be able to withstand a load of num lbs .
num kg without exhibiting any breakage or visible deformation .
when tested according to astm d num the water absorption shall not exceed num. g. mortar blocks precast mortar blocks used as spacers and supports shall be made of cement and concrete sand with a num cementsand ration and shall have wires cast into them for fastening to the steel .
support faces shall be approximately parallel and smooth .
the blocks shall be moist cured for a minimum of three num days .
num .
tie wire use at least no .
num gauge black soft iron wire to tie bar reinforcement steel .
b .
fabrication comply with the following requirements num .
bar supports .
fabricate all wire bar supports as per the illustrations given in table num. a .
stainless wire for nominal heights exceeding num in num mm attach stainless steel extensions to the bottom of each leg .
design the leg extensions so that no portion of the carbon steel wire will be unprotected closer than num in num mm from the form surface .
b .
plastic protected apply plastic protection by dipping the bar support in plastic or by molding legs to the top wire .
num apply a plastic coat at least num in num mm thick at points of contact with the form .
num extend the plastic upward on the wire to a point at least num in num mm above the form .
num turn up all legs on wire bar supports at least num in num mm .
c. epoxy powder coated wire apply an epoxy powder coat at least num in num mm thick .
num table numbar support designation requirements symbol bar support illustration type of support nominal height minimum wire sizes type of steel remarks carbon stainless top legs runner legs sb slab bolster all no .
num corrugated no .
num ñ no .
num legs spaced num in num mm on center .
vertical corrugations spaced num in num mm on center .
sbu slab bolster upper all no .
num corrugated no .
num no .
num same as sb bb beam bolster up to num ½ num mm incl .
over num ½ num in num num mm incl .
over num num ½ in num num mm incl .
over num ½ in num mm no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num legs spaced num ½ in num mm on center .
bbu beam bolster upper up to num in num mm incl .
over num in num mm no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num same as bb .
bc individual bar chair all no .
num no .
num .
jc joist chair all ñ no .
num ñ no .
num .
hc individual high chair up to num ½ in num mm incl .
over num ½ num in num num mm incl .
over num num in num num mm incl .
over num in num mm ñ ñ ñ ñ no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num ñ ñ ñ ñ no .
num legs at num degrees or less with vert .
when height exceeds num in num mm legs are reinf .
with welded crosswires or encircling wires .
hcm high chair for metal deck num num in num num mm incl .
over num num in num num mm incl .
over num in num mm ñ ñ ñ no .
num ñ ñ ñ sane as hc .
the longest leg will govern the size of wire to be used .
chc continuous high chair num num ½ num num mm incl .
over num ½ num in num num mm incl .
over num num in num num mm incl .
over num in num mm no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num ñ ñ ñ ñ no .
num legs at num deg .
or less with vert .
all legs num ¼ in num mm on center max .
with leg within num in num mm of end of chair and spread between legs not less than num nominal height .
section numreinforcement steel num chcu continuous high chair upper num num in num num mm incl .
over num num in num num mm incl .
over num in num mm no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num chcm continuous high chair for metal deck up to num in num mm incl .
up to num in num mm incl .
over num num in num num mm incl .
no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num top wire maximum leg spacing num in num mm on center .
no .
num top wire maximum is num in num mm on center .
ujc upper joist chair num to num ½ in num to num mm incl .
measured from form to top of middle portion of saddle bar in ¼ in num mm increments no .
num bar or num in num mm no .
num ñ legs spaced num in num mm on center .
cs continuous support num ½ num in num num mm incl .
over num num ½ in num num mm incl .
over num ½ num in num num mm incl .
no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num no .
num legs spaced num in num mm on center num in num mm on center at bend point .
middle runner used with heights over num in num mm .
zig zag width num in num mm min .
if the top wire on continuous supports are not designated as corrugated the manufacturer may use either straight or corrugated wire .
refer to the manual of standard practice prepared by the concrete reinforcing steel institute and the western concrete reinforcing steel institute for bar support illustrations .
to provide adequate stability against overturning make the leg spread measured between points of support on the minor axis of the support at least num percent of the nominal height .
to provide adequate stability against overturning make the leg spread measured between points of support on the minor axis of the support at least num percent of the nominal height .
to provide adequate stability against overturning and to provide adequate load capacity make the leg spread measured between points of support on the minor axis of the support be between the minimum and maximum percentages of the nominal height as shown nominal height in .
mm distance between supports of nominal height under num in num num in num num in num num in num num in num num in num over num in num minimum num num num num num num num maximum no limit num num num num num num num num .
reinforcement steel .
fabricate reinforcement steel bars in the planes they were designed for and to the tolerances specified in the fabrication tolerances illustration figure num .
bar dimensions shown on the plans are outtoout unless otherwise noted on the plans .
the maximum allowable deviations out of the design plane are as follows bar size allowable deviation no .
num num m bars and under num in num mm no .
num num m bars and over num in num mm bend the reinforcement steel to the shapes and dimensions specified on the plans .
do not rebend and use bars that have been rejected .
hooks and bends shall comply with the manual of standard practice prepared by the concrete reinforcing steel institute and the western concrete reinforcing steel institute unless otherwise shown on the plans .
figure num fabrication tolerances c. acceptance num .
plastic protected bar supports if using plastisol test the tensile strength of num to num psi num to num mpa and the shore a hardness of num to num durometers .
a .
test the insolubility of the plastisol by immersing it in methylethylketone mek commercial grade num percent solution for one hour .
section numreinforcement steel num b .
use the performance test procedure for plastic protected bar supports in the crsi manual of standard practices .
ensure that the plastic does not deform permanently when heated to num f num c. c. reject any material that shows metal exposed at points of contact after being heated .
d. reject any material that shatters or severely cracks under an impact loading subjected at num f num c. reject any plastic on the fabricated unit that chips cracks or peels under ordinary job conditions .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling after reinforcement steel is fabricated by one of the steel fabricators listed on qpl num handle and store it as follows load transport unload and handle reinforcement steel in a way that prevents damage .
block unloaded reinforcement steel off the ground and store it in piles separated by size and type .
protect reinforcement steel from the weather if prolonged exposure is expected and the engineer requires the protection .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation before placing reinforcement clean off loose mill scale rust scale and coatings that will destroy or materially reduce the bond .
num fabrication see subsection num.b fabrication and subsection num.b fabrication .
num construction bar schedules are shown on the plans as a service .
the contractor is responsible for conforming to the plan details .
if there is a discrepancy between plan details and bar schedules the plan details take precedence .
space reinforcement steel within permissible tolerances .
tie and support the reinforcement steel so it can not move during concrete placement .
twist bar ties at least two full turns .
the engineer may require double bar ties if single bar ties do not keep the bar reinforcing steel secure under construction traffic .
tie epoxycoated reinforcement steel with the epoxycoated or plasticcoated tie wire specified in section num .
use the following placing requirements a. footing reinforcement steel num .
footing ties .
tie mat steel at each intersection on the outer edges and at alternate intersections within the mat .
num .
footing steel support .
support mat steel using precast blocks with the maximum dimensions of num in x num in num mm x num mm plan clearance .
fasten the precast blocks with castin wires .
steel may be supported by other satisfactory means approved by the engineer .
do not use rocks or random pieces of broken concrete to support steel .
section numreinforcement steel num num .
footing steel tolerances .
place mat steel within num in num mm vertically from the bottom clearance and num in num mm from the side clearance .
do not deviate more than num in num mm from the location indicated on the plans as seen in the plan view .
b .
column and wall dowel bars num .
dowel bar position .
position dowel bars so the column bars or vertical wall bars can be spliced and tied in the location the plan specifies .
num .
dowel bar support .
before pouring concrete in any footing do the following a .
place dowel bars .
b. construct a rigid template across the top of the footing to support the dowel bars .
c. attach dowel bars to the template so they can not move during concrete placement .
d. do not push dowel bars into wet concrete after placing the concrete .
num .
dowel bar tolerances .
place dowel bars within num in num mm of plan location .
do not deviate more than num in num mm on the side clearance .
c. column reinforcement steel num .
column steel support .
space steel off side forms using precast blocks with maximum dimensions of num in x num in x plan clearance num mm x num mm .
fasten the blocks with castin wires .
num .
vertical bar tolerances .
place vertical bars within num in num mm of the location indicated on the plan .
do not deviate more than num in num mm on the side form clearance .
num .
hoop tolerances .
place hoops within num in num mm of specified locations .
do not deviate more than num in num mm on the side form clearance .
num .
hoop ties .
tie hoops as follows a .
tie hoops at intersections with dowel bars and corner vertical bars .
b .
tie other vertical bars to at least every third hoop on a staggered basis both vertically and horizontally .
d. wall reinforcement steel num .
wall steel support .
space steel and mat supports as follows a .
space steel off side forms using precast blocks with maximum dimensions of num in x num in x plan clearance num mm x num mm .
fasten the blocks with castin wires .
b .
space mat steel using satisfactory spacing devices approved by the engineer between wall mats .
ensure that the spacing devices provide enough space between steel mats according to the plans .
num .
wall bar tolerances .
space wall bars within num in num mm for any bar .
do not allow the tolerance to accumulate causing an omission of bars .
do not deviate more than num in num mm on the side form clearance .
shift bars more than the tolerance only when necessary to clear a fixture .
do not reduce the number of bars specified for the pour .
place any remaining bars on either side of the fixture to the spacing specified on the plans and to the tolerance specified in the previous paragraph .
num .
wall ties .
tie wall steel as follows a .
tie steel at each intersection on the outer edges and at every third intersection within the mat .
b .
for large walls tie steel at alternate intersections or at each intersection if necessary .
c. check for bar displacement after the initial tying and correct it before pouring concrete .
e. beam and cap reinforcement steel num .
beam and cap steel support .
support beam and cap steel as follows a .
space upper main longitudinal steel located below the top bars vertically using precast blocks with maximum dimensions of num in x num in x plan clearance num mm x num mm .
fasten the blocks with castin wires .
section numreinforcement steel num b .
maintain side form clearance using precast blocks with maximum dimensions of num in x num in x plan clearance num mm x num mm .
fasten the blocks with castin wires .
c. maintain bottom clearances using approved beam bolsters see symbol bb on the table of bar support designation requirements table num. d. support additional layers of main longitudinal bottom steel in beams and caps that are not bundled from the lower layers with upper beam bolsters placed directly over lower supports .
refer to symbol sbu on the table of bar support designation requirements table num. e. space beam bolsters no more than num ft num mm from the end of a beam or cap .
additional bolsters will be required at a maximum spacing of num ft num m. num .
beam and cap steel tolerances .
place the bottom and top clearance of a layer of main longitudinal steel within num in num mm of the plan vertical dimension for that layer .
do not deviate more than num in num mm on side form clearance .
place each stirrup within num in num mm of its specified location .
if transverse spacing is not specified on the plans ensure that the main steel in beams and in tops and bottom of caps has at least num in num mm horizontal clearance between bars .
num .
beam and cap steel ties .
tie beam and cap steel as follows a .
tie intersecting bars .
b .
ensure that ties on bundled bars are spaced no more than numft num m apart .
c. ensure that bundled bars have at least three ties per bundle .
f. box culvert slabs num .
box culvert slab support .
support box culvert slabs as follows a .
support walls .
place steel supports according to the requirements for walls in subsection num.d wall reinforcement steel .
b .
support bottom slabs .
place supports for single mat steel or for bottom mat steel according to the requirements for footings in subsection num.a footing reinforcement steel .
if more than one mat of steel is required by the plans support the top mat from the bottom mat using upper beam bolsters sbu or other satisfactory means approved by the engineer .
c. support top slabs .
support the top mat steel of top slabs using either of the following continuous high chairs placed near each end of the top bends of truss bars .
refer to symbol chc on the table of bar support designation requirements table num .
individual high chairs at a maximum longitudinal spacing of num ft num m. refer to symbol hc on the table of bar support designation requirements table num .
support the bottom mat steel of top slabs as follows num use slab bolsters spaced approximately num in num mm from the inside faces of walls .
refer to symbol sb on the table of bar support designation requirements table num num additional bolsters will be required along the length of the slab at a maximum spacing of approximately num ft num m to maintain the bottom clearance .
num the contractor may support bottom mats using precast blocks spaced approximately num ft num m maximum in any direction .
blocks shall have maximum dimensions of num in x num in x plan clearance num mm x num mm .
fasten the blocks with castin wires .
if the engineer determines that precast blocks do not provide proper support and maintain bottom clearances use slab bolsters .
refer to symbol sb on the table of bar support designation requirements table num .
num .
box culvert slab tolerances .
place bar reinforcing steel in the walls according to the tolerance requirements in subsection num.d.num wall bar tolerances .
section numreinforcement steel num place top and bottom slab reinforcing bar mats according to the tolerances specified in subsection num.g.num bridge deck slab tolerances .
num .
box culvert slab ties .
for top and bottom slabs tie the reinforcing steel in each layer at the following locations each intersection on the outer edges every third intersection within the mat g. bridge deck slabs num .
bridge deck slab bottom mat supportslab bolsters .
support bridge deck slab bottom mat reinforcing with slab bolsters as follows a .
use lines of longitudinal slab bolsters .
refer to symbol sb on the table of bar support designation requirements table num. b .
ensure that slab bolsters that contact the forms are corrosion resistant .
c. place slab bolsters along both sides of each beam approximately num in num mm to num in num mm from the beam edges .
d. if the spacing between the lines of bolsters exceeds num ft num m place an additional row or rows of bolsters parallel to and in between the lines of bolsters so the maximum spacing between the lines of bolsters does not exceed num ft num m. e. if the reinforcement extends num in num mm or more past bolsters on curb or median overhangs place an additional row of bolsters approximately num in num mm from the end of the reinforcement .
f. on skewed bridges where main transverse deck steel is not placed parallel to skew support discontinuous ends of cutoff transverse bars using slab bolsters .
refer to symbol sb on the table of bar support designation requirements table num .
place bolsters parallel to skew and as close to the cut ends of bars as possible .
num .
bridge deck slab bottom mat supportprecast blocks .
the contractor may support bottom mat reinforcing in the panels between beams using precast blocks instead of slab bolsters as follows a .
use precast blocks with maximum dimensions of num in x num in x plan clearance num mm x num mm .
b. fasten the blocks with castin wires .
c. space the blocks a maximum of num ft num m longitudinally .
d. space the blocks transversely according to the requirements for slab bolsters described in subsection num.g.num bridge deck slab bottom mat supportslab bolsters steps c d and e. e. if precast blocks do not adequately support the reinforcing steel use slab bolsters .
refer to symbol sb on the table of bar support designation requirements table num .
num .
bridge deck slab top mat support using continuous high chairs support top mat reinforcing steel with continuous high chairs as follows except as noted in alternate num and alternate num .
refer to symbol chc on the table of bar support designation requirements table num. a .
use a line of longitudinal continuous high chairs .
refer to symbol chc on the table of bar support designation requirements table num. b .
place the continuous high chairs num in num mm from the edge along both sides of each beam .
c. place another line of continuous high chairs num in num mm from each outside edge of the slab .
d. if the spacing between the lines of continuous high chairs exceeds num ft num m place an additional row or rows of continuous high chairs so the maximum spacing between the lines of continuous high chairs does not exceed num ft num m. refer to symbol chc on the table of bar support designation requirements table num .
num .
bridge deck slab top mat support using alternate num .
when truss bars are used for main slab transverse reinforcing support top mat steel using individual high chairs as follows a .
place individual high chairs in a line num in num mm from the edges along both sides of each beam .
refer to symbol hc on the table of bar support designation requirements table num. b .
place another line num in num mm from each outside edge of the slab .
maximum spacing for individual high chairs is num ft num m longitudinally and num ft num m transversely .
section numreinforcement steel num num .
bridge deck slab top mat support using alternate num .
when truss bars are not used for main slab transverse einforcing support top mat steel using continuous high chairs upper as follows a .
place lines of longitudinal continuous high chairs upper directly over the lines of longitudinal slab bolsters that support the bottom mat steel .
refer to symbols chcu and sb on the table of bar support designation requirements table num. b .
on skewed bridges where main transverse deck steel is not placed parallel to skew support discontinuous ends of cutoff transverse bars using continuous high chairs chc placed parallel to skew as close to the cut ends of bars as possible .
c. on bridges skewed less than num degrees place an additional no .
num numm bar parallel to the skew for the full deck width and as close as possible to the deck joint .
securely tie this bar to the following to maintain correct bar mat location the underside of the top mat of reinforcing steel the forms the supports beams both forms and supports beams d. when using prestressed concrete deck panels securely tie the top mat of bar reinforcing steel to each shear bar and pickup loop in the panels .
this keeps the top bar reinforcing mat in the correct vertical position .
num .
bridge deck slab tolerances .
bridge deck slab tolerances are as follows a .
top and bottom mat .
top and bottom clearances for reinforcement steel mats shall be within num in num mm of the dimension shown on the plans .
do not deviate horizontal spacing or end and edge clearances of the mats more than num num in num mm from the spacing shown on the plans .
b .
curb and sidewalk bar .
place curb and sidewalk bars within num in num mm in all directions of the plan dimension .
c. truss bar .
if using truss bars in the bridge deck raise the bar to meet the top clearance specified on the plans .
do not deviate from the bottom clearance specified on the plans .
num .
bridge deck slab bottom mat ties .
tie reinforcing steel as follows a .
tie the steel at each intersection of the outer edges and every third intersection within the mat unless the steel is coated with epoxy .
b .
tie epoxycoated reinforcing steel at every other intersection within the mat .
num .
bridge deck slab top mat ties .
tie reinforcing steel as follows a .
tie the steel at each intersection on the outer edges and every other intersection within the mat unless the steel is coated with epoxy .
b .
tie epoxycoated reinforcing steel at every intersection .
h. reinforcement steel splices furnish reinforcement steel in the full lengths shown on plans .
splice as shown on the plans .
do not make other splices unless approved by the engineer .
place bars in continuous contact on lapped splices .
wire the bars together to maintain a clearance not less than the minimum clear distance to other bars and to the surface of the concrete .
splice length shall be at least num in num mm on no .
num numm longitudinal bars for castinplace box culverts unless indicated otherwise on the plans .
i. reinforcement steel welds weld reinforcement steel only where shown on plans .
section numreinforcement steel num j .
minimum steel spacing requirements the minimum spacing limitations are as follows unless shown otherwise on the plans clear distance between parallel bars shall be at least the largest measurement listed castinplace concrete precast concrete manufactured under plant control conditions num bar diameters num bar diameter num times the maximum size of the coarse aggregate num times the maximum size of the coarse aggregate num in num mm num in num mm num quality acceptance place reinforcement steel and have it inspected and approved by the engineer before placing concrete .
if this requirement is violated the engineer may reject the concrete and require the contractor to remove it .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work is measured for payment as an accepted lump quantity or in pounds kilograms of accepted bar reinforcement steel whichever is shown on the plans .
the department reserves the right to revise bar reinforcement steel quantities to correct errors and reflect changes on the plans .
payment per lump sum the quantity of bar reinforcing steel measured for payment per lump sum basis shall conform to the plan details and will include reinforcement in concrete handrailings concrete parapets and barriers .
payment per pound kilogram the quantity of bar reinforcement steel measured for payment per pound kilogram in bridges and concrete box culverts will be the algebraic sum of the base pay quantity and authorized quantity changes .
reinforcement bar weight calculations will be made using the theoretical unit weight in pounds kilograms per foot meter for deformed bars as shown in the table of deformed bar designation numbers units weights and nominal dimensions table num .
this table is taken from astm a num .
lengths of bent bars will be the sum of the component sections of the bars as shown on the plans .
table numdeformed bar designation numbers unit weights and nominal dimensions nominal dimensions bar designation no .
unit weight lb ft kgm diameter in mm crosssectional area in² mm² perimeter in mm num numm num num num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num num section numreinforcement steel num nominal dimensions bar designation no .
unit weight lb ft kgm diameter in mm crosssectional area in² mm² perimeter in mm num numm num num num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num num num numm num num num num num num num num bar numbers are based on the number of eighthsofaninch included in the nominal diameter of the bars .
metric equivalents are rounded to the nearest whole millimeter .
num limits a .
construction of minor items no separate measurement or payment will be made for the cost of bar reinforcement steel used in constructing minor items .
b. prestressed concrete bridge members bar reinforcement steel in prestressed concrete bridge members will be considered a component part of the members .
the cost shall be included in the contract price for prestressed concrete bridge members .
c. handrail end posts reinforcement steel in handrail end posts that are a part of the superstructure or substructure will be considered part of the superstructure or substructure quantities .
d. lap splices extra reinforcement steel in lap splices permitted for convenience at splices not shown on the plans will not be measured for payment .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per lump sum or per pound kilogram of bar reinforcement steel each complete in place .
payment will be made under item no .
num superstructure reinforcement steelbridge no._____ per lump sum item no .
num bar reinforcement steel per pound kilogram num adjustments a .
plan quantities assume the burden of proof for errors of commission or omission in the plan quantities .
the department will not consider requests for additional monies because of plan errors unless they are submitted with the bar lists and weights described in subsection num.b bar lists and calculated weights .
projects involving multiple bridges or nonskewed concrete box culverts will be considered on an individual basis .
quantities for bridges and concrete box culverts shown on the contract plans including standard plans will beconsidered the base pay quantity .
calculated additions or deductions will be applied to the base pay quantity when quantity changes authorized by the engineer are made .
changes include but are not limited to the following section numreinforcement steel num raising or lowering foundations lengthening or shortening concrete box culverts correcting plan quantity errors or placement details b .
lump sum payment when authorized quantity changes in the bar reinforcement plan quantity are made lump sum payments will be adjusted on a prorata basis as follows num .
if the calculated bar reinforcement weights furnished by the contractor differ from the plan quantity by more than two percent the bridge office will recalculate the plan quantity .
num .
if the recalculated plan quantity differs by more than two percent from the original plan quantity the plan quantity will be revised by the bridge office to equal the recalculated quantity or the contractors quantity whichever is lower .
the lump sum payment will be adjusted on a prorata basis .
when the contractor exercises an optional feature of the plans that results in the only increase or decrease to the base pay quantity there will be no increase or decrease in payment .
however if the two percent variation is being considered the effects of the optional feature will favor the department .
c. prestressed concrete deck panels payment for prestressed concrete deck panels will be num percent of the lump sum superstructure reinforcement steel price .
payment will be made after panels are placed .
payment for posttensioned box girder bridges will be num percent of the lump sum superstructure reinforcement steel price only for the reinforcement steel in the top slab of the box .
section numshear connectors num general description this work consists of furnishing and welding shear connectors as shown on the plans .
this work is a pay item only when specified in the contract .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numsteel structures b. referenced documents astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials materials shall meet the following requirements unless otherwise specified channel type shear connectors shall be manufactured from structural steel meeting astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num .
section numshear connectors num use the stud type shear connectors of the size or diameter and length specified on the plans .
do not paint or galvanize studs .
ensure that stud type shear connectors and the welding comply with subsections num.h and num.c welded construction .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment ensure that equipment for welding chipping and oxygen cutting is designed manufactured and maintained so that qualified welders and welding operators can meet the specification requirements .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. fabricate shear connectors fabricate shear connectors according to the specifications and the plan details .
num .
channel type shear connectors length tolerances for cutting the channel type are plus num in num mm and minus num in num mm .
num .
stud type shear connectors the stud length specified shall be the length after welding .
b. construct shear connectors shear connectors may be welded to the girder flanges beam either in the shop or at the site .
in either case ensure that shear connector welding and construction complies with subsections num.h and num.c welded construction the plan details and the following num .
before welding prepare shear connectors and base metal as follows a .
clean the shear connectors and the base metal of rust scale oil paint and other harmful substances that would affect the welding operation and the bonding to concrete .
if the connectors are excessively pitted or can not be cleaned they will be rejected .
b. wirebrush peen prickpunch or grind the base metal where the shear connectors will be welded .
perform this step only when necessary to obtain satisfactory welds .
num .
do not weld shear connectors when the temperature of the base metal is below num f num c or when the surface is wet or exposed to rain or snow .
num .
install shear connectors as follows a .
channel type shear connectors location tolerances for individual connectors are plus or minus num in num mm from the plan location .
place connectors at right angles to the beam flanges .
section numshear connectors num b .
stud type shear connectors install stud type shear connectors according to subsections num.i.num paragraph num and num.i.num paragraph num .
c. repair defective welds repair defective welds shear connectors and base metals as follows num .
channel type shear connectors repair channel type shear connectors as follows a .
repair undersized but otherwise sound welds by bringing the weld up to size with additional welding .
b .
repair undercut caused by the welding process by filling with additional weld metal .
c. repair unsound welds as follows num remove the weld by chipping .
num if removing unsound welds damages the base metal repair the base metal by welding and grinding before rewelding the shear connector .
num replace the weld with sound welds .
num .
stud type shear connectors repair stud type shear connectors according to subsections num.i.num paragraph num and num.i.num paragraph num .
num quality acceptance a .
inspect welds the engineer will inspect and must approve shear connector welds before the contractor encases them in concrete .
the engineer will inspect them as follows num .
channel type shear connectors the engineer will visually inspect the welds to determine the following welds are sound .
welds are the size shown on the plans .
welds are the proper profile .
if the engineer finds defective welds they shall be repaired at the contractors expense as specified in subsection num.c repair defective welds .
num .
stud type shear connectors the engineer will inspect stud type shear connectors according to subsections num.i.num paragraph num and num.i.num paragraph num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement when a pay item for shear connectors is specified in the contract the quantity measured for payment will be the pounds kilograms of installed shear connectors accepted .
pay quantities will be computed as follows num .
channel type shear connectors .
the weight will be computed for the length and nominal weight per foot meter shown on the plans .
num .
stud type shear connectors .
the weight will be computed from the nominal dimensions of a stud as shown on the plans .
section numshear connectors num num limits a .
weights the weights of weld metal flux arc shield etc .
will not be included in the pay quantity but their costs shall be included in the contract price for this item .
b .
separate measurement generally there will be no pay item specified for shear connectors in the contract .
therefore there will be no separate measurement and the cost of furnishing and installing the connectors shall be included in the contract price for structural steel .
num payment when a pay item is specified for shear connectors in the contract the work will be paid for at the contract price per pound kilogram for shear connectors of the specified type complete in place .
payment will be made under item no .
num channel shear connectors per pound kilogram item no .
num stud shear connectors per pound kilogram num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numprecast reinforced concrete box culverts barrel sections and end sections num general description this work consists of constructing transporting joining and finishing precast box culvert installations normally as alternates to castinplace box culverts according to plan details and these specifications .
use precast boxes only in these situations under allowable fill heights designated on the plan details as approved design numbers for precast barrel sections refer to plan designations .
precast ends refer to precast wingwalls parapets apron sections toewalls and baffles for outlets .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures section numconcrete structures section numexpanded mortar section nummasonry materials section numprecast reinforced conrete box culverts barrel sections and end sections num section numconcrete pipe section numpipe appurtenances section nummiscellaneous steel materials b. referenced documents astm c num aashto m num aashto m num aashto m num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials materials shall meet the requirements of the following specifications material section concrete for precast boxes num all other concrete num reinforcing steel num steel bolts nuts and washers num anchor bolts num bituminous plastic cement num preformed plastic gaskets num grout or mortar num expanded mortar num corrugated steel pipe sleeves aashto m num corrugated plastic pipe sleeves aashto m num backfill num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num precast reinforced concrete box culvert barrel and end a .
requirements refer to the standard specifications or plan details for the reinforcement steel requirements concrete strength maximum fill heights and minimum cover .
use the design number for the specified size and fill height .
num .
components a .
use precast end components that are according to plan details notes and section num. b .
ensure that the precast wingwalls and aprons are built so that the corrugations of the pipe sleeve insets lock into the concrete and still has the reinforcement steel maintained all around the pipe sleeve insets .
c. use modified connector boxes of the type required for connections to precast ends or castinplace ends .
section numprecast reinforced conrete box culverts barrel sections and end sections num d. have the manufacturer of the precast ends galvanize and provide all steel bolts nuts steel plates and anchor bolts .
e. use pipe sleeves rigid enough to withstand concrete placement anchoring and construction loads without damage or excessive deformation .
num .
alternates the contractor may at no additional payment use precast box sections with a greater span or height than specified on the plans under the following conditions minimum cover required for the design number is retained .
no detrimental effects result from using the larger size .
the contractor also may substitute a combination for multiple line culverts if the clear height and total clear spans are at least equal to that specified on the plans .
submit any alternate designs alternate materials or alternate methods of manufacturing to the department for approval .
include all the necessary details andor specifications in the submission .
num .
certification submit to the engineer a certificate from the manufacturer of the precast boxes and precast ends stating that all of the precast box sections and all of the precast end components manufactured in this plant for the use of the department contain at least the minimum requirements of reinforcement steel specified herein .
a .
ensure that the certificate is sworn to for the manufacturer by a person having legal authority to bind the company .
b .
submit the manufacturers certificate with a guarantee providing the following num all precast box andor all precast end components will be replaced without cost to the purchaser if the reinforcement steel does not meet these specifications .
num language so that the guarantee remains in effect as long as the manufacturer continues to furnish precast box culvert barrel sections and precast end sections for use by the department .
the manufacturers certificate will not limit the right of the department to make inspections and checks of the materials in manufactured precast sections prior to and during the construction of the culvert line .
b .
fabrication except as otherwise specified on the plans or in the specifications manufacture precast box culvert barrel sections according to aashto m num or astm c num and applicable parts of gdt num .
num .
lifting .
cast no more than four handling devices or lifting holes in the top of each box in each precast wing section and in each precast apron section .
a .
make holes no more than num in .
num mm in diameter nor more than num in num mm square .
b .
do not cast lifting holes in the sides or bottom of the boxes .
c. do not lift apron sections or wingwall sections by or through the pipe sleeve insets .
num .
finishing and marking .
put a type i ordinary formed surface finish on the precast boxes and precast end components as in subsection num.ab .
a .
ensure that the precast boxes and precast end components except baffles have the following markings made either by indenting into the concrete or with waterproof paint .
num name or trademark of the manufacturer num date of manufacture num box sections span rise maximum fill height minimum cover and concrete design strength section numprecast reinforced conrete box culverts barrel sections and end sections num num ensure that the top of each precast box is clearly indented by marking into either the inner or outer surface of the concrete during manufacture .
num ensure that the word top is painted on the inside top surface of each box in waterproof paint .
ensure that this marking comes from the manufacturer at the plant .
num when so indicated on the plans number and matchmark the sections .
num ensure each section bears the department inspectors approval stamp .
num .
precast parapets .
you may allow the manufacturer to bolt precast parapets to connector box type p at the manufacturers plant or at the construction site .
have the manufacturer check all precast components for fit and connections before transporting the components to the project .
c. testing and inspection num .
use applicable parts of gdt num .
num .
determine concrete compressive strength from cylinder or core tests as required by the laboratory .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a. excavation bedding and backfill excavate place bedding and backfill according to section num and the plan details .
place bedding as follows num .
place bedding between graded forms set at least num in num mm outside each outside wall of the boxes or from the edge of the precast apron sections .
num .
shape the bedding material to fit the bottom of the precast sections .
num .
screed off the graded forms .
num .
grade the bedding surface essentially perfect .
the maximum tolerance is plus or minus num in num mm .
num .
ensure that the bedding is level in the plane perpendicular to the culvert center line .
num .
check the grade of the bedding surface on both sides before installing precast sections .
num .
after placing the precast sections on the graded bedding remove and reuse the forms if needed .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction install the structures as required by the specifications and the plan details or as directed by the engineer .
provide necessary temporary drainage .
section numprecast reinforced conrete box culverts barrel sections and end sections num a .
install barrels install barrels according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
multiple barrel box culverts .
install these box culverts as follows a .
lay precast box culvert sections in the prepared trench with socket ends pointing upstream .
b .
joint the sections with either bituminous plastic cement or preformed plastic gaskets using these guidelines in bituminous plastic cement joints fill the annular space with joint material and wipe smooth the inside of each joint in the barrel .
pull box sections together with a comealong or mechanical puller to provide jointing satisfactory to the engineer .
num .
multiple line box culverts .
these precast box culverts are the alternative to castinplace multiple barrel box culverts .
where multiple lines are skewed determine the end treatment method including the positions of the connector boxes the parapet alignment and the lengths of wingwalls needed for proper slope intercepts .
this must occur before barrel installation begins .
install multiple culvert lines adjacent to one another according to plan details .
use grout see subsection num mortar and grout a concrete mix or other material approved by the engineer as filler material between multiple lines .
b .
protect structures from traffic and loads before allowing traffic or loads on the box culvert provide the depth and width of compacted backfill as shown on the plans to protect the structure from damage or displacement .
damaged or displaced structures subjected to construction loads or erosion during installation and backfill shall be repaired at the contractors expense .
c. use ends for precast barrels use precast or castinplace ends as follows num .
precast ends precast ends are allowed in the following situations where either single line or multiple line precast barrels are normal to the roadway with skewed single lines or skewed multiple lines at locations shown on the plans or approved by the engineer do not use precast ends with skewed culverts if the installation would be incompatible with roadway geometrics or would cause other detrimental effects .
a. precast ends on skewed culverts .
where precast ends are allowed on skews extend the barrel length so that the precast wing end on the acute side falls approximately at the same point that the castinplace long wing end would have fallen with additional embankment warped to fit .
b. aprons for precast wingwalls .
use precast wingwalls with num in num mm thick reinforced concrete aprons for anchor connections .
for sleeve inset fill use either expanded mortar see section num or nonshrinking mortar used immediately after mixing approved by the engineer .
do not subject anchors to loads until the mortar sets up .
use precast or castinplace aprons that are multipiece or monolithic .
num precast aprons .
carefully place sections to grade upon the screeded bedding described in subsection num.a excavation bedding and backfill .
ensure that forms hold bedding for toewalls according to the plan details and as directed by the engineer .
section numprecast reinforced conrete box culverts barrel sections and end sections num make joints between apron sections water tight .
num castinplace aprons .
ensure that concrete is set up before installing the wingwalls .
connect wingwalls to apron anchors according to plan details .
num .
castinplace ends .
when required and when not using precast ends use castinplace ends as follows a .
use castinplace ends at the ends of precast box culvert barrels either skewed or normal .
b .
use castinplace ends of the same design as castinplace box culvert barrels .
c. use aprons with castinplace wingwalls only where specified on the plans or special provisions .
d. use castinplace ends with multiple precast lines as follows num minimally increase the standard parapet and toewall widths to accommodate the double inside walls .
num use type c connector boxes between the standard precast boxes and the castinplace construction .
e. where there is a skewed alignment or other nondescript alignment condition the contractor may castinplace a fraction of the barrel between the connector box and the parapet .
d. finish the culvert after precast sections are set in their final position do the following num .
repair spalled areas around the holes .
num .
fill the lift holes with mortar or concrete .
num .
cure the concrete as directed in subsection num.z cure concrete .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement unless otherwise specified the contract includes alternate plans for both precast and castinplace box culverts .
plan quantities and payment are based upon the castinplace alternate .
a. precast box culvert barrels the required linear feet meter of culvert will be converted for payment into cubic yards meters of class a concrete and pounds kilograms of reinforcement steel .
these measurements will come from the standard or special design computation tables for castinplace box culverts .
multiple line precast box culverts will be measured as a multiple barrel castinplace box culvert of the specified size .
b .
ends for barrels wingwalls parapets toewalls and aprons may be either precast or castinplace .
plan quantities and payment for these items are based upon the castinplace design quantities .
c. backfill foundation backfill material type ii when required will be measured according to subsection num measurement .
num limits no additional payment will be made when barrel lengths apron areas backfilling or other items are increased due to using the precast alternate .
the following items will not be paid for section numprecast reinforced conrete box culverts barrel sections and end sections num connecting hardware mortar joint materials filler material used between multiple precast culvert lines num payment payment for precast reinforced concrete box culvert barrel sections and end sections will be based on the castinplace alternate and will include conversions when using the precast design .
castinplace concrete will be paid for under section num and reinforcing steel will be paid for under section num .
payment for foundation backfill type ii will be made according to and subsection num payment .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numepoxy coated steel reinforcement num general description this work consists of furnishing and placing epoxy coated bar reinforcement steel according to these specifications .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numreinforcement steel section numreinforcement and tensioning steel b. referenced documents qpl num aashto mnum num submittals a .
mill orders and shipping statements submit mill orders and shipping statements as required in subsection num.a mill orders and shipping statements .
num materials when choosing an epoxy coating material the contractor may do either of the following use an epoxy coating material from qpl num of acceptable powdered epoxy resins and their manufacturer .
use powder that meets aashto mnum .
ensure that uncoated deformed steel bars meet the applicable requirements of subsection num steel bars for concrete reinforcement .
allow the office of materials to sample and test materials any time .
section numepoxy coated steel reinforcement num a. epoxy coating requirements num .
notify the office of materials at least two weeks before blast cleaning the steel reinforcement bars and applying the epoxy coating .
this time will allow the department to schedule an inspection .
num .
you may request in writing that the department accept the coating on the basis of a certificate of compliance .
if the department approves your request you must meet the following conditions a .
ensure that the coating applicator has a quality assurance program approved by the department .
b. furnish the department a certificate of compliance from the coating applicator with each shipment of coated bars .
ensure that the certificate of compliance verifies that the coated bars and coating material have been tested in accordance with the requirements of this specification states the actual test results for each requirement states that the test results comply with the requirements num .
submit from the coating applicator at the time of shipping a written certification attached to a completed form num a .
ensure that the certificate states that the coated reinforcing bars meet the requirements of this specification .
num .
the epoxy for the fabrication shop repair work shall also be suitable for use in the field by the contractor installing the coated bars in the bridge deck .
b .
fabrication num .
immediately before applying the epoxy coating blast clean all surfaces of the steel bars to a nearwhite surface finish as per the steel structures painting council surface preparation specification sspcspnum for nearwhite blast cleaning .
a .
make the blastcleaned surface correspond with either pictorial standard a sa num½ b sa num½ or c sa num½ of sspc vis num. b .
clear the surfaces of all dust and grit .
num .
coat all tie wires clips chair and bar supports and other metallic materials used to install the epoxycoated reinforcing bars with either the same powdered epoxy resin with a minimum thickness of num mils num mm a plastic material approved by the office of materials num .
coat the ends of the coated bars cut during fabrication with the epoxy used for repairs .
num .
repair damaged areas and coat the ends of cut bars within num hours and before any visible rusting appears .
c. acceptance num .
the office of materials will inspect the application and the finished coating at the applicators plant according to the provisions of subsection num samples tests cited specifications or will accept the certificate of compliance under the conditions listed in subsection num.a .
num .
grant the department inspector free access to the coating applicators plant .
a .
the inspector may have any or all of the work specified in this section performed in his or her presence .
b. furnish the inspector with check samples of the coated bars on a random basis as the inspector deems necessary for testing by the office of materials .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling before using epoxy coated steel bars carefully load unload and store them on the project site to prevent damage or contamination .
handle the bars as follows section numepoxy coated steel reinforcement num num .
use systems for handling coated bars that have padded contact areas for the bars whenever possible .
num .
use padded bundling bands .
num .
to prevent sags in the bar bundle lift bundles with a strong back multiple supports or a platform bridge .
sags in the bundle cause bartobar abrasion .
num .
do not drop or drag bars .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication a .
fabrication shop repair work refer to subsection num.b fabrication num construction a .
install bars to protect and preserve the epoxy coating install coated bars in the bridge deck according to subsection num construction this specification and the engineers directions .
have the engineer approve additional splices to accommodate lengths suitable for coating equipment .
cleaning and repair methods and materials for coated bars are subject to the engineers approval .
install the bars as follows num .
during and after installing bars into their deck locations repair cuts nicks and abrasions in the bar coating with the epoxy repair material supplied by the powdered epoxy resin manufacturer .
repair damaged areas within num hours and before visible rusting appears .
num .
before they rust repair damaged reinforcing steel and metallic accessories with the epoxy repair material supplied by the powdered epoxy resin manufacturer .
num .
if small damaged areas are rusted thoroughly remove the rust by sand blasting or other approved methods before repairing the areas .
num .
provide a rustfree and completely coated steel reinforcement system before placing the concrete in the deck to prevent subsequent rusting .
num .
when the coated bars are incorporated into the work keep them free from dirt paint oil grease or other foreign substance .
num .
when necessary clean the bars to the satisfaction of the engineer .
num .
place the deck concrete using methods and equipment that will not damage the coated materials .
num .
since the epoxy coating is flammable do not expose the coated bars to fire or flame .
do not cut coated bars by burning .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
section numepoxy coated steel reinforcement num num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the accepted epoxy coated steel reinforcing bars will be measured according to subsection num measurement .
num limits a .
theoretical weight of uncoated bars the department will not add to or deduct from the theoretical weight per foot meter of the uncoated bars because of additional specification requirements for blast cleaning and epoxy coating of the bars .
num payment the accepted epoxycoated steel reinforcing bars will be paid for according to subsection num payment .
payment will be made under item no .
num epoxy coated bar reinforcement steel per pound kilogram item no .
num epoxy coated superstructure reinforcement steel bridge no._____ per lump sum num adjustments a .
additional splices additional splices requested to accommodate lengths suitable for coating equipment will be subject to the engineers approval .
additional splices will be at the contractors expense .
b .
additional expenses additional expenses incurred by the contractor or suppliers because of the requirements in this specification are considered incidental .
these expenses are included in the contract price per pound kilogram or per lump sum .
section numhandrailferrous metal and pipe num general description this work consists of placing handrail and posts made of ferrous metal pipe .
it shall include setting anchorages preparing bearing areas and painting or galvanizing the handrail whichever the plans require .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures section numsteel structures section numpainting structures section numrepair of galvanized coatings section numhandrailferrous metal and pipe num b. referenced documents astm a numa num m astm a numa num m num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials all materials shall meet the requirements of the following specifications .
material section structural steel num malleable iron castings num steel castings num steel pipe num steel bolts nuts and washers num paint num plain steel barsthreaded ends num num delivery storage and handling handle the rails and posts carefully to minimize damage to shop paint or galvanizing .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. fabricate handrail fabricate handrail as follows .
all fabrications shall meet the applicable specifications of subsections num.h and num.c welded construction .
num .
fabrication material .
fabricate handrail from plates shapes bars pipe castings or from combinations of these materials as shown on the plan details .
num .
handrail not supported on concrete parapets .
when erected bridge handrail will not be supported on a concrete parapet fabricate the handrail so posts will be plumb .
num .
stairways on grades .
on handrail for stairways on grades use adjustable malleable iron fittings where required or weld the handrails to the posts when specified on the plans .
section numhandrailferrous metal and pipe num num .
welding requirements .
welding shall meet the requirements of subsections num.h and num.c welded construction .
grind smooth all welds except fillet welds .
do not grind fillet welds leave them as they are .
num .
galvanizing .
before galvanizing complete all cutting welding and fabrication of rails posts bolts set screws and other components .
galvanize material according to the following standards material standard all material except hardware astm a numa numm hardware astm a numa numm num .
shop painting .
if metal or pipe handrail posts and their component parts will not be galvanized paint them with the type of shop paint required on the plans .
all painting shall meet the requirements of section num .
b. construct handrails construction shall meet the applicable specifications of subsections num.h and num.c welded construction .
construct handrail according to the plan details and as follows num .
set anchor bolts .
set anchor bolts using these guidelines set the anchor bolts according to the plan details and ensure that the bolts have the correct spacing and projection .
projections shown on the plans are for flat grades and assume no use of shims .
on other grades or where shims are needed modify the projection shown on the plans so that after all shims pads posts and washers have been placed the anchor bolt nut can be screwed completely onto the anchor bolt .
if the projection is too short lengthen or replace the bolt at the contractors expense as directed by the engineer .
num .
prepare bearing areas .
before placing the posts prepare bearing areas using these guidelines to obtain full contact between the posts or shims and the concrete remove all concrete protrusions .
fill all depressions .
ensure that bearing areas for posts are true to grade .
finish concrete with the type ivfloated surface finish specified in subsection num.ab.num type iv floated surface finish .
num .
erect handrail .
erect handrail using these guidelines make all rails parallel to grade .
where bridge rail will be supported on a concrete parapet set handrail posts normal to grade .
set other handrail posts and pipe standards plumb .
if necessary use shims under post bases and floor flanges to achieve plumb posts .
tighten the set screws as detailed on the plans .
tighten anchor bolt nuts to a snug fit with full bearing on the base of the post .
when posts and rails are completely bolted into place ensure that they are true to line and grade .
num .
paint handrail in the field .
painting shall meet the specifications of section num .
if metal or pipe handrail posts and their component parts are not galvanized paint them with the type of paint and number of coats required on the plans .
num .
repair galvanized coating .
repair damaged galvanized coatings at the contractors expense according to section num .
section numhandrailferrous metal and pipe num num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work will be measured for payment in linear feet meters of accepted handrail .
handrail will be measured along the top rail from outtoout of the ends of metal rail or from outtoout of metal end posts whichever is greater .
no deductions will be made for openings at deck expansion joints or at light standards .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter for metal or pipe handrail complete in place .
payment will be made under item no .
num ferrous metal handrail type per linear foot meter item no .
num galvanized steel pipe handrail_____ in mm type per linear foot meter item no .
num black steel pipe handrail_____ in mm type per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numaluminum handrail num general description this work consists of placing handrail and posts made of cast rolled or extruded aluminum or of combinations of these materials .
it also includes setting anchorages and preparing bearing areas .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials all cast posts for any one structure shall be produced by the same manufacturer .
section numaluminum handrail num all materials shall meet the requirements of the following specifications material section aluminum alloy sheet and plate num aluminum alloy bars rods shapes and wire num aluminum alloy bolts nuts and set screws num aluminum alloy washers num aluminum alloy rivets num aluminum alloy shims num cast aluminum alloy railing post num aluminum alloy sand mold castings num aluminum alloy extruded tubing num aluminum alloy pipe num aluminum impregnated caulking compound num.a.num neoprene pads num steel bolts nuts and washers num plain steel barsthreaded ends num galvanizing num.b num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication a. fabricate handrail fabricate handrail as follows num .
fabrication material fabricate handrail from plates shapes bars pipe castings or from combinations of these materials as shown on the plan details .
num .
handrail not supported on concrete parapets when erected bridge handrail will not be supported on a concrete parapet fabricate the handrail so posts will be plumb .
section numaluminum handrail num num construction a. construct and erect handrail construct and erect handrail according to the plan details and as follows num .
set anchor bolts set anchor bolts as follows a .
set the anchor bolts according to the plan details and ensure that the bolts have the correct spacing and projection .
projections shown on the plans are for flat grades and assume no use of shims .
b .
on other grades or where shims are needed modify the projection shown on the plans so that after all shims pads posts and washers have been placed the anchor bolt nut can be screwed completely onto the anchor bolt .
c. if the projection is too short lengthen or replace the bolt at the contractors expense as directed by the engineer .
num .
prepare bearing areas before placing the posts prepare bearing areas as follows to obtain full contact between the posts or shims or pads and the concrete a .
remove all concrete protrusions .
b .
fill all depressions .
c. ensure that bearing areas for posts are true to grade .
d. finish concrete with the type ivfloated surface finish specified in section num.ab.num type iv floated surface finish .
num .
protect contact surfaces where aluminum alloys contact other materials protect the contact surfaces as detailed on the plans or as follows a .
contact with other metals or wood .
separate the contact surfaces with neoprene pads .
do not place aluminum alloys in direct contact with copper copper base alloys lead nickel iron steel or wood .
b .
contact with concrete stone or masonry .
separate the contact surfaces with neoprene pads .
num .
erect handrail erect handrail as follows a .
if the finish on rails or posts is damaged in handling either repair it to the satisfaction of the engineer or replace it both at the contractors expense .
b .
make all rails parallel to grade .
c. where bridge rail will be supported on a concrete parapet set handrail posts normal to grade .
d. set other handrail posts plumb .
if necessary use aluminum alloy shims under post bases to achieve plumb posts .
e. tighten the anchor bolt nuts to a snug fit with full bearing on the base of the post .
f. when posts and rails are completely bolted into place ensure that they are true to line and grade .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
section numaluminum handrail num num measurement this work will be measured for payment in linear feet meters of accepted handrail .
handrail will be measured along the top rail from outtoout of ends of aluminum rail or from outtoout of aluminum end posts whichever is greater .
no deductions will be made for openings at deck expansion joints or at light standards .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter for aluminum handrail complete in place .
payment will be made under item no .
num aluminum handrail type per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numprotective concrete collar for existing columns num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numraise existing bridge num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numconcrete bridge deck overlay num section numpiling num general description this work consists of placing completed piling in structures .
the work includes incidentals and additional work except for the following prestressed concrete cylinder piling see project special provisions piling for groundmounted roadside signs see section num although square prestressedconcrete piles are a pay item under section num have them manufactured finished cured marked handled stored at the plant and shipped from the plant according to section num .
the requirements in this specification are minimal .
comply with the requirements and assume the responsibility for taking additional precautions to complete the work successfully .
num definitions plan driving objective pdo statement on the plans specifying the minimum requirements during pile driving .
the pdo may require a driving resistance tonnage kilonewtons by formula a minimum tip elevation or a combination of these .
minimum tip elevation elevation the pile tip can not stop above .
when composite prestressed concrete piling is used this term will refer to the protruded tip of the steel hpile section .
long pile a pile more than num ft num m in length .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numdefinitions and terms section numscope of work section nummeasurement and payment section numconcrete structures section numsteel structures section numpile encasement section numhighway signs section numsteel pile section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members b. referenced documents astm d num qpl num num submittals a. template plan for positioning piling before driving piling submit a plan for ensuring piling stability and position including templates to the engineer .
do not drive piling until the plan is approved .
b .
plans for loading test methods submit the plans for loading test methods to the engineer for approval before beginning the work .
section numpiling num ensure that the test method is logical and can be rationally analyzed by a commonly accepted structural design theory .
c. loading test equipment submit the list of equipment for conducting loading tests to the engineer for approval before beginning the work .
if the testing apparatus is a hydraulic jack furnish num copies of the calibration certification to the engineer for the equipment prepared by the manufacturer an authorized representative or an approved testing laboratory .
consult the engineer to find out which laboratories are approved .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section preservative treatment of timber products num timber piles num prestressed concrete piles bridge members num welded and seamless steel piles num fluted steel shell piles num steel hpiles num steel bolts nuts and washers num aluminum alloy sheet and plate num metal caps num.a.num refer to subsection num steel pile for specifications on cast steelh pile points .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
use the following piling types where shown on the plans timber piling prestressed concrete piling metal shell piling steel hpiling use other piling types when the plans and special provisions require it .
num delivery storage and handling a .
timber piling handle timber piling carefully using only nonmetallic slings .
do not drop or damage the piling .
store timber piles on skids above the supporting surface .
keep hardware covered .
b. prestressed concrete piling handle prestressed concrete piling carefully to prevent fracture by impact or by excessive bending stress either in storage during transportation or when being transferred to the leads .
do not place other materials on the piling during storage or transport .
num .
transporting prestressed concrete piling transport prestressed concrete piling using the approved limits of support spacing for the various sizes and lengths of piling .
these limits are shown on standard plans or on other drawings and are available to the engineer from the department .
section numpiling num num .
loading and unloading prestressed concrete piling load and unload piles using the embedded pickup points placed during manufacture .
num .
storing prestressed concrete piling store piles as follows store piling in single layers directly on the ground only when there is uniform level bearing for the full pile length .
to store piles in tiers support the piling using blocks of uniform thicknesses placed immediately adjacent to the embedded pickup points and in line vertically .
store piling in groups of the same lengths .
num .
placing piles in the leads or in position when picking up piles from storage and placing them in the leads or in position use only the single pickup point marked with sp or a line painted on the pile at the plant unless noted on the plans or otherwise directed by the engineer .
num .
driving piles do not subject prestressed concrete piling to excessive tensile stresses from combining a particular hammer with the soil conditions .
excessive stress may occur for example in these situations when encountering hard driving resistance at the point of a long pile when such situations damage pile make changes to provide undamaged piling in place .
if piles are damaged the engineer may require the following a .
reduce the energy delivered to the piling by reducing the stroke changing the cushioning or using a lighter ram .
b .
maintain equivalent energy but use a heavier or lighter ram with a different stroke .
c. use a smaller hammer for the easier initial driving .
d. drill pilot holes jet or spud .
when these driving aids are required or permitted see subsection num.b drill pilot holes and subsection num.g jet and spud .
c. metal shell piling do not deform or dent metal shell piling during handling and storage .
place shells to be stored for a prolonged period on enough skids to prevent ground contact and deflection .
keep the shells fully drained .
d. steel hpiling do not deform or bend flanges on steel hpiling during handling and storage .
place steel hpiling to be stored for a prolonged period on enough skids to prevent ground contact and deflection .
keep the piling fully drained .
num construction requirements num personnel furnish enough labor and work to install the complete loading test including a temporary shelter over the area if the engineer requires it .
num equipment a .
hydraulic jack for loading tests if the hydraulic jack used to apply the loading test changes behavior during use return the jack to the manufacturer an authorized representative or a testing laboratory approved by the engineer for recalibration .
section numpiling num b .
driving head use a structural steel driving head recommended by the manufacturer as suitable for the type and size of pile being driven .
the driving head shall hold the pile in the proper driving position be constructed to prevent pile damage be constructed to transmit the hammer energy along the pile axis fit loosely enough around the pile head so that the pile can rotate slightly without binding c. cushion or shock blocks replace cushion blocks as necessary to prevent pile damage .
inspect cushions periodically to ensure that they prevent pile damage .
num .
hammer cushions use cushions or shock blocks above the driving head to avoid damaging the pile .
replace used hammer cushions reduced to half their original thickness with new cushions .
use hammer cushions of a manmade material only such as micarta or aluminum .
do not use materials such as plywood hardwood wire rope and asbestos .
num .
pile cushions for prestressed concrete piling up to num in num mm provide a suitable pile cushion block for the top of the pile .
use a cushion made of material that does not compress so far that the cushioning effect is lost .
for prestressed concrete piling num in num mm and num in num mm square use an approved solid hardwood pile cushion block at least num in num mm thick or an equivalent in the base of the hammer to cushion the hammer ram blow on the pile or follower .
num .
follower cushions when a follower is permitted or required use an approved squareshaped laminated cushion block between the follower and the top of the pile .
use a cushion block for a follower that is at least num in num mm thick made of num in num mm hardwood boards preferably green of uniform thicknesses cut to fit the pile head subsection num.f followers defines a follower within the scope of these specifications .
d. hammers regardless of the requirements for hammers in these specifications the pdo governs in selecting the hammer .
the exception for this is the tabulations for prestressed concrete piling shown in the energy rating table in subsection num.d.num.b .
except for timber piling drive piling with power hammers of an approved make and model steam or diesel that are singleacting open end diesel or doubleacting enclosed ram diesel .
when desired use gravity drop hammers to drive timber piling and within the conditions in subsection num.d.num gravity hammers steel hpiling and metal shell piling .
hammer types and restrictions are as follows num .
power hammers maintain power hammers to obtain their potential stroke length and number of blows per minute .
driving resistance values are invalid when these requirements are not met .
if driving resistance values are invalid stop the driving operations and correct the problem .
do not begin driving until the problem is resolved .
a .
power hammer types section numpiling num power hammer types include steam hammers .
use steam or compressed air from boilers or air compressors to power steam hammers .
use boilers and air compressors with an accurate pressure gauge and capacities and hose sizes at least equal to those specified by the hammer manufacturers .
openend diesel hammers .
use openend diesel hammers that allow measurement of the ram stroke length above the top of the hammer .
enclosedram diesel hammers .
use enclosedram diesel hammers with a bounce chamber gauge and charts that will evaluate the equivalent energy being produced under any driving condition .
b .
power hammer restrictions follow these power hammer restrictions timber piling .
drive timber piling using a power hammer with a maximum energy rating of num ftlb num num nm .
steel piling .
drive steel hpiling and metal shell piling using a power hammer with an energy per blow of at least num ftlb num nm but not less than num ftlb num num nm for each pound kilogram of driven weight .
prestressed concrete piling .
except as specified in the following energy rating table drive prestressed concrete piling using a power hammer with an energy per blow of at least num ftlb num nm for each pound kilogram of pile weight but not less than num ftlb num num nm .
driving conditions may require hammers with more energy than the minimum required on the energy rating table .
however the department will not require hammers that have more than the minimum energy rating regardless of pile length unless the plans or special provisions specify otherwise .
energy rating table english manufacturers energy ratings on hammers for prestressed concrete piling pile size in weight lbft minimum energy rating ftlbs fttons ft . lbs ft .
tons num solid num num num num num solid num num num num num solid num num num num num solid num num num num num voided num num num num num voided num num num num num voided num num num num section numpiling num energy rating table metric manufacturers energy ratings on hammers for prestressed concrete piling pile size mm weight kgm minimum energy rating nm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
gravity hammers when using a gravity hammer regulate the drop height to avoid damaging the pile .
do not allow the drop height to exceed num ft num m for timber piling and num ft num m for steel piling .
ensure that the hammer is marked with its weight to the nearest num lbs num kg .
upon the engineers request furnish a certified scale weight of the hammer .
follow these gravity hammer restrictions a .
timber piling .
drive timber piling using a gravity hammer that weighs at least num lbs num kg but no more than num lbs num kg .
however ensure that the hammer has enough weight to obtain the pdo with a maximum fall of num ft num m. b .
steel piling .
if desired substitute a gravity hammer for a power hammer when the quantity of a steel piling type shown on the bridge plans summary of quantities does not exceed num linear ft num linear meters including test pile lengths if any for that pile type for an individual bridge .
when using a gravity hammer within the scope of the linear foot meter condition ensure that it has enough weight to obtain the pdo with a maximum fall of num ft num m. the maximum allowable hammer weight is num lbs num kg .
c. prestressed concrete piling .
do not use gravity hammers to drive prestressed concrete piling .
e. leads equip pile driving rigs with leads that allow the hammer to move freely and support piling during driving .
use leads that meet the following requirements the vertical axis of the leads and hammer coincide with the vertical axis of the pile .
the leads are long and rigid enough to hold the pile in accurate alignment while it is being driven .
however ensure that the driving rig can slightly adjust the lead position to compensate for minor changes in direction while driving .
when the pile is supported by the material being penetrated or by approved templates use hammer leads only .
driving in deep water may require special platformtype templates to ensure piling stability and position see subsection num.a template plan for positioning piling .
use templates with enough area to accommodate all persons necessary to perform and inspect the work .
the engineer may require templates in other necessary locations to ensure piling stability and position .
f. followers do not use inserts of similar type piling placed between the hammer and a pile to keep the hammer above water level or other levels .
section numpiling num within the scope of these specifications a follower is part of the driving mechanism used to drive largersized prestressed concrete piling .
position the follower between the pile head and the hammer driving base to evenly distribute the driving energy across the concrete area of voidedtype piling .
always use followers when driving num in num mm prestressed concrete piling .
the department allows followers when driving num in num mm prestressed concrete piling .
g. spuds use spuds heavy enough to penetrate through strata or a stratum of firm or hard material to reach the necessary depth .
control the alignment for battered spudding using templates that maintain the batter .
unless otherwise permitted use templates to control vertical spudding .
mark the distance from the top of the spud clearly at num ft num mm intervals along the length of the stem .
use either round or square spud tips for pile driving that meet the following requirements at least as large as the pile to be driven at the spudding location if round no more than approximately num in num mm larger than the diameter or diagonal dimension of the pile if square no more than approximately num in num mm larger than the lateral dimension or diameter of the pile h. jetting equipment provide enough pumping capacity using at least two jets to produce a volume and pressure that will freely erode the material next to the pile and the material num in num mm below the pile tip .
i. loading test equipment furnish the necessary material tools equipment including a constant tension wire with a weight and sheave or a weight and round pin and incidentals to properly install the complete loading test and a temporary shelter over the area if the engineer requires it .
num preparation a .
remove obstacles unless otherwise permitted remove or cut out portions of obstacles that interfere with attaining the pdo .
this will be measured and paid for as described in subsection num.a removing obstacles .
b .
form the embankment at bridge ends before driving piling at bridge ends and unless otherwise shown on the plans form the embankment as follows num .
make the embankment at bridge ends full depth to the subgrade template except for the stage construction providing a bench for the end bent .
num .
thoroughly compact the embankment as provided in the specifications .
num .
when the plans or special provisions require a waiting period delay the construction of all or portions of the bridge as required .
the minimum acceptable length of completed fulldepth embankment is specified in subsection num bridge .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numpiling num num construction a .
determine the pile length use fulllength piling when possible but always use fulllength timber piling .
use piling long enough to reach the pdo .
except for test piles shown on the plans pile lengths are based on the lengths assumed to remain in the completed structure .
provide fresh headings and the additional length necessary to suit the method of operation at no additional expense to the department .
pile lengths or quantities shown on the plans are for estimating purposes only .
the engineers length list will be available only after the test piles that logically cover the listed bents have been driven and evaluated and required load tests have been performed .
the written length list itemizes the number type size and length of pile required per bent .
num .
steel hpiling or metal shell piling lengths determine and furnish the required lengths of piling in place to reach the pdo regardless of whether the plans require test piles or show estimated lengths .
to determine these lengths of piling in place either drive test piles make borings or make other investigations at no additional expense to the department .
num .
timber piling lengths have the department determine the lengths of this piling .
furnish the piling either according to the plan listing or according to the engineers length list as directed .
lengths for timber piling up to num ft num m will be given in num ft num mm increments .
lengths for timber piling over num ft num m will be given in num ft num mm increments .
num .
prestressed concrete piling lengths have the department determine the lengths of this piling .
furnish the piling according to the plan listing or the engineers length list as directed .
lengths for prestressed concrete piling num in num mm square or smaller will be given in num num ft num mm increments .
a .
additional lengths for prestressed concrete piling .
if a prestressed concrete pile including test pile is driven below cutoff elevation before reaching the pdo the engineer will determine the net additional length required and add this extension length to the written length list .
b .
composite prestressed concrete piling lengths .
the composite pile length of composite prestressed concrete piling with steel hsection tips partially embedded in and partially protruding from the concrete is the endto end length of the concrete .
the total length of the steel hsection and its embedded and protruding tips is as shown on the plans .
the steel sections are incidental to the work .
b .
drill pilot holes when pilot holes are required drill them to the diameter and approximate depth specified on the plans .
backfill voids and holes with sand or other suitable granular material or other material as indicated on the plans .
this backfill is an incidental part of the work .
the following are not considered pilot holes holes created by spudding punching holes dug to drive piling that is too long to fit leads holes dug to replace a template if permitted where pilot holes are required in granular material and the material can not be sealed off using mudding drilling methods drill the pilot hole as follows section numpiling num num .
place a casing pipe with a large enough diameter around the boring device .
num .
hold the casing in position until the pilot hole is completed and the pile driving progresses deep enough into the hard material to keep loose material out of the pilot hole .
drilling pilot holes using casing is incidental to the work .
c. test piling the plans will normally require test piles only with timber and prestressed concrete piling including composite piling .
however the department may require steel h or metal shell test piles .
when the plans show the design load of a pile as well as a pdo the design load is shown only for information purposes if a loading test is required .
ensure that the piling to be loaded is of the size and type and at the locations specified on the plans or designated by the engineer .
the engineer may revise the quantity or location of the departments test piles .
the department may designate locations on the plans where the engineer will record pile driving data during driving operations .
such piles are designated as driving data piles .
follow these requirements when driving ensure that the crosssectional dimensions of test piles are the same as the piles that will be part of the completed structure .
test piles are generally longer than piles that remain in the completed structure .
regardless of the pdo drive test piles to their full length where possible for exploratory purposes .
drive test piles of the length type and size designated on the plans in the locations the engineer specifies .
when using timber test piles peel the piles and drive them next to the piles that will be part of the completed structure .
if desired machinepeel timber test piles and leave them untreated .
drive other types of test piles so that they become part of the completed structure .
ensure that test piles furnished and driven in permanent locations meet the requirements in subsection num.d.num determine driving resistance and subsection num.a.num steel hpiling or metal shell piling lengths .
drive test piles to determine required lengths in the engineers presence .
cooperate with the engineer to obtain the required data on driving data piles as an incidental part of the work .
driving data piles do not need to be driven before other piling .
d. evaluate bearing capacity determine the bearing capacity of piling by determining driving resistance performing loading tests or doing a combination of these .
determine driving resistance for all piling driven regardless of pdo requirements .
num .
determine driving resistance drive a pile in one continuous operation and determine the driving resistance without delays .
however in soft material the contractor may at the engineers discretion determine the driving resistance after delaying driving operations .
determine the driving resistance of the piling using the appropriate formula for the hammer type .
these resistance formulas apply only when the hammer has a free fall .
the head of the pile is not broomed crushed spalled or excessively crimped .
the penetration rate is reasonably uniform .
section numpiling num determining driving resistance by formula is not a pay item .
provide the facilities for determining driving resistance by formula as an incidental part of the work .
driving resistance formulas hammer type formula number formula dr gravity hammer num numwh s num singleacting steam or air hammer openend diesel hammer num numwh s num doubleacting enclosedram diesel hammer num nume s num doubleacting steam or air hammer num numw aph s num note do not use the manufacturers bearing chart unless it agrees with the applicable formula above .
driving resistance formulas metric hammer type formula number formula dr gravity hammer num numwh s num singleacting steam or air hammer openend diesel hammer num numwh s num doubleacting enclosedram diesel hammer num nume s num doubleacting steam or air hammer num numw ahp s num note do not use the manufacturers bearing chart unless it agrees with the applicable above formula .
the abbreviations in the driving resistance formulas are defined as follows driving resistance formula abbreviations abbreviation meaning dr driving resistance in tons kilonewtons .
w weight of the striking part of the hammer in tons newtons .
h height of fall in feet meters for gravity steam and air hammers .
when using formula num the maximum height is num ft num m for timber piling and num ft num m for steel h or metal shell piling .
observed average height of fall in feet meters for openend diesel hammers .
record h as the average penetration in inches millimeters per blow being determined .
when rating openend diesel hammers to comply with energy requirements use the height of fall as num ft num m. section numpiling num driving resistance formula abbreviations abbreviation meaning e average equivalent energy in foottons newtonmeters for enclosedram diesel hammers .
measure e as the average penetration in inches millimeters per blow being determined using a gauge attached to the hammer .
a area of piston in square inches meters for doubleacting steam or air hammers .
p pressure at the hammer in tons per in² pascals for doubleacting steam or air hammers .
s average penetration in inches millimeters per blow for the last num to num blows for a gravity hammer and the last num to num blows for a power hammer .
num .
perform loading test unless otherwise specified on the plans use a test method that conforms to astm d num modified for quick load tests .
use loading apparatus capable of the lesser value of the following for concrete piles num percent of the design load or num tons num kilonewtons for steel piles num percent of the design load or num percent of the yield strength the engineer may increase or decrease the number of loading tests .
furnish and read the instrumentation necessary to determine the pile settlement under load .
a loaded pile is unsatisfactory when the total settlement under num percent of the design load exceeds num in num mm or the permanent settlement exceeds num in num mm using the standard loading procedure in astm d num section num .
the laboratory will determine the maximum safe design load or the failure load of original loading materials based on the results of the loading test .
the engineer may require the following piles to be driven further unsatisfactory piles as defined in the paragraphs above piles without enough maximum safety design or failure loads as determined by the office of materials perform the loading test as follows a .
test load piling as required on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
b. furnish and drive the piling to be test loaded .
c. furnish and drive necessary anchor piling .
when the engineer permits use piling that will remain in the completed structure after load testing as anchor piles when desired .
d. apply the test loads in equal increments of num to num percent of the design load .
e. apply the loads at constant numminute time intervals throughout the test .
f. after the test is complete remove the temporary materials .
these temporary materials remain the contractors property .
g. remove or cut off the piling that will not remain in the completed structure .
cut off the piling at least num ft num mm below the bottom of the footing or the ground line whichever applies .
h. in deep water have the engineer direct how much pile to remove .
e. drive piling drive piling to the pdo shown on the plans .
when the pdo involves only a driving resistance requirement the engineer will determine the depth to drive piling .
if there is no plan pdo drive the piling as directed by the engineer .
if the engineer determines that driving results and loading test results require modification drive the piling to a pdo modified by the department .
drive piling as follows section numpiling num num .
when using pilot holes drive the piling enough to fix the point firmly and reach the pdo .
num .
drive piling so that it conforms closely with the position and line shown on the plans .
num .
drive piling of a given type including test piles with the same type and size of hammer .
num .
use vibratory or other pile driving methods only when permitted by special provisions plan notes or directed by the engineer .
num .
do not damage piling during driving .
pile damage includes crushed spalled or cracked concrete split splintered or broomed wood broken piling shell collapse steel deformation num .
do not force piling into the proper position .
num .
when driving a prestressed concrete pile ensure that the pile point is wellseated with reasonable soil resistance before using full driving energy .
num .
determine the driving resistance when driving the pile using the appropriate driving resistance formula .
f. excavate and redrive do not drive foundation and end bent piling until excavation is nearly complete .
if driving a test pile to the side one that will not become part of the structure have it begin penetration at approximately the same ground elevation as if it were driven within the structure .
redrive piles that are raised or moved while driving adjacent piling .
g. jet and spud jetting and unless otherwise noted in the contract spudding are considered incidental to the work .
unless otherwise permitted by the engineer do not jetting or spudding operations lower than num ft num mm above the estimated final elevation of the pile tip or lower than num ft num mm above the specified minimum tip elevation to obtain minimum penetration .
when jetting or spudding to drive a prestressed concrete pile ensure that the pile point is well seated with reasonable soil resistance at the point before using full driving energy .
num .
jetting when the engineer permits use jetting to properly position a pile .
additional driving may be required to determine the final driving resistance when piles are positioned by jetting .
should additional driving require additional length the additional expense involved is considered incidental to the work .
jetting may be required with any hammer or piling type including test piling and at any site .
however jet only when directed or permitted by the engineer and as follows a .
do not use jets where the engineer determines that the jets may endanger the stability of embankments or other improvements .
b .
perform trial jetting to determine whether to jet using one or two jets .
have the engineer approve the trial run .
c. suspend the pile driving that requires jetting until the jetting is accomplished as directed by the engineer .
d. jet either ahead of the actual pile driving or simultaneously with it as the engineer determines from the results of trials .
control and dispose of water and solids that run off from the jetting .
e. maintain parallel drainage to railroad tracks .
section numpiling num f. do not simultaneously drive and jet a prestressed concrete pile unless there is reasonable soil resistance at the pile point .
g. if using jets and hammers simultaneously as required or permitted by the engineer withdraw the jets before reaching the pdo and continue driving to fix the point of the pile firmly and reach the pdo .
h. after jetting an area completely recheck the driving resistance of questionable piles .
num .
spudding if the plans or engineer require spudding do it to facilitate driving .
the engineer may require advance jetting exploration before deciding whether or not spudding is necessary to penetrate firm or hard material .
h. cut off splice and extend piling cut off pilings at the required elevation .
splice piling driven below this elevation and extend it according to the pile splice details .
ensure that the minimum splice spacing is at least num ft. num m. lengths of cutoff of any piling including test piles remain the property of the contractor .
dispose of cutoff lengths outside the highway rightofway according to subsection num final cleaning up .
if desired use undamaged pieces of steel h and metal shell cutoff for splice plates extensions and reinforcement for steel htips .
num .
cut off prestressed concrete piling cut prestressed concrete piling using pneumatic tools saws or other approved methods as follows .
do not use explosives .
when the engineer considers it necessary use an approved collar when cutting .
a .
cut back the required amount of concrete at the end of the pile to be extended leaving the prestressed strand exposed .
b .
make the final cut at right angles to the pile axis .
c. when cutting avoid spalling or damaging the pile below the cutoff elevation .
d. if the pile is damaged replace the pile or repair the damage by cutting back to the extent determined by the engineer .
replace or repair piles at no expense to the department .
num .
extend prestressed concrete piling driven extensions of prestressed concrete piling shall consist of class aaa concrete .
undriven extensions shall consist of class a concrete .
extend prestressed concrete piling as follows a .
build place and brace the form work for the extension carefully to obtain true alignment and prevent leaks at the construction joint .
b .
just before placing the new concrete thoroughly wet the cut area and cover it with a thin coating of cement paste .
c. when driving the extension chamfer the top num in num mm at right angles to the extension axis .
d. remove the forms and cure and finish the concrete according to subsection num.b.num concrete curing and subsection num.z cure concrete .
e. when extending prestressed concrete piling comply with the required details when additional driving is or is not necessary after making the extension .
when additional driving is necessary ensure that the extension reaches its numday compressive strength and has been watercured for num curing days before resuming driving .
the delay is considered incidental to the work .
section numpiling num figure num section numpiling num num .
splice and extend steel hpiling and metal shell piling splice and extend steel hpiling or metal shell piling before during or after driving according to the pile splice details figure num .
ensure that the sections have identical cross sections .
instead of using the splice details for hpiles shown in the pile splice details figure num when desired use approved hpile splicers as follows a .
ensure that hpile splicers are the proper size recommended by the manufacturer for the pile to be spliced .
b .
with the splicer in position and before making the splice ensure that at least num percent of the mating ends of the piling to be spliced touch .
c. connect the splicer and the piling by welding according to a procedure approved by the department .
num .
cut off and splice timber piling accurately cut off piling to be capped with timber or precast concrete to obtain true bearing on every pile without using shims .
replace or repair piles inaccurately cut off at no additional expense to the department .
replace or repair to the engineers satisfaction .
do not splice timber piling without the engineers permission .
i. weld steel piling splices and swaybracing attachments weld steel piling splices and swaybracing attachments according to section num.c .
weld only in the engineers presence .
use a welder with current department certification for welds involved .
j .
repair and treat timber piling repair and treat timber piling as follows num .
field treat cuts and abrasions in treated timber piling with either of these heated treatments two applications of a mixture of num percent creosote oil and num percent roofing pitch two thorough brush coats of creosote oil followed by a covering of roofing pitch allow each coat to dry before applying the next .
num .
before placing bolts field treat holes made after treating with hot creosote oil .
num .
plug unused holes with treated plugs after the field treatment .
num .
when the approved use of temporary forms or braces causes nail or spike holes in treated piling fill the holes using either of these methods drive galvanized or aluminum nails or spikes flush with the surface .
plug the holes with treated plugs after the field treatment .
num .
field treat treated piling heads used in permanent structures that will not be encased in concrete footings or caps after cutoff a .
treat the sawed surfaces with either of these heated treatments three applications of a mixture of num percent creosote oil and num percent roofing pitch three thorough brush coats of creosote oil followed by a covering of roofing pitch .
allow each coat to dry before applying the next .
b .
cover each pile head with a minimum numgauge num in num mm thick metal .
the metal may be aluminum or galvanized steel .
however aluminum is preferred .
trim the metal neatly .
bend the metal down around the pile and fasten it to the side using largeheaded aluminum or galvanized roofing nails .
section numpiling num k. bolt timber bracing bolt permanent timber bracing at its intersections with piles using standard steel bolts and nuts and cast or malleable iron ogee washers .
refer to subsection num materials num .
place an ogee washer under the bolt head and under the nut .
num .
ensure that the diameters of the bolt and the drilled hole are each num in num mm .
num .
after adjusting the nuts burr the bolt threads .
l. use prestressed concrete piling piles cracked in transportation handling or storage may be rejected by the engineer as defective piles if the cracking indicates structural damage .
piles with cracks that are not structurally damaging that will not be used in sea water or alkali soils may be accepted by the engineer if the cracks close and are not visible when the pile is in the leads .
when using prestressed concrete piling comply with the following do not drive prestressed concrete piles until they reach a minimum strength of num psi num mpa and a minimum age of num days .
form vent holes for voidedtype piles in one face of each pile at approximately num ft num m on the centers .
ensure that these holes remain open permanently .
after completing the driving cut back and point over cable loops used as embedded pickup points that remain above the ground or water line .
m. use metal shell piling metal shell piling consists of steel shells filled with class a concrete after they are driven in place and cut off .
ensure that the shells minimum wall thickness is num in num mm unless otherwise shown on the plans .
however furnish shells thick and rigid enough that they can be driven to the pdo without crimping buckling or distorting .
the contractor may use either of the following shells of constant section shells that meet the requirements of subsection num fluted steel shell pile use metal shell piling as follows num .
drive metal shell piling closedended .
num .
unless the plans specify another detail construct the end closure according to option num of the closure plate detail figure num so that the closure plate does not project beyond the outside diameter of the pile .
num .
after driving keep the tops of shells covered until the concrete is placed .
num .
ensure that driven shells are clean and free of water immediately before placing concrete .
use a suitable light to inspect the entire length of the shell in place .
num .
before placing concrete examine the shells for collapse or diameter reduction .
shells that are broken or are collapsed enough that bearing capacity is materially decreased will be rejected as defective piles .
fill rejected shells that can not be removed with class a concrete at no expense to the department .
num .
when reinforcement steel is required rigidly assemble and lower it into the shell so that its position is correct during concrete placement .
section numpiling num figure num section numpiling num num .
ensure that there are no loose reinforcement steel bars .
num .
do not place concrete in the shells until completing driving within a num ft num m radius or until driving shells in any one bent or footing .
if this is not possible stop the driving within the radius limit until the concrete in the last shell filled reaches a minimum strength of num psi num mpa .
the engineer may adjust the num ft num m limit according to the prevailing vibration conditions .
num .
place concrete in the shells continuously from tip to butt .
where shells contain reinforcement steel use tremies to pour the concrete .
num .
for shells in trestle bents mechanically vibrate the concrete starting approximately num ft num m below the ground and working up .
num .
for shells in footings mechanically vibrate the concrete for approximately num ft num m downward from the top of the shell pile .
num .
pour footings and trestle bent caps at least two hours after filling the last shell in the footing or trestle bent with concrete .
n. use steel hpiling wherever the plans require hp num in by num lb num mm by num kg steel hpiling the contractor may substitute hp num in by num lb num mm by num kg steel hpiling and as appropriate num in num mm pile tip reinforcement for bearing pile in footings .
do not make this substitution for pile bents .
do not change the contract bid price to make the substitution .
do not cut or trim steel hpiling to fit into an improperly sized steel driving head .
instead replace the head with one that conforms to the requirements of subsection num.b driving head .
place swaybracing members as shown on the plans or as required by the engineer and weld it according to the swaybracing attachment detail figure num .
figure num if steel hpiles are not driven in the position and to the alignment required the engineer may require fills and shims between the bracing and the pile flanges as an incidental part of the work .
section numpiling num o .
coat and paint piling apply a special protective coating as described below to steel hpiling metal shell piling steel swaybracing and when specified psc piling .
clean and paint the piling according to subsections num.a clean new steel structures and subsection num.e paint steel hpiling metal shell piling and steel swaybracing .
num .
coating requirements for endbent piling clean endbent piling and coat it with a system iv paint for num ft num mm below the bottom of the cap .
as an alternate to coating pour a concrete collar num ft num mm deep with a num in num mm cover around the pile .
num .
coating requirements for structures crossing streams coat pilings as follows a. piles not encased .
for piles within the stream and within num ft num m of the top of the stream bank extend the coating required in subsection num.o.num coating requirements for endbent piling for num ft num m below the stream beds .
give piles a protective coating num ft num m below ground line for bents more than num ft num m outside each stream bank .
b. piles encased .
for piles that will be encased according to section num extend the system iv paint num in num mm below the top of the encasement .
num .
coating requirements for grade separation structures for grade separation structures extend coatings for intermediate bent piling to num ft num m below the finished ground line .
num quality acceptance a .
reaching the pdo the engineer is solely responsible for determining whether the pdo has been reached satisfactorily .
b .
driving corrections correct driving deviations that exceed num in num mm from either the position or the line shown on the plans as directed by the engineer .
do not allow the pile heave from driving nearby piling to exceed num in num mm without retapping .
c. correcting rejected piles rejected piles are unable to meet material certification damaged by internal defects or by improper driving driven out of proper location as described in subsection num.b driving corrections .
incorrectly driven below the elevation fixed by the plans or the engineer excessively crimped in driving steel piling if cracks develop in a prestressed concrete pile that do not classify the pile as defective seal the cracks with an approved epoxy crack sealer at no expense to the department .
place the sealer as directed by the engineer .
if a pile is driven excessively out of position or below cutoff elevation through no fault of the contractor correct it using the method designated by the engineer at the departments expense .
correct rejected piling at no expense to the department using one or more of the following methods approved for the pile num .
extract the pile and replace it with a new one .
num .
drive a second pile next to the defective pile .
section numpiling num num .
cut off the pile to obtain a fresh heading splice it and extend the pile according to subsection num.h cut off splice and extend piling .
num .
extend the footing or cap concrete to embed the pile properly and change the bar reinforcement steel as required .
num .
delay the work pending a design analysis performed by the contractor with a department review and make the corrections specified by the engineer .
the delay is considered incidental to the work .
num contractor warranty and maintenance a. unused piling prestressed concrete or timber undriven and undamaged whole lengths of piling ordered by the engineer will become the property of the department .
assemble and neatly stack the lengths as directed by the engineer at a convenient location for loading on department vehicles .
guard the lengths against damage or loss for num days after notifying the engineer in writing that the lengths are ready for loading .
the numday period begins when the engineer receives the notice .
num measurement the items included in this work will be measured for payment as described in subsection num limits .
num limits a .
removing obstacles when the obstacle removed see subsection num.a remove obstacles consists of the structure being replaced and the department has previously paid for removing the structure remove or cut the obstacle at no cost to the department .
when the obstacle consists of another object below the original ground and its removal or cutting is necessary the removal or cutting is measured as extra work if it is not covered by another pay item .
cutting by spudding is not measured for payment .
b .
order lengths the department will not recognize accept or pay any claim for adjusting the contract unit prices because of underruns or overruns of estimated lengths or quantities of piling .
c. test piling accepted test piles required by the plans or the engineer are measured per each and paid for at the contract unit price .
accepted piles furnished and driven as test piles at the contractors option to determine order lengths are measured and paid for the same as for other piling in place of that type used in the completed structure .
piling measured and paid for as test piles is not included in other measurement for payment .
there is no additional measurement for payment for driving data piles .
d. steel hpiling and metal shell piling these piling types are measured in linear feet meters of piling in place remaining in the completed work and will be paid for at the respective contract price .
measurement does not include piling measured as test piling .
payment is full compensation for furnishing driving jetting spudding lining filling with concrete disposing of cutoffs and painting including special protective coatings .
pile encasement will be paid for by the linear foot meter according tosection num .
section numpiling num steel swaybracing of steel hpiling will be measured and paid for under subsection num measurement and subsection num payment .
e. prestressed concrete piling and timber piling these piling types are measured in linear feet meters of piling in place plus an allowance for cutoff lengths noted in subsection num.f cutoffs and paid for at the contract price .
measurement does not include piling measured as test piling .
pay lengths will be based on the engineers pile order length .
payment is full compensation for furnishing driving jetting spudding lining disposing of cutoffs and placing special protective coatings on prestressed concrete piling if required .
for timber piling this payment is also full compensation for the costs of furnishing placing and removing temporary bracing necessary to hold the piles in alignment .
the pay quantity includes prestressed concrete piling extensions see subsection num.g.num extensions .
f. cutoffs no separate payment will be made for cutting off pile or for using the cutoff lengths of steel h or metal shell piling .
however cutoff undamaged pieces of steel h or metal shell piling used to make other piles or used as extensions will be paid for as piling in place described in subsection num.d steel hpiling and metal shell piling subsection num.g splices and extensions and subsection num.g.num extensions .
g. splices and extensions all extensions and splices are measured and paid for the same way whether or not the pile is a test pile .
splicing and extending timber piling if allowed will be measured and paid for as extra work according to subsection num extra work .
num .
splices for any pile including test piles each splice per steel h or metal shell pile provided for in the splice tabulations will be included in the pay quantities and paid for as a specification allowance of piling in place in the amounts of num linear ft num m for steel hpile and num linear ft num mm for metal shell pile .
when the original length of a department test pile is increased by the engineer after being driven each splice required as ordered and accepted is measured for payment in the amount provided above .
other steel pile splices including others made on test piles will be performed at the contractors expense .
for prestressed concrete piling each splice ordered and accepted except those required because of contractor negligence will be measured and paid for as a specification allowance of num linear ft num m of piling .
this payment compensates for the costs of making the actual splice within the limits of the cutback portion .
include uncompensated costs in the overall bid submitted .
splice tabulations steel h or metal shell piling in place length maximum pay splices if made num ft num m or less none above num ft num m through num ft num m num above num ft num m through num ft num m num above num ft num m and up num splices will be paid for only when performed .
section numpiling num num .
extensions the extension of a prestressed concrete pile including test piles will be the net length ordered by the engineer measured from the original pile head to the extended head .
this extension is measured as piling .
the actual splice within the cutback portion is measured separately as specified in subsection num.g.num splices .
extensions required because of the contractors negligence are not measured for payment .
the engineer will determine the length of extensions for the departments steel h or metal shell test piling .
these extensions will be paid for as piling in place according to subsection num.d steel hpiling and metal shell piling .
h. alternate to extending test piling instead of extending a prestressed concrete test pile that requires additional driving to reach the pdo as provided in subsection num.g.num extensions .
the engineer may give the contractor the option of abandoning the pile as a test pile as far as measurement and payment are concerned .
if the contractor chooses this option the engineer will allow the contractor to drive a substituted longer pile of the required length as the test pile at another location selected by the engineer .
the engineer will determine the net additional length required .
this additional length will be paid for as piling with no splice allowance .
complete the abandoned test pile which is measured the same as nontest piles .
the engineer will not allow the option if the driving data obtained is sufficient or if a loading test is needed instead of further driving .
i. loading tests the number of loading tests completed and accepted will be measured and paid for per each at the contract price .
any loading test or additional stage of loading abandoned because of contractor fault will not be measured .
j .
cast steel hpile points cast steel hpile points of the type and size designated on the plans are measured per each .
k. pilot holes pilot holes drilled and accepted as a contract item are measured per linear foot meter from the natural ground intermediate trestle bents or from the bottom of concrete whichever applies .
pilot holes will be paid for at the contract price .
pilot holes not required by the plans but made at the request of the engineer will be measured and paid for as extra work according to subsection num extra work .
l. composite prestressed concrete piling no separate payment will be made for furnishing and driving steel hpile sections partially embedded in and partially protruding from prestressed concrete piling including test piles .
m. unused prestressed concrete or timber piling unused prestressed concrete or timber piling will be paid for at invoiced cost including transportation plus num percent .
num payment this work will be measured and paid for at the contract prices complete in place .
payment is full compensation for all costs of complying with these specifications including incidentals and additional work .
section numpiling num payment will be made under item no .
num piling in place type size per linear foot meter item no .
num piling type size per linear foot meter item no .
num test pile type size per each item no .
num loading test type size per each item no .
num pilot holes per linear foot meter item no .
num hpile points type size per each item no .
num cast steel hpile points type size per each for timber piling size will be omitted .
num adjustments a .
test piles no deduction will be made when a required test pile underruns in length with the engineers consent .
when a required test pile overruns in length with the engineers consent see subsection num.g.num splices .
b .
cutoff allowances cutoff allowances exclude test piling .
cutoff allowances will be made for each excess linear foot meter removed to achieve the cutoff elevation as follows for timber piling the cutoff allowance is num percent of the contract price .
for prestressed concrete piling the cutoff allowance is num percent of the contract price .
c. loading tests if the loaded pile does not carry the load satisfactorily after the load is placed and it is necessary to redrive and reload the pile this reload constitutes an additional stage of loading but not an additional loading test .
each additional stage of loading made and accepted on any single pile as specified will be measured and paid for as num percent of a loading test .
section numpatching concrete bridge num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numshoring num general description this work consists of furnishing placing maintaining and removing all materials and equipment required for shoring as shown on the plans and as described in other special provisions .
it also includes all incidentals and additional work related to shoring .
section numshoring num num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
related specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals a .
drawings the engineer may require the contractor to submit drawings of the proposed shoring for review .
if this is required the contractor shall not start work until the engineer completes the review .
the review will not relieve the contractor of responsibility for the adequate and safe performance of the shoring .
num materials use materials that meet the requirements of the plans and specifications .
the contractor retains ownership of all shoring materials .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
shoring design ensure that shoring is structurally adequate to withstand forces including the following forces and pressures resulting from excavation forces and pressures of surcharge loads from adjacent structures roadbeds tracks slopes and equipment b .
work standards ensure this work conforms to the sequence of construction outlined on the plans and in the special provisions .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
section numshoring num num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work is not measured separately for payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price for shoring complete in place maintained and removed .
payment will be made under item no .
num shoring per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numdynamic testing of pile num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numdrilled caisson foundations num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numcofferdams num general description this work consists of designing constructing maintaining dewatering removing and disposing of cofferdams which are necessary for constructing substructures and for protecting personnel and adjacent structures roadbeds tracks channels slopes or other property public or private whether on or off the rightsofway from water caving soil and other dangers .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment section numbridge excavation and backfill section numcofferdams num section numconcrete structures b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals a .
drawings the engineer may require the contractor to submit drawings of proposed cofferdams for review .
if this is required the contractor shall not start work until the engineer completes the review .
the review will not relieve the contractor of the responsibility for providing an adequate and safe cofferdam .
num materials materials used in cofferdam construction may be of any type suitable for the design requirements and for the particular dam being constructed subject to the engineers approval .
earth dams sand bags or dams constructed using excavated materials are not considered cofferdam construction .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a .
pumps supply sufficient pumping capacity to dewater the cofferdam .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
designing cofferdams cofferdams shall be structurally adequate to withstand external and internal forces including the following num .
forces and pressures from an excavation depth of not less than num ft num m below the elevation of the bottom of the footing num .
forces and pressures from surcharge loads from adjacent structures roadbeds tracks slopes and equipment .
design the cofferdam to meet these conditions cofferdams shall permit placing pumping equipment outside the footing forms .
cofferdams shall permit driving piling between braces .
b. correcting cofferdams correct to the engineers satisfaction cofferdams that tilt or move laterally during construction .
section numcofferdams num c. lowering cofferdams substructure elevations shown on the plans are approximate therefore the engineer may require that both substructures and cofferdams be lowered by a specified amount .
d. dewatering cofferdams try to dewater cofferdams without using seal concrete unless the plans require seals .
num .
dewatering cofferdams without seal concrete use all reasonable methods to provide a dewaterable enclosure including the following a .
drive all sheeting within the cofferdam to a depth of at least num ft num mm below the bottom of the excavation .
b .
provide a doublewalled cofferdam lined with clay or other reasonably impervious material .
the engineer decides if the contractor has used all reasonable methods to provide watertight cofferdams .
if the enclosures are not dewaterable and the engineer decides the contractor has not used all reasonable methods to provide watertight cofferdams the engineer may do either of the following require the contractor to place seal concrete at the contractors expense .
permit the contractor to place seal concrete at the contractors expense instead of trying further dewatering methods without a seal .
num .
dewatering cofferdams with seal concrete if all reasonable methods to provide a dewaterable enclosure have been used and the engineer determines that seal concrete is necessary place the concrete as outlined in subsection num.v place seal concrete .
when using seal concrete dewater the cofferdam no earlier than num hours after the concrete is placed unless the engineer determines that a longer period is necessary .
e. removing cofferdams unless otherwise specified completely remove all cofferdam material .
this material shall remain the property of the contractor .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a .
measuring cofferdams for separate payment cofferdams will be measured for separate payment only when set up as a pay item on the plans .
separate measurement will be made only for cofferdams constructed at the specific locations required on the plans regardless of cofferdams built at other locations within the limits of the structure and regardless of site conditions .
the contractor may request permission to enclose more than one footing in a single cofferdam at a pay measurement location .
if the engineer approves the number of cofferdams measured for payment will equal the number of footings enclosed within that single cofferdam .
if cofferdams are not set up as a pay item on the plans and their use becomes necessary they will not be measured for payment .
b .
measuring lowered cofferdams for payment the following restrictions apply to lowered cofferdams section numcofferdams num num .
if lowering a footing requires lowering a separately measured cofferdam lower the cofferdam enough distance to permit construction at an elevation not to exceed num ft num m below plan elevation at the contractors expense .
num .
any lowering of a cofferdam to permit construction at an elevation more than num ft num m below plan elevation will be paid for as extra work .
num .
the specifications intend that no extra work be paid for lowering a separately measured cofferdam until the contractor completes the cofferdam to the extent that footings or substructure can be successfully constructed at an elevation no more than num ft num m below plan elevation .
no extra work shall be done under this item until the requirements of subsection num extra work have been met .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a. cofferdams measured for separate payment .
each cofferdam eligible for separate measurement and payment will be paid for at the contract price per each complete in place maintained dewatered removed and disposed of .
b. cofferdams not measured for separate payment .
the cost of cofferdams not measured for separate payment will be included in the contract price for bridge excavation .
if lowering a footing requires lowering a cofferdam not measured for separate payment the compensation for extra depth excavation provided for in subsection num.a bridge excavation will be full compensation for the cost of lowering the cofferdam .
payment for cofferdams eligible for separate measurement will be made under the following item no .
num cofferdams per each num adjustments a .
partial payment adjustments partial payment for measured cofferdams will be made as follows num .
after a satisfactory initial dewatering of the cofferdam num percent of the contract price per cofferdam will be included in the next statement .
num .
the remaining num percent will be included in the next statement after the satisfactory removal and disposal of the cofferdam .
b .
extra work qualifications when the excavation elevation reaches num m below the plan elevation and the cofferdam is satisfactory as determined by the engineer for dewatering to that elevation then any lowering of the cofferdam to permit construction at an elevation more than num ft num m below plan elevation will be considered extra work .
num section numsteel girder flooring num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numbridge rehabilitation num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numepoxy pressure injection of concrete cracks num general description this work consists of labor material equipment and services necessary for repairing concrete cracks .
the plans will specify or the engineer will determine the extent of repair .
the work shall comply with the specifications including special provisions where applicable .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numepoxy resin adhesives b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure epoxy used for crack repair complies with the requirements of section num type v epoxy adhesive .
ensure epoxy used for sealing cracks at the surface is strong enough to withstand injection pressures up to num psi num mpa .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
section numepoxy pressure injection of concrete cracks num num equipment a. injection equipment ensure that dispensing equipment for the injection complies with the following performance requirements selfmonitor pressures of num psi num mpa for extended periods under flow .
maintain a ratio of accuracy of one percent at the required pressures .
mix inline using a static mixing head .
when using screen wire wire brushes or other elements for mixing provide independent certification that the material is mixing thoroughly at the flow rate and temperatures for the job .
also demonstrate that the unit will not dispense resin if the material line is blocked on the supply or dispense side of the system .
num preparation before repairing the cracks specified on the plans prepare the concrete surfaces next to the cracks by exposing clean and sound concrete .
the exact procedures for exposing clean and sound concrete shall be the contractors option and responsibility .
however the procedures must comply with any traffic handling and construction sequencing requirements for the project .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction seal concrete cracks as follows num .
after preparing the concrete surfaces seal the cracks at the surface with epoxy .
port spacing location and port type shall be the contractors option and responsibility .
num .
if the voids are not thoroughly penetrated use the following procedure a .
wet core on num in num mm centers the holes that are num in num mm diameter and num in num mm to num in num mm depth .
b. insert into the cored holes to the full depth copper or plastic tubes num in num mm diameter and notched at the base .
c. seal the circumference of the ports at the surface .
d. inject the epoxy at a constant pressure not to exceed num psi num mpa for at least num minutes or until penetration occurs .
num .
after the injection operation is complete clean the sealed cracks to the original concrete surface .
num .
remove nipple devices and surface sealers over the injection holes .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement no measurement for payment will be made for any material equipment or labor necessary to accomplish this work .
num limits general provisions num through num .
section numepoxy pressure injection of concrete cracks num num payment all costs for material equipment or labor shall be included in the lump sum price bid for epoxy pressure injection of concrete cracks .
payment will be made under item no .
num epoxy pressure injection of concrete cracks bridge no.___ per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numnavigation lighting num general description this work consists of furnishing and installing navigation lighting complete or to the extent indicated on the plans on bridges and on fender systems where required on the plans and approved shop and work drawings .
the specifications intent is to secure a complete operational system according to the national electrical code and applicable local ordinances .
num definitions qualified electrician a journeyman electrician with one of the two following classifications has a class ii license issued by the georgia state construction industry licensing board has completed an approved fouryear apprenticeship training program num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures section numrepair of galvanized coatings section nummiscellaneous steel materials section numpreservative treatment of timber products section numluminaries section numelectric wire and cable section numelectrical conduit section nummiscellaneous electrical materials b. referenced documents national electrical code astm a numa numm num submittals a .
contractor qualifications the contractor performing this work must be on the departments list of approved electrical contractors or electrical subcontractors .
section numnavigation lighting num b .
product lists to avoid misunderstanding and ensure compliance with the specifications submit to the engineer for approval a complete list of the products proposed for use before purchasing materials or equipment .
products must comply with plan requirements to be approved .
the product list shall include the following information manufacturers name for each item manufacturers catalog number for each item where the engineer deems necessary alternate equipment will be specified .
c. fees and permits pay the fees and obtain the permits required by power companies and governmental agencies .
num materials all electrical material shall be approved by the underwriters laboratory or other acceptable testing agency .
ensure that materials conform to the requirements of the following specifications material section wood pole num disconnect switch num magnetic contactor num lightning arrester num miscellaneous electrical materials num electrical conduit num ground rod num luminaries and lamps num electrical wire and cable num miscellaneous steel materials num photoelectric control num if this specification or the plans omit any item needed to install and operate the navigation lighting satisfactorily include the item in the system .
if necessary have a qualified person including a registered professional electrical engineer check verify or modify with the departments permission the contract requirements .
the department will review and approve a persons qualifications .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel a .
qualified electrician have a qualified electrician on the job site when electrical wiring is being pulled or electrical connections are being made .
section numnavigation lighting num ensure that the qualified electrician possesses evidence of classification and displays this evidence to the departments engineer in charge of the construction .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
contractor guidelines comply with the following local ordinances rules and regulations the plans the plans are not intended to show the complete details of the overall work but they will indicate the general layout and designate acceptable manufacturers equipment .
approved shop and working drawings including drawings by others if any b .
contractor responsibilities take responsibility for the following provide fittings devices materials and work necessary to install the complete functional system .
any necessary drilling cutting patching galvanizing repair and other work required because of misplaced or plugged conduit or improper workmanship shall be done without additional compensation and shall be approved by the engineer .
ensure that electrical work is adequate .
c. construction precautions when a bridge is under construction provide the lights and other signals necessary for protecting navigation as may be prescribed by the u.s. coast guard .
d. galvanized steel items the following steel items shall be galvanized according to astm a numa numm except the weight of zinc coating per square foot meter of actual surface for num in num mm and num in num mm steels shall average at least num oz num g and no individual specimen shall show less than num oz num g. structural steel conduit support angles on fender system junction boxes except stainless steel conduit clamps and screws luminaire retriever chain and swivel lag screws powderactuated galvanized studs may be of commercial galvanizing quality .
repair damaged galvanized areas according to section num .
section numnavigation lighting num e. conduit boxes fittings wiring and supports furnish and install as required by the national electrical code the conduit boxes fittings wiring supports and accessories required to complete the work .
num .
conduit specifications ensure that conduit connections are waterproof .
provide approved conduit expansion joints at each bridge expansion joint .
use flexible conduit when going from the bridge superstructure to the substructure from the bridge to the fender system and in the transition areas between rigid members .
a. conduit for service risers and bridges unless otherwise shown on the plans use num in num mm rigid galvanized steel conduit for the service riser and along the bridge .
b .
underground conduit unless otherwise specified on the plans use num in num mm nonmetallic conduit for the underground conduit between the service riser and the bridge .
join underground conduit according to the manufacturers recommendations and bury it at least num in num mm .
c. conduit for the fender system walkway the conduit placed along the fender system walkway may be num in num mm size and shall be either liquid tight flexible conduit or rigid galvanized steel conduit .
use the conduit size specified on the plans .
d. conduit connections use flexible conduit to connect the rigid galvanized steel conduit located on the faces of pier or bent columns to the conduit located on the fender system walkway .
ensure this flexible conduit has waterproof couplings and is of sufficient length and slack to permit at least num ft num mm of horizontal movement in each direction .
num .
conduit installation install conduit as follows a .
install conduit perpendicular to or parallel with the principal structural members .
b .
fit conduit terminals at the junction boxes with bushings .
c. support the rigid galvanized steel conduit at least every num ft num m and within num ft num m of junction boxes luminaires etc .
d. use ¼ in num mm galvanized lag screws and clamps to fasten the conduit to the timber walkway of the fender system .
the contractor may use powderactuated galvanized studs and clamps to fasten the following items located underneath the bridge and down the face of pier or bent columns to the concrete rigid galvanized steel conduit expansion devices num .
specifications of pull and junction boxes pull and junction boxes mounted on bridges and the fender system shall be waterproof shall be made of galvanized steel stainless steel or cast aluminum and shall comply with the national electrical code .
there are two options for providing pull and junction boxes to be installed in the ground section numnavigation lighting num construct the boxes according to the plan design and dimensions and at the locations shown on the plans .
construct the concrete boxes of class a concrete meeting the applicable requirements of section num including precast concrete boxes .
furnish and install manufactured boxes approved by the engineer .
manufactured boxes will be permitted when the engineer determines they are equal to the boxes constructed of class a concrete in design quality and structural strength .
boxes must meet the requirements of section num .
provide with each pull or junction box cast iron steel or reinforced concrete covers as shown on the plans .
num .
pull and junction box installation install pull and junction boxes as follows a .
if necessary use powderactuated galvanized studs and clamps to fasten junction boxes located underneath the bridge and down the face of pier or bent columns to the concrete .
b. seal conduit entrance holes in pull or junction boxes around the conduit as approved by the engineer .
c. blank off unused entrance holes and openings for conduit to be extended by others with suitable plugs of plastic bituminous fiber or other material approved to keep out foreign matter .
num .
luminaire installation install luminaires as follows unless otherwise shown on the plans a .
use the number and diameter of studs bolts and lag screws the luminaire manufacturer recommends .
b. fasten each channel marker to the bridge with powderactuated galvanized threaded studs or cadmiumplated expansion bolts .
c. fasten each fender marker to the timber walkway with galvanized lag screws .
f. power supply and wiring unless otherwise noted the power supply shall be num volts numwire and single phase .
the department and the serving electric utility will agree upon the supply point which in most cases will be near the rightsofway line near the bridge location .
num .
service pole set up a service pole as follows a .
to receive the service from the utility company unless otherwise indicated on the plans or in the specifications set up a wood pole that complies with section num .
the pole shall be at least num ft num m class num or as shown on the plans .
b .
install the following on the service pole a metallic service riser with a weatherhead a weatherproof enclosure containing a fusible disconnect switch of the appropriate voltage and ampere rating or as shown on the plans see subsection num.h power control for information on additional items contained in the waterproof enclosure an underwriterapproved meter base in the service riser where required by the power company or where indicated on the plans g. grounding system construction furnish and install an approved lightning arrester at the weatherproof enclosure on the service pole and connect it to the grounding system .
num .
grounding system section numnavigation lighting num construct the grounding system as follows install a ground rod adjacent to the service pole .
connect neutral and grounding conductors to the ground rod .
install a separate continuous copper grounding conductor green throughout the system .
solidly connect metallic noncurrent carrying materials in the lighting system to the grounding conductor .
drive single ground rods vertically until the top of the rod is at least num in num mm below the finished ground .
attach a length of no .
num agw bare copper numstranded wire to the ground rod with suitable ground rod clamps .
connect this wire to the neutral and grounding conductors at the service pole .
num .
ground rod system when the above procedure does not result in sufficient penetration construct a ground rod system as follows a .
place num parallel ground rods at least num ft num m centertocenter in a horizontal pattern and at least num in num mm below the finished ground .
b .
joint and connect these rods to the neutral and grounding conductors at the service pole using suitable ground rod clamps and no .
num awg bare copper numstranded wire .
h. power control unless otherwise specified on the plans or the specifications furnish the following items for each service pole photoelectric control complete with receptacle and accessories .
the control shall provide on operation as indicated under subsection num photoelectric controls .
disconnect switch magnetic contactor .
the contactor shall supply power to the lighting circuit .
transformer .
if the supply voltage is other than num volts furnish and install a transformer to provide num volt control voltage nemanumr lockable weatherproof enclosures the disconnect switch and magnetic contactor shall have the number of poles required to open each ungrounded conductor and shall be accessible from the ground .
install the following items as follows num .
install the photoelectric control a .
mount the photoelectric control near the top of the service pole .
b .
direct the photoelectric control toward the north sky .
c. enclose wiring to and from the photoelectric control in rigid galvanized conduit .
the photoelectric control shall operate the magnetic contactor .
num .
install the disconnect switch magnetic contactor and transformer mount the disconnect switch magnetic contactor and transformer if required in nemanumr lockable weatherproof enclosures on the service pole .
num .
install the weatherproof enclosure a .
install the weatherproof enclosures so that it is accessible from the ground .
b. furnish a padlocks approved by the engineer with two keys each for locking the weatherproof enclosures .
when a project requires more than one padlock key the padlocks alike .
section numnavigation lighting num num quality acceptance a .
inspection of the navigation lighting system materials and workmanship shall meet the requirements of the plans and these specifications and shall comply with the national electrical code .
the work shall be inspected by the department the utility company involved and the u.s. coast guard .
the navigation lighting system shall be approved by both the department and the u.s. coast guard .
if the coast guard fails to make its inspection within num days the department and the utility company will make the final inspection of the navigation lighting system .
the contractor will be relieved of any further responsibility for the system after department acceptance .
b .
testing and acceptance of the navigation lighting system final acceptance of the navigation lighting system will be withheld for a testing period of num days .
the testing will consist of continuous nightly automatic operation after the contractor completes the lighting work or until all other items in the contract except grassing have been accepted whichever occurs later .
assume the cost of the electrical energy consumed during the testing period .
correct any defects in materials or workmanship that occur during the testing period at the contractors expense .
any portion of the testing period subsection num.b testing acceptance of the navigation lighting system that occurs after final acceptance of the other work will not be charged against the contract time .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement each navigation lighting system completed and accepted at the location specified will be measured for payment on a lump sum basis .
see subsection num general description .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment each navigation lighting system completed and accepted at the location specified will be paid for at the lump sum price bid for each system .
this payment shall be full compensation for furnishing and installing materials and for labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the item .
payment will be made under item no .
num navigation lighting bridge no._____ per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numwaterproofing fabrics num general description this work consists of waterproofing concrete and other masonry surfaces by preparing and applying a composite waterproofing membrane at locations shown on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section waterproofing membrane material num mortar num for a list of waterproofing membrane sources see qpl num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a .
prepare the concrete prime the concrete and apply the membrane only under the following conditions air and concrete temperatures are above num f num c. all surfaces are thoroughly dry .
concrete is at least num days old .
prepare the concrete as follows section numwaterproofing fabrics num a .
fill all hole cracks and depressions in the concrete surface flush with mortar composed of one part portland cement and two parts approved sand and cure according to subsection num.z cure concrete .
the contractor may use approved commercially produced fast setting no sag grouts to expedite the work .
b .
chip or grind smooth all high spots sharp points and edges .
c. thoroughly clean and dry the concrete surface .
b .
prime the concrete prime all areas that will receive membrane and allow the areas to cure according to the manufacturers recommendations or as directed by the engineer .
areas not covered with membrane in num hours must be reprimed .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. seal openings and structure edges at openings for drains and pipes and at the edges of structures construct a seal to prevent water from passing between the waterproofing and the surface that it overlays .
apply a manufacturerrecommended edge seal to any area of the membrane permanently exposed to sunlight .
b. waterproof joints joints require a double thickness of waterproofing membrane over properly sealed expansion construction or control joints .
prestrip the joint with a num in .
num mm wide membrane before applying the main waterproofing .
the surface of this prestrip does not need priming .
c. seal seams edge and end seams must overlap at least num in num mm on all applications .
d. apply membrane apply the membrane as follows rub the entire membrane firmly and completely as soon as possible to minimize bubbles caused by air outgassing or water vapor from the concrete .
slit all fish mouths overlap the flaps and repair with a patch pressed or rolled to make the seal .
seal the edges with mastic .
patch misaligned or inadequately lapped seams with the membrane .
e. protect membrane when necessary use a manufacturerapproved protection system to protect waterproofing membranes from damage caused by backfill material or other construction activities .
f. repair membrane as soon as possible patch all tears and inadequately lapped seams with waterproofing membrane .
slit fish mouths and repair with a patch extending num in num mm in all directions from the slit and seal the edges of the patch with mastic .
section numwaterproofing fabrics num num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work will be measured for payment in square yards meters of accepted waterproofing .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per square yard meter for waterproofing complete in place .
payment will be made under item no .
num waterproofing per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numdampproofing num general description this work consists of dampproofing concrete and other types of masonry surfaces .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications .
material section bituminous material for dampproofing or waterproofing num unless otherwise specified pitch type i or ii shall only be used when required by the contract .
when pitch is required use type i on vertical surfaces and type ii on flat surfaces .
use the primers specified in subsection num with asphalt and pitch seal coats .
section numdampproofing num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a .
prepare surfaces concrete surfaces shall cure at least num days before dampproofing .
prepare the surface as follows before dampproofing num .
thoroughly clean and dry the surface to be dampproofed .
num .
spray at least two applications of primer allowing primer to be thoroughly absorbed before the next application .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. dampproof surfaces after the final primer coat has been absorbed dampproof the surface as follows num .
evenly apply a seal coat having a temperature of num f num c to num f num c for asphalt and num f num c for pitch .
num .
allow the seal coat to dry at least two days or longer .
the seal coat shall be hard before any water or earth contacts it .
num .
protect the seal coat from the weather during the drying period .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work will be measured for payment in square yards meters of accepted dampproofing .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per square yards meters for dampproofing complete in place .
payment will be made under item no .
num dampproofing per square yard meter section numdampproofing num num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numbridge deck waterproofing membrane num general description this work consists of preparing surfaces for and applying a protective membrane to concrete bridge decks .
the membrane shall serve as a waterproof barrier to be overlaid with asphaltic concrete .
the waterproofing method shall be as specified on the plans and shall be one of the following method a a waterproofing membrane system placed directly on the portland cement concrete bridge deck surface .
method b a waterproofing membrane system placed directly on a specified grade and thickness of freshly placed asphaltic concrete on the bridge deck .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction section numbituminous tack coat section numconcrete structures b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials all materials shall meet the requirements of the following specifications material section asphaltic concrete num bituminous prime num bituminous tack coat num sand for blast cleaning num waterproofing membrane materials num mortar num for a list of sources see qpl num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section numbridge deck waterproofing membrane num num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a .
method a surface preparation cure new bridge decks that will receive waterproofing membrane according to subsection num.z cure concrete without using membraneforming curing compounds or linseed oil treatments .
prepare concrete surfaces receiving method a waterproofing as follows num .
chip or grind smooth high spots sharp points and edges on the deck surface .
num .
fill holes and depressions in the concrete surface flush with mortar .
mortar shall be composed of one part portland cement and two parts sand and shall be cured according to subsection num.z cure concrete .
approved commercially produced fast setting grout may be used to expedite the work .
num .
allow the mortar to cure .
num .
clean and remove all traffic paint and other harmful materials from the deck by sandblasting the entire deck surface to which the waterproofing membrane will be applied .
num .
remove all sandblasting residue with compressed air .
do not use water to clean the deck .
b .
method b surface preparation prepare concrete surfaces receiving method b waterproofing as follows num .
prepare the joints when the plans specify to place the waterproofing membrane continuously across any joint prepare the joints as follows before applying the asphaltic concrete a .
place an additional strip of preformed sheet membrane transversely across deck joints .
this strip shall have a minimum width of num in num mm and shall be centered across the joint .
b .
apply a mastic of the type specified by the manufacturer at the face of the curb and at joints to ensure that the membrane uniformly adheres to the concrete .
num .
apply the asphaltic concrete once the joints have been prepared apply the asphaltic concrete as follows a .
apply a tack coat to the bridge deck at the rate specified by the engineer .
b .
place the specified grade and thickness of asphaltic concrete .
c. compact the asphaltic concrete according to the applicable provisions of section num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
method a waterproofing use the following guidelines when waterproofing by method a num .
observe weather conditions do not perform the work when the relative humidity is above num percent or when rain is imminent .
section numbridge deck waterproofing membrane num prime surfaces and place membrane only when the air and concrete surface temperatures are above num f num c and the surface is thoroughly dry .
num .
prime the surface prime the surface as follows a .
ensure that the concrete decks are at least num days old before applying prime and membrane .
b .
prime and cure all areas that will receive membrane according to the manufacturers recommendation or as directed by the engineer .
num .
place the waterproofing membrane place the waterproofing membrane as follows a .
unless otherwise designated on the plans extend the waterproofing membrane at least num in num mm up the faces of the curbs parapets and barriers in the transverse direction and to the outer limits of the approach slabs in the longitudinal direction .
b .
apply the membrane to the deck surface using either hand methods or mechanical applicators .
c. apply the membrane to the concrete deck so that it forms a butt joint with the faces of open joints and at expansion devices and other joints .
d. seal the edges of the membrane and the drain openings to prevent water from passing between the waterproofing and the surface it covers .
e. install preformed sheet membrane in a shingled pattern so that water can drain to the low areas of the deck without accumulating against seams .
follow these steps to install the membrane num roll the preformed sheet membrane into place with a lawntype roller to minimize air bubbles and to ensure that the membrane bonds with the primed surface and bonds at the overlaps .
num overlap each strip of preformed sheet membrane at least num in num mm .
num place the membrane so that end laps are in the direction of the paving operation .
num when the plans indicate to place the waterproofing membrane continuously across any joint prepare the joints as described in section num.b.num .
f. eliminate air bubbles by puncturing the membrane and forcing the air out .
g. repair these holes and other ruptures as recommended by the manufacturer .
extend patches at least num in num mm beyond the defect .
h. completely open all drain holes in the deck before paving over them .
num .
place the pavement place the pavement as follows a .
do not allow construction traffic over the waterproofing membrane before placing the surface pavement .
b .
apply the paving over the membrane .
c. completely open drain holes in the deck after placing the pavement course .
b .
method b waterproofing after the asphaltic concrete is compacted and water used in the compaction process has dried completely place waterproofing membrane directly on the asphaltic concrete using the methods specified in method a waterproofing with the following exception the tack coat or primer is not required on the asphaltic concrete beneath the waterproofing membrane .
c. method a and method b applying bituminous overlay the paving operation and asphaltic concrete temperatures shall comply with the membrane manufacturers recommendations and the applicable asphalt concrete pavement specifications or be as directed by the engineer .
only vehicles necessary for the overlay or paving operations shall be on the membrane .
section numbridge deck waterproofing membrane num the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining the condition of the waterproofing membrane until it is covered with pavement .
apply bituminous overlay in either method a or method b as follows num .
before placing the overlay and if required apply a bond coat of adhesive bituminous tack coat to the surface of the waterproofing membrane according to the membrane manufacturers recommendations .
num .
overlay the waterproofing membrane with the thickness or quantity and the type of asphaltic concrete specified on the plans .
bituminous overlay application shall begin as soon as possible after the membrane and if required after the bond coat are placed .
num .
dump the asphalt concrete directly into the receiving hopper of the paving machine .
num .
have the truck pull forward and avoid contacting the paving machine while it is moving .
num .
do not permit the mixture to be dumped onto the deck ahead of the paving machine .
num .
spread and roll the asphalt concrete so that the membrane will not be damaged .
roll the first asphalt concrete lift with a breakdown roller as soon as possible after the paving machine has passed .
do not permit the use of vibratory rollers with the vibrator on .
num .
since a minimum percent compaction is not specified compact the asphaltic concrete to the satisfaction of the engineer and applicable compaction requirements in subsection num.c .
num .
place a final surface course of open graded surface mixture according to subsection num open graded surface mixtures in the amount specified on the plans unless otherwise specified .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement bridge deck waterproofing membrane complete in place and accepted will be measured by the number of square yards meters of bridge deck and approach slabs covered .
material placed on curb faces and overlaps will not be measured .
tack coat and asphaltic concrete will be measured and paid for as provided under the respective items of section num and section num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment bridge deck waterproofing membrane will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yards meters for preparing the surfaces and for furnishing and applying the waterproofing system .
payment will be made under item no .
num bridge deck waterproofing membrane method____ per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numpedestrian overpass bridge num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numpainting structures num general description this work consists of painting new and existing steel structures steel hpiling and metal shell piling and steel swaybracing .
the work includes applying special protective coatings to piling and swaybracing complete in place .
the work also includes protecting traffic and property .
num definitions epa environmental protection agency osha occupational safety and health administration pccp painting contractor certification program qpnum sspc contractor certification program evaluates contractors who perform surface preparation and industrial coating application on steel structures in the field .
qpnum sspc contractor certification program evaluates the contractors ability to perform industrial hazardous paint removal in a field operation .
two qp num categories are available based on the type of equipment and containment category a negative air containment category b no negative air containment sspc the society for protective coatings num related references a .
standard specifications section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public section numsteel structures section numpiling section numtraffic signal installation section numpaint b. referenced documents sspcguide num guide for containing debris generated during paint removal operations sspcguide num guide for the disposal of leadcontaminated surface preparation debris sspcsp numnace no .
num commercial blast cleaning sspcsp numnace no .
num brushoff blast cleaning osha standards num cfr num and num cfr num epa uniform hazardous waste manifest section numpainting structures num epa method num toxicity characteristics leaching procedure tclp num submittals provide evidence to the department prior to beginning the work that any contractor or subcontractor that performs surface preparation or coating application is currently qpnum certified by the society for protective coatings sspc .
provide evidence to the department prior to beginning the work that any contractor or subcontractor performing cleaning rehabilitation and painting work on bridge components coated with lead based paint or paint containing hazardous material is currently qpnum category a certified by the society for protective coatings sspc .
at the preconstruction conference or at least four num weeks before mobilization make the following submittals to the engineer for acceptance as appropriate a .
health and safety responsibilities provide effective engineering and work practice controls to protect employee health and safety .
num .
comply with all relevant environmental protection agency epa resource conservation and recovery act rcra comprehensive environmental response compensation and liability act cercla occupational safety and health act osha and environmental protection division epd regulations .
num .
certify to the engineer that personnel involved with lead paint removal operations including rigging and material handling personnel have received training and understand the applicable parts of the latest edition of osha standards num cfr num and num cfr num including any amendments .
have the certification signed by all personnel involved with lead paint removal .
num .
provide test results from an osha certified laboratory showing blood lead levels of employees that may be exposed to lead during the project .
num .
provide a medical monitoring schedule to verify acceptable blood lead levels during the project and after the project is completed .
b .
blast cleaning containment system num .
before beginning work at each bridge submit design and drawings of the proposed containment system to the engineer for review and approval .
include tarpaulin data sheets to verify that the material is airtight and tightly secured at the seams .
do not use burlap or open weave materials .
num .
when the proposed containment system will induce large loads on the existing structure the engineer may direct the contractor to submit an analysis of the load that will be added to the existing structure by the containment system and blast waste .
have a licensed professional engineer registered in the state of georgia with bridge experience perform and stamp the load analysis .
ensure that the analysis shows that the system will not induce a load on the bridge that overstresses it or affects the structural integrity of the bridge .
num .
do not allow the containment system or equipment to violate the minimum bridge clearances shown on the plans unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
c. emergency contingency plan submit to the engineer for review and approval an emergency contingency plan for cleaning up spills from failure of the containment system spent material recovery system or storage containers .
define procedures for spills or releases of waste and indicate the training of workers handling the waste as required by rcra .
d. spent material sampling plan submit in writing to the engineer for review and approval the proposed method for collecting the spent material .
include a sampling plan that conforms to epa swnum or a statement of intent to use the dot sampling plan subsection num.b.num .
this submittal will also include the name of the company ies and responsible persons that will sample treat and haul the spent material .
section numpainting structures num e. material safety data sheets submit material safety data sheets on the abrasive and paint materials that will be used .
f. hazardous waste transporter information provide the name and epa identification number of each licensed transporter used for shipping hazardous waste to a treatment storage or disposal facility .
g. permitted site information provide the name and epa identification number phone number and address for each permitted offsite treatment storage or disposal facility to which the waste will be shipped .
h. accredited laboratory information provide the name of the environmental lead laboratory accreditation program ellap accredited laboratory that will perform the tclp tests .
i .
quality control qc program submit a written qc program that identifies the following num .
instrumentation that will be used num .
schedule of required measurements and observations num .
procedures for correcting unacceptable work num .
procedures for improving surface preparation and painting quality as a result of quality control findings num .
names qualifications experience and training of personnel who will be managing and implementing the qc program and conducting quality control tests include the ga dot quality control daily report form as supplied by the engineer .
include sspc painting contractor certification program pccp certifications the engineer will forward a copy of these submittals to the office of materials for review .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section abrasives for blast cleaning note num paint num note num use low dusting mineral abrasives which contain a minimum of ten percent num by weight gnum steel grit blended homogeneously throughout the blasting abrasive or num steel grit .
alternate abrasive mixtures proposed by the contractor require approval by the office of materials before use .
abrasives shall contain no more than num ppm of any corrosive compound such as sulfate or chloride .
abrasives shall not contain epa characteristic compounds such as lead chromium or arsenic which can be detected by the epa toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp .
the mineral abrasive used to blend with steel grit will be listed in the departments qualified products manual .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section numpainting structures num num construction requirements num personnel a .
contractor certification provide the engineer with documentation to ensure that all contractors or subcontractors that perform surface preparation or coating application are currently certified by the society for protective coatings sspc to the requirements of sspc qpnum .
provide the engineer with documentation to ensure that all contractors or subcontractors that perform removal or disturbance of paint containing lead or other hazardous material are currently certified to the requirements of sspc qpnum category a .
the painting contractors and painting subcontractors must remain so certified for the duration of the project .
if a contractors or subcontractors certification expires the company will not be allowed to perform any work until the certification is reissued .
notify the engineer of any change in contractor certification status including certification expiration or certification renewal .
requests for extension of time for any delay to the completion of the project due to an inactive certification will not be considered and liquidated damages will apply .
num equipment a. brushes preferably use brushes with round or oval cross sections .
if using flat brushes ensure that the maximum width is num in num mm .
for surfaces inaccessible to brushes apply paint with sheepskin daubers made for painting .
application of inorganic zinc by brush is prohibited except for small areas and touch up work .
b. spray equipment if spraying paint use air cold airless or hot circulating airless equipment .
spray equipment is subject to the engineers approval .
use spray equipment that can constantly agitate the paint .
also use equipment with a device that thoroughly mixes paints in their shipping containers before the paints are removed .
water traps are required as follows when using air spray equipment ensure that the air lines in the system have suitable water traps .
for cold airless spray equipment water traps are not required in the air lines use them if desired .
c. rollers rollers are subject to the engineers approval .
use rollers suitable to the type of paint applied and the work areas involved .
provide pans for dipping the rollers into the paint .
follow these restrictions do not use worn rollers .
do not use rollers to apply special protective coatings or paints to piling and swaybracing .
if a surface is inaccessible to rollers apply the paint with sheepskin daubers made for painting .
d. inspection equipment ensure that the system applicator has the following wetfilm gauge section numpainting structures num dryfilm gauge surface thermometer sling psychrometer abrasive blasting finish gauge during and after field cleaning and painting furnish a safety belt and a lift truck bucket truck or snooper truck to the engineers satisfaction to inspect the cleaning and painting operation .
e. protection equipment furnish signs warning lights barricades enclosures and watchmen as required by the manual on uniform traffic control devices or by the engineer .
num preparation refer to subsection numb.num weather conditions before performing any cleaning operations .
a .
clean new steel structures before painting clean new steel structures as follows num .
clean steel hpiling metal shell piling and steel swaybracing .
num .
field blast clean steel hpiling metal shell piling and steel swaybracing that will receive paints systems or special protective coatings by field blasting .
the extent of cleaning shall be sspcspnum commercial blast cleaning .
num .
thoroughly shop clean the following structural steel metal surfaces to be painted .
the extent of cleaning shall be sspcspnum commercial blast cleaning .
num .
clean field weld or bolted connection surfaces as follows a .
before cleaning the steel straighten bent metal according to subsection num.a straightening material .
b .
before welding or bolting field clean the surfaces that will touch after the welding or bolting as described in subsection num.a clean new steel structures step num and step num. c. keep the surfaces free of paint and metal spatters .
d. field clean the remainder of the structural steel .
if desired delay cleaning the rest of the structural steel until concrete work is complete and the main painting operation is ready to begin .
num .
prepare new steel structure surfaces for painting as follows a .
have the engineer inspect each span or unit of work .
b .
do not begin painting until the engineer approves the spans or units of work .
b .
clean existing steel structures ensure that no work is performed before a project bridge painting repainting preconstruction conference is held .
clean only as much metal as can be painted before it rusts .
if surfaces rust after cleaning clean them again before painting them .
blast clean existing steel structures as follows num .
construct protection devices .
assume responsibility for damages to vehicles persons or property caused by cleaning operations .
protect the following from blastcleaning hazards portions of the structure superstructure substructure and highway appurtenances that could be damaged by the blast cleaning existing pedestrian vehicular and other traffic on underneath or adjacent to the structure construct protection devices as follows section numpainting structures num a .
cover or shield portions of the structure that could be damaged .
b. construct a system that protects traffic from direct blasting and prevents abrasive materials and debris from spreading and creating a traffic hazard .
c. if blast cleaning disrupts traffic flow stop cleaning or clean behind screens .
d. if the protection devices are not providing protection stop the work and correct the problem .
do not begin work until effective corrections are made .
e. before reopening work areas to traffic remove abrasive material and debris deposited on the pavement shoulders or slope paving in the area .
num .
prepare the structures for blast cleaning as follows a .
if the project inspector requires remove railings nameplates and other interfering parts from surfaces to be cleaned and painted .
b. straighten bent metal .
c. before blast cleaning a beam or girder remove dust and debris from the top of the bottom flange .
num .
remove all coats of paint to clean bare metal by blast cleaning or other approved means .
the extent of cleaning shall be sspcspnum commercial blast cleaning with an anchor pattern between num and num mils num and num mm .
anchor patterns greater than num mils num mm will require that the primer be applied at a thickness of at least num mil num mm over the anchor pattern or that the steel be reblasted unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num .
after blast cleaning and before painting prepare the steel surfaces as follows a .
remove sand dust and other foreign matter from the following deck piers railing other adjoining parts of the structure slope paving b .
remove any fins tears or slivers from the steel .
c. remove burred or sharp edges that appear on any steel members .
d. have the engineer inspect each span or unit of work .
e. do not begin painting until the engineer approves the spans or units of work .
num .
contain the paint chips abrasive particles and dust or debris spent material caused by cleaning and blasting as follows a .
contain spent material according to the sspc guide num class num .
the containment materials and support structure may be flexible or rigid .
b .
ensure that tarpaulins are airtight and secure at the seams .
c. do not use burlap or openweave materials .
d. seal seams and joints by taping or overlapping tarps at least num in num mm .
overlap the entryway at least num ft num m. e. use negative pressure and verify it as follows verify pressure through the concave nature of the containment materials taking into account wind effects .
observe air flow using smoke or other visible means inside or outside the containment .
f. filter the air exhausting from the containment with a properly sized dust collector bag house or other approved method .
g. during abrasive blasting operations ensure that the crossdraft and downdraft air movements within the containment comply with osha standard num cfr num .
section numpainting structures num num .
additional blastcleaning requirements for bridges over waterways a .
ensure that there is no scum on the surface of the water outside a num ft num m limit of the bridge .
stretch a floating boom across the waterway at or before this num ft num m limit on the downstream and downwind sides of the bridge to contain floating spent material .
b .
if floating residue is found outside this num ft num m limit the engineer will consider protection inadequate and will require further containment measures .
c. if the wind velocity is high enough to blow the residue outside the num ft num m limit the engineer will temporarily suspend the blast cleaning .
d. provide a flotation device in the water underneath the area being blast cleaned to collect the spent material .
e. if the stream is too shallow for a barge erect a temporary platform or tarp arrangement to collect the spent material .
num .
alternate containment system if desired propose an alternate method for containing the dust and spent materials from blast cleaning the structural steel .
the department may reject a proposed alternate method that does not satisfy the departments concerns for the safe removal and containment of leadbased paint from bridge structures .
submit the proposal for evaluation and approval as follows a .
submit a detailed written proposal describing the alternate containment and blasting method .
b .
include in the description specific information on materials and equipment noise levels and worker safety and health .
c. supply references of other locations where the alternate method has been used .
d. the department will review the information submitted and may reject the proposal or issue a conditional approval .
e. if the department grants conditional approval demonstrate the alternate method for containment and blast cleaning on a trial basis .
num .
the department will evaluate the effectiveness of dust and spent material containment worker safety and health concerns and noise levels .
num .
if the department finds the alternate method unacceptable the department may reject it and require work according to this specification .
num .
if the department approves the alternate method the contractor will receive no additional payment above the established contract unit price .
num .
handling spent materials handle spent materials according to the following requirements a .
collect the spent material daily and store it in sealed waste disposal containers .
b .
use waste containers that are approved by the engineer and located where they will not cause a potential hazard .
c. store waste containers in a temporary fenced secured area that is not located in a storm water runoff course in standing water nor on department property .
ensure compliance with the requirements of epa num cfr num and num cfr num. d. label waste containers in compliance with hazardous waste laws .
e. have the contractor or hisher consultant sample the spent materials according to the approved sampling plan referenced in subsection num.d .
f. test the material using certified independent laboratory in accordance with the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp .
g. collection storage sampling and testing shall be performed in accordance with epa rcra regulations num cfr num. h. forward a copy of all tclp results to the engineer and to omr .
section numpainting structures num i .
if the tclp toxicity test results do not classify the spent materials as a hazardous waste uniformly blend twenty percent portland cement with the spent materials and solidify the mixture before disposing of it at a licensed solid waste landfill .
the cost of treatment and disposal of nonhazardous spent material is considered incidental to the pay item .
j .
if the tclp test results classify the material as a hazardous waste treat the material to the land disposal restriction standard of nummgl .
the waste shall not be disposed of until authorized by the engineer .
num if the waste is to be treated onsite submit a waste analysis plan to the regional epa office in accordance with num cfr num within num days of receipt of the tclp results .
num if the waste is to be treated offsite submit tclp results to the epa permitted hazardous waste treatment facility .
k. forward a copy of all manifests and pertinent documents to the engineer and to omr .
num .
sampling for lead paint residue a .
use the approved detailed sampling plan included in subsection num.d spent material sampling plan which could either be the sampling plan listed below or a similar plan that conforms to epa sw num chapter num test methods for evaluating solid waste physicalchemical methods .
ensure the plan includes the following num. who will be responsible for the sampling num .
how often samples will be taken num .
how the samples will be obtained num .
where the samples will be taken num .
how the samples will be handled num .
how the sample results will be tied back to the waste from which it was sampled .
b .
inform the project personnel and independent assurance engineer as to when date and time the samples will be taken .
the department will monitor the sampling procedure and the project personnel will enter all pertinent information in a logbook .
information to be recorded is as follows num .
project and contract id numbers num .
sampling points num .
field contact personnel num .
producer of waste num .
type of process producing the waste num .
type of waste num .
total number of samples num .
number of drums each sample will cover num .
which bridge location and the drum number i.e .
num num that the sample will cover .
a. label all of the drums on the project .
ensure that the labels are weatherproof and include the following the date the project number the contract id number the bridge location assign drums a series of consecutive numbers i.e .
num. c. take one grab sample using random sampling technique from a drum for each bridge location .
use a thieving device to secure samples from each of the drums .
the minimum sample size is num lb num g which is about a cupful .
d. samples may be taken by the paint contractor or hisher consultant who will treat the waste .
num .
send the samples to a certified private testing lab .
section numpainting structures num num .
attach a sampling analysis request sample card to the samples which includes a the date b project number c contract id number d bridge location e name of collector f place of collection g number of drums from bridge each sample will cover and h drum numbers i.e .
num num that sample will cover .
num include this information on the test report and the manifest so that the waste on the manifest can be keyed to the results on the tclp report .
num ensure that a chain of custody form accompanies the sample and is returned with the test results .
e. test the samples for epa method num toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp .
f. test one num sample for each bridge location .
num .
if the results are num mgl or greater leachable lead the waste is to be declared hazardous and no further testing is needed until the waste has been treated .
after treatment the waste shall be resampled and re tested in accordance with an approved sampling plan and shall be below num mgl before disposal .
num .
if the results are below nummgl the waste is to be declared nonhazardous then the contractor or hisher consultant shall uniformly blend twenty percent portland cement with the spent material and solidify the mixture before disposing of it at a licensed solid waste landfill .
g. additional samples must be acquired according to epa sw num and sspcguide num section num. h. mail the test reports and manifests to the engineers office which will review them take the appropriate action and send them to the lab files at the office of materials .
send an extra copy of each to the office of materialsindependent assurance .
if the tclp toxicity test results classify the spent materials as a hazardous waste treat the waste either onsite or offsite to the land disposal restriction standard of num mgl .
do not dispose of the waste until authorized by the engineer .
hazardous waste material may be treated offsite if the treatment is performed by a licensed hazardous waste treatment facility in accordance with epa and epd guidelines .
forward a copy of all manifests and other pertinent documents to the engineer and to omr .
these documents will be maintained in the project file for three years .
if after treatment the spent material is classified as a hazardous waste by the tclp test retreat it until the universal treatment standard is met .
hazardous waste disposal shall be paid for as specified under subsection num payment of this specification .
num .
handle hazardous waste as follows a .
comply with section num of the specifications .
the contractor is responsible for complying with the hazardous waste laws when performing the work .
obtain a separate united states environmental protection agency generator i.d .
number for each project where the spent material is hazardous waste according to the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp results .
b .
obtain the generator i.d .
number from the georgia environmental protection division hazardous waste management num num. c. obtain the generator i.d .
number within num days of receiving the tclp results and provide copies of the number to the project engineer and the office of maintenance bridge inspection unit no .
num capitol square atlanta georgia num. d. dispose of hazardous spent material only at a licensed hazardous waste disposal facility .
e. if the disposal facility requires it send a sample of spent material for confirmation testing before delivering the shipment .
f. transport the waste to the facility using epaapproved licensed waste haulers .
section numpainting structures num g. document each truckload of hazardous waste using an epa uniform hazardous waste manifest .
h. according to epa and epd rules provide gdt and the georgia epd notification and certification of treated hazardous spent abrasives .
include the following name and address of facility receiving the shipment description of the waste as initially generated including the applicable epa hazardous waste numbers and treatability groups treatment standards applicable to the waste at the initial generation point signature of an authorized contractor representative on the certification g. hazardous waste disposal is paid for as specified under subsection num.a spent materials .
c. clean structures under or over railroads when cleaning and painting steel structures involves work on over or below the railroad rightofway or the property of a railroad company railroad comply with the following the additional requirements including railroad flagging and insurance coverage listed in the special provision for protection of railway interests the railroads general rules regulations and requirements including those on safety fall protection and personal protective equipment coordinate the work with the railroad and ensure that there will be no interference with or delay to railroad operations including train signal and communication services .
num .
railroad protection requirements the contractor is responsible for damages to vehicles persons or property resulting from cleaning operations .
ensure that the facilities and property of the railroad or any tenants remain undamaged .
comply with the following a .
protect the following from the damages of blastcleaning operations traffic pedestrian vehicular rail train and other kinds of traffic on under or next to the structure portions of the structure superstructure substructure and highway appurtenances that could be damaged b .
weight or anchor ground cloths to withstand the suction effects of a passing train .
c. restrain ropes hoses tarps booms and other equipment so they do not hang from the bridge or otherwise infringe on the clearances around an active track see subsection num.c.num railroad construction clearance limits below .
account for the following wind billowing of draped tarpaulins sag from the weight of collected spent materials num .
railroad construction clearance limits comply with the railroad construction clearance limits railroad construction clearance limits track type horizontal limits vertical limits single track num ft num m from the center line the existing vertical clearance from the top of the rail to the underside of the bridge multiple tracks num ft num m from the center lines of the outermost tracks the existing vertical clearance from the top of the rail to the underside of the bridge num .
requirements on bridges carrying roadways over railroad tracks when work is required within the railroad construction clearance limits ensure that the following can be moved outside the clearance limits when the railroad flagman notifies you to clear the track for rail traffic .
working platforms section numpainting structures num scaffolding containment systems other equipment necessary to complete the work while the track is open to rail traffic do not allow ropes hoses tarps booms or other equipment or items to hang from the bridge or infringe on the clearance limits .
num .
requirements on bridges carrying railroad tracks over roadways when work is required on the railroad bridge ensure that the following can be moved completely off the bridge when the railroad flagman notifies you to clear the track for rail traffic .
working platforms scaffolding containment systems other equipment necessary to complete the work spent material do not attach rigging or other items to the bridge rails or barriers at the sides of the bridge .
while the track is open to rail traffic do not allow ropes hoses tarps booms or other equipment or items to remain on the bridge .
d. prepare steel piling swaybracing and concrete piling surfaces for special protective coatings prepare surfaces and material for special protective coatings according to the manufacturers recommendations .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
provide protection protect the structure adjoining property and the public from the dangers and damages of cleaning and painting .
protect the following pedestrian vehicular and marine traffic on or underneath the structures being painted structures slope paving clean slope paving stained during painting to the engineers satisfaction .
b .
meet general painting requirements follow these requirements when painting new and existing steel structures meet general painting requirements follow these requirements when painting new and existing steel structures num .
weather conditions cleaning or painting shall not take place during windy or gusty conditions unless the contractor can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the engineer that containment is sufficient to prevent the escape of paint overspray or spent material .
if any paint overspray or spent material is detected outside containment areas cease all operations until clean up has been completed .
do not recommence cleaning or painting operations until additional measures have been taken to prevent any future escape of spent material andor paint overspray .
section numpainting structures num when the plans specify system vi waterborne ensure that the minimum air and surface temperature is num f num c. comply with the other weather requirements listed below .
when the plans specify system vii ensure that the minimum air and surface temperatures are above num of num oc and the relative humidity is greater than num when applying the inorganic zinc primer .
apply system vii waterborne intermediate and top coats only when the temperatures of both the air and surface are above num of num c. for systems iv and v alkyd apply paint only when the air and surface temperatures are both above num of num c. weather requirements for painting all systems maximum surface temperature num f num c relative humidity below num minimum surface temperature num f num c above dew point follow these weather restrictions do not apply paint to surfaces that are damp or otherwise unsatisfactory as determined by the engineer .
do not paint in open yards or on erected structures when the metal is hot enough to cause the paint to blister or produce a porous film .
do not paint metal hot enough to cause oil separation in the alkyd paint .
do not paint metal when freezing weather num of num oc is forecast or expected before the paint can dry .
do not store at temperatures below num of num ocor above num of num oc .
when outdoor temperatures exceed these limits paint shall be stored in an appropriate indoor location .
num .
oxidation if a prime coat on structural steel fades or chalks because of oxidation thoroughly remove the oxidation by brushing or by washing with water until the sound prime coat is visible .
num .
paint thinning do not thin or dilute paints .
num .
application methods thoroughly mix paints in their shipping containers using mechanical devices before removing the paint .
for inorganic zinc primers add the powder component to the liquid component with thorough stirring and continue stirring until the powder is well dispersed .
strain the mixture through a num mesh sieve to remove large particles .
use pressure pots equipped with a mechanical agitator which will remain in motion throughout the application .
ensure that the paint formulation matches the application method brush roller airless spray or air spray .
apply paint neatly by brushing spraying or rolling .
use rollers only as specified in subsection num.c rollers .
when using brushes or rollers apply the paint as follows a .
produce an even coating covering the metal or the previous coat .
b .
work the paint into corners and crevices .
c. keep enough paint on rollers and overlap the applications to avoid unsightly or mottled areas .
use the paint numbers shown in the table of application methods below .
table of application methods brush roller airless spray hydraulic air spray ordinary exposure green system iv lead free alkyd numa numa numa x numa numa numa x section numpainting structures num table of application methods brush roller airless spray hydraulic air spray numa numa numa x numb numb numb x x x x x heavy exposure green system v lead free alkyd numa numa numa x numa numa numa x numa numa numa x numa numa numa x numb numb numb x ordinary exposure green system vi waterborne numw numw numw numw numw numw numw numw numw numw numw numw numw numw numw numw ordinary exposure green system vii zinc primer x x inorganic zinc primer x numw numw numw numw numw numw numw numw num .
paint systems and dry film thickness apply the minimum required dry film thickness and the additional coats according to the paint system required on the plans .
table of paint systems and minimum required dry film thickness no .
of coats color of coats thickness mils mm ordinary exposure green system iv lead free alkyd primer red num num to num num touchup red numnd coat buff num num to num num numrd coat green num num to num num numth coat none x heavy exposure green system v lead free alkyd primer redt num num to num num touchup red numnd coat red num num to num num numrd coat buff num num to num num section numpainting structures num table of paint systems and minimum required dry film thickness no .
of coats color of coats thickness mils mm numth coat green num num to num num ordinary exposure green system vi waterborne primer brown num num to num num touchup brown numnd coat buff or white num num to num num numrd coat green num num to num num numth coat none x ordinary exposure green system vii zinc primer primer gray num num to num num numnd coat buff or white num .num to num num numrd coat green num num to num num numth coat none x num num for touchup coats t tinted num .
proper drying ensure that each coat is thoroughly dry and cured before applying the next coat .
allow at least num hours between coats .
if weather conditions and paint type require allow longer periods between coats .
num .
cracks and cavities before applying the second field coat fill small cracks and cavities that are not sealed watertight by the first field coat using the following planrequired paint system fill mixture iv or v pasty mixture of zinc hydroxy phosphite and linseed oil vi pasty mixture recommended and supplied by the manufacturer vii pasty mixture recommended and supplied by the manufacturer c. paint new steel structures paint new steel structures as follows num .
use the correct paint system .
the plans usually specify one of the systems shown in the table of paint systems and minimum required dry film thickness .
if the plans do not specify a paint system use system vi .
if the structure is located in the num county ozone nonattainment region use only waterborne coatings for any painting operation conducted between may num and september num .
the num metro atlanta counties that comprise the nonattainment region are cherokee clayton cobb coweta dekalb douglas fayette forsyth fulton gwinnett henry paulding and rockdale .
do not apply alkyd coatings and the system vii inorganic zinc primer under the above conditions .
system vi and the system vii waterborne intermediate and top coats may be applied .
num .
paint new structural metal with one shop prime coat one field touchup coat and two field weather coats .
when severe exposure conditions require apply one additional prime coat .
once painting has commenced including shop coat succeeding coats of paint are to be the same paint system and from the same paint manufacturer .
section numpainting structures num num .
apply the type and color of paint coats as required by the system number shown on the plans .
if succeeding coats are the same type and color tint one of the underlying coats as required by subsection num.b.num.d and subsection num.a.num .
num .
do not paint advertising on structural steel .
num .
adhere to the following requirements for special surfaces a .
concrete contact areas if the following surfaces will touch previously poured and hardened concrete apply two coats of primer to them steel surfaces nongalvanized handrail posts nonembedded armored joints unless otherwise specified on the shop drawings do not shop paint surfaces that will touch plastic concrete .
b. inaccessible areas before assembly paint surfaces that will be inaccessible after assembly or installation with two coats of primer .
c. connection areas do not shop paint the following connection areas surfaces that will touch after welding or bolting areas next to field welds d. machinefinished surfaces using the materials specified either shop paint or coat the machinefinished surfaces according to subsection num.d.num coating machinefinished steel surfaces .
e. plates that touch elastomeric pads apply one coat of the shop primer specified on the plans to plates that will touch elastomeric bearing pads .
num .
paint surfaces and edges that will be exposed after components are erected .
num .
do not apply the primer paint to areas that will be welded .
num .
do not apply the primer paint to the area that will bear against the elastomeric pad .
num .
dimension and locate the blockedout nopaint areas to within plus or minus num in num mm of the theoretical location and size of the elastomeric pad .
num .
do not handle or load steel until the shop paint is dry .
num .
field paint steel surfaces according to this time line a .
before erection if the following surfaces will touch previously poured and hardened concrete touch them up as required with primer or apply two coats of primer if the item was not shop painted before installing them steel surfaces nongalvanized handrail posts nonembedded armored joints do not install until the paint is thoroughly dry .
b .
after erection after completing steel erection clean unprimed surfaces of connection areas requiring paint as specified in subsection num.a clean new steel structures step num .
connection areas include welded or bolted splices beam and diaphragm connections and bracing connections .
prime connection areas with the paint specified in the system number shown on the plans .
do not prime welded connections until the following occurs weld metal is cleaned according to subsection num.i.num paragraph num and subsection num.i.num paragraph num .
section numpainting structures num radiographic or magnetic particle inspection work if specified is complete and the welds are approved .
c. after concreting after completing concreting work clean surfaces as specified in subsection num.a clean new steel structures and field paint as follows num .
cover the following with one coat of touchup primer paint and allow it to dry shipping and erection marks bolt heads other surfaces with worn off or defective prime coat num .
during touch up stripe or paint the following with an additional coat of primer exposed edges of flanges on rolled beams and builtup girders edges of angles and stiffeners exposed edges of gusset plates splice plates and cover plates num .
ensure that sharp exposed edges have two full coats of primer paint including the shop coat .
num .
if removing oxidation as described in subsection num.b.num oxidation damages the prime coat so that bare metal is exposed after cleaning prime the exposed bare metal with an additional coat at no expense to the department .
num .
if removing oxidation reduces the prime thickness use two field weather coats if desired to obtain the total thickness required for the paint system .
however when the two field weather coats are different types of paint use additional prime paint to obtain the prime thickness .
d. paint existing steel structures paint existing steel structures as follows num .
prevent paint overspray by using containments .
num .
the weather conditions specified for new steel structures described in subsection num.b also apply to existing steel structures .
num .
apply the correct colors and number of coats as follows only steel which has undergone complete removal of all coats and which has a surface cleanliness conforming to sspc spnum may be coated with system vi .
give this steel one full prime coat and two weather coats all of the color and type required by the special provisions or plans .
if succeeding coats are of the same type and color tint one of the underlying coats as required by the specifications .
num .
the drying requirements of subsection num.b.num specified for new steel structures shall apply to existing steel structures .
num .
the paint thinning requirements of subsection num.b.num specified for new steel structures shall apply to existing steel structures .
num .
painting of surfaces a .
methods of application the requirements of subsection num.b.num.as specified for new steel structures shall apply to existing steel structures .
b .
cracks and cavities the requirements of subsection num.b.num as specified for new steel structures shall apply to existing steel structures .
c. paint thickness the minimum required dry film thickness as specified in subsection num.b.num and the additional coats specified in subsection num.b.num for new steel structures shall apply to existing steel structures .
however when new paint is applied over existing sound paint the required wet film thickness of the new coats shall be that required by the special provisions or plans .
section numpainting structures num num .
apply the minimum required dry film thickness and the additional coats specified in the table of paint systems and minimum required dry film thickness .
however when applying new paint over existing sound paint comply with the required wet film thickness specified by the special provisions or plans for new coats .
num .
after completing the painting replace the railings name plates and other interfering parts removed as described in subsection num.b clean existing steel structures step num.a to the engineers satisfaction .
e. paint steel hpiling metal shell piling and steel swaybracing paint this material as follows num .
weather conditions except as specified below apply paint in the weather conditions specified in subsection num.b.num weather conditions .
a. painting in open yards or on erected structures shall not be done when the metal is sufficiently hot to cause the paint to blister or produce a porous film .
b .
metal shall not be painted when freezing weather num of num oc is forecast or expected in the time that would occur before the paint has dried .
num .
thinning paint do not thin or dilute pile paints .
num .
number of coats and color unless the plans require a no .
nump or nump system described in subsection num.a.num paint for steel piling and swaybracing paint steel hpiling metal shell piling and steel swaybracing with a system vii paint system .
apply a no .
nump system as follows a .
when using a no .
nump system formulated as a first application primer and a separate finish coat ensure that containers are clearly labeled as primer or finish coat .
b .
apply the primer first .
c. apply successive coats using either primer or finish coat .
d. ensure that the final coat is a finish coat num .
method of application apply the black paints noted in subsection num.e.num number of coats and color using either brushes or sprayers .
when using a brush apply the paint as follows a .
apply a thick application of paint to be plastered or troweled on the steel surfaces .
b. brush out the paint only as required to obtain uniform thickness do not attempt to brush it out neatly .
c. work the paint into corners and crevices .
num .
application rate for each coat apply at least num gal of paint type per num ft² .
num lmnum .
ensure that the total dryfilm thickness of paint coats is as specified in subsection num.e.num thickness of paint below .
num .
thickness of paint ensure that the final dryfilm thickness of the completed work is at least num mils num mm .
apply additional coats to achieve the minimum dryfilm thickness at no expense to the department .
num .
extent of paint paint to the following extent coat exposed piling with a system vii paint system unless a no .
nump orno .
nump system is specified on the plans .
coat piling in the stream bed and within num ft num m of the top of the stream bank with the system vii from num ft num m below the stream bed to the bottom of the concrete cap .
section numpainting structures num coat end bent piles num ft num mm below the bottom of the cap or concrete encased as defined in subsection num.o coat and paint piling .
for piling that will be encased according to section num paint the piling with system vii to the extent specified in subsection num.o coat and paint piling .
before driving coat test piles located in permanent surface water with a system vii according to subsection num.o coat and paint piling .
paint enough of the test pile to ensure that the coated portion extends num ft num m below the stream bed or bottom .
num .
drying requirements ensure that each coat is thoroughly dry before the next coat is applied .
f. apply special protective coatings to steel piling steel swaybracing and concrete piling unless the plans require no .
nump or nump system apply a system vii coating .
apply the coating to the extent specified in subsection num.o coat and paint piling .
ensure that coverage wet and dryfilm thicknesses temperature considerations primer use and drying and curing time comply with the manufacturers recommendations .
apply the special protective coating as follows num .
when the structure will be welded do not apply the material until the weld is placed and cleaned .
num .
apply the material in at least two coats by brushing .
num .
apply the second coat at right angles to the first coat .
num .
use the elapsed time between coats recommended by the manufacturer .
num .
ensure that the finished film has no holidays and pinholes and completely covers the underlying surface .
num .
after applying the coating material recoat damaged areas where the protection is ineffective as determined by the engineer .
num .
where swaybracing members will be welded to piles and painted in advance burn off the coating at the weld location and proceed as follows a .
thoroughly clean the burned area by scraping and poweroperated wire brushing before welding .
b .
after making and cleaning the weld recoat the area .
num .
do not drive piles painted in advance until the second coat has thoroughly dried and completely cured .
num quality acceptance a .
correct defective work if applied paint does not meet the requirements of this specification remove the paint or correct it using sspcapproved means .
remove paint that is applied to improperly cleaned surfaces .
clean the surfaces and repaint them to the engineers satisfaction .
b .
meet the required total dryfilm thickness if the minimum required total dryfilm thickness specified for the paint system is not reached after applying the required number of coats and colors apply additional coats at no expense to the department until the required thickness is obtained .
the department considers the applied zinc primer deficient in thickness for measured dry thickness values less than num mils num mm .
if more than four deficient thickness values one measurement per num ft.num num mnum of surface area are found in any num ftnum num mnumof continuous metal section blast clean the entire section to a sspcspnum commercial blast condition .
repaint the section with inorganic primer to achieve a dry film coating thickness of num to num mils num to num mm .
section numpainting structures num repair primed areas having excessive dry film coating thickness coating dry spray visible coating mudcracking visible surface hackles handling abrasions and missed paint in bolt holes .
repair in accordance with the written recommendations of the paint manufacturer .
obtain the engineers approval for all repair recommendations .
include current product data and application instruction sheets with the repair recommendations .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the cost of painting new steel structures shall be included in the contract price for structural steel .
no separate payment will be made .
cleaning and painting existing steel bridge structures will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for painting existing steel structure station or bridge i.d .
no .
_____ .
this includes payment for the following equipment including a flotation device or temporary platform on waterway bridges work platform bucket truck or snooper truck with safety belt tclp testing materials and work necessary to remove leadbased paint and contain the spent materials collection and storage of spent materials water and slurry generated by abrasive blasting num limits a .
spent materials treatment of hazardous waste and subsequent disposal shall be paid for under a force account basis .
the engineer will reimburse the contractor based upon invoices from the licensed hauler and disposal facility .
an additional amount equal to num of the total invoices will be paid as administrative costs incurred by the contractor .
the costs of collecting spent material furnishing the containers loading the material into containers treating the material onsite and loading the containers into the licensed hauling unit will not be paid for separately .
these costs are considered incidental to the pay item .
the disposal of other spent materials collected is incidental to the pay item painting existing steel structures .
b. piling and steel swaybracing the cost of applying special protective coatings or paint to piling shall be included in the contract price for piling .
no separate payment will be made .
the cost of applying special protective coatings or paint to steel swaybracing shall be included in the contract price for structural steel .
no separate payment will be made .
num payment payment is full compensation for the costs direct and indirect of complying with the requirements of this specification .
payment will be made under item no .
num painting existing steel structure station no .
____ per lump sum item no .
num painting existing steel structure bridge i.d .
no .
____ per lump sum item no .
num painting existing steel structures railroad special station no .
_______ per lump sum item no .
num painting existing steel structures railroad special bridge i.d .
no .
_______ per lump sum section numpainting structures num num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numcattle pass num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numposttensioned prestressed concrete construction num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numinspection traveler num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numremoval of existing bridge num general description this work consists of removing and disposing of or salvaging as specified in subsection num.c disposal and ownership of material all or parts of an existing bridge for the departments further disposition .
the work includes but is not limited to the following removing all or part of the superstructure or the substructure as described in subsection num.a extent of removal .
excavating to remove the structure unless the excavation is required as a part of another pay item .
necessary backfilling because of the removal or excavation .
parts of the structure removed will not be included in the measurements for any excavation to be paid under another pay item .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numclearing and grubbing rightofway section numremoval of existing bridge num b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a. sequence of operations no existing structure shall be removed or closed to traffic until traffic has been satisfactorily provided for as required by the plans or the engineer .
no burial will be allowed under any conditions in areas designated by the department as wetlands .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
extent of removal where culverts will replace an existing bridge remove portions of the existing bridge including piling within the area of the proposed culvert to a minimum depth of num ft num m below the flow line of the culvert .
otherwise do the following remove the superstructures or parts of them as shown on the plans .
remove the entire substructure down to the streambed or the natural ground line unless the plans require that old substructures or parts of them be used as permanent parts of the new structure .
remove the parts of the substructure that interfere with the new work .
do not leave parts within the limits of an excavation required as part of another pay item .
remove fender systems and dolphins to the streambed .
leave abutments or end bents in place that do not interfere with the stream flow or the new work if the plans indicate .
if the abutments or end bents must be removed remove them and slope the existing fill immediately next to them in an attractive manner as determined by the engineer .
section numremoval of existing bridge num b .
care in removal use only approved methods to remove an existing bridge and be careful during blasting to prevent property damage or injury .
num .
reuse of existing structures handle existing structures being reused as follows a .
if part of a separate unit of an existing structure will be incorporated into the new structure remove the part from that unit without blasting .
b .
if the plans provide for reusing existing reinforcement clean straighten or bend reinforcement to the required dimensions and cut it as an incidental part of this work .
c. when existing structures will remain as part of a widened structure neatly remove parts from the structures .
leave the face of the joint essentially true to the line and plane indicated on the plans .
num .
salvageable material handle salvageable material as follows a .
determine from the plans the parts if any to be salvaged for the departments further disposition .
b .
arrange the salvaging method accordingly .
the contractor shall be responsible for damage to salvageable materials because of carelessness and shall replace or compensate the department for damaged salvageable materials .
c. when a wrecking ball is used have no blows struck within num in num mm of the edge of any member to be salvaged for the department .
c. disposal and ownership of material dispose of material as follows num .
salvage only the material designated on the plans for salvage .
num .
disassemble this material and neatly stockpile it near the bridge site and above high water .
num .
do not use any materials stockpiled for the department without written permission from the engineer .
all other materials removed shall become the property of the contractor who shall remove them from the bridge site or if permitted bury them neatly within the rightofway all without additional compensation .
dispose of the above materials according to subsection num.e removal and disposal of materials .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work will not be measured separately for payment num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per lump sum which will be full compensation for all things necessary to complete the work .
section numremoval of existing bridge num the cost of excavation needed only to remove or dispose of all or parts of an existing structure and which is not within the limits of an excavation required as part of another pay item shall be included in the contract price for this work .
this price shall also include the cost of backfilling excavation performed for these purposes .
payment will be made under item no .
num removal of existing br sta no per lump sum item no .
num removal of existing br br no per lump sum item no .
num removal of parts of existing bridge sta no per lump sum item no .
num removal of parts of existing bridge br no per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numdetour bridges num general description this work consists of constructing maintaining and removing detour bridges .
construct detour bridges the width and length required on the plans .
the bridge width is the clear distance between curbs or hubguards .
construct the bridges at the locations required on the plans and provide the necessary end walls or bulkheads as part of the work .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numscope of work section numcontrol of work section numremoval of existing bridge b. referenced documents aashto hsnum aashto standard specifications for highway bridges georgia standard num and num num submittals a. bridge design considerations unless otherwise shown design detour bridges for an aashto hsnum live load capacity .
this capacity is based on the working stresses allowed for the materials used and for the design criteria of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
the contractor may omit lane loadings from design considerations .
load factor design is allowed .
section numdetour bridges num b. bridge drawings submit the proposed layout and details for each detour bridge to the engineer for review as follows num .
do not begin work until the drawings have been approved .
num .
submit drawings in either of the following forms three prints a reproducible drawing the engineer can require the contractor to change the drawings to conform to the specifications .
num .
after making required changes resubmit the drawings for final review .
num materials use materials approved by the department .
material restrictions are as follows do not use timber in the superstructure .
do not use structurally unsound materials of any type .
piling may be timber .
tight bark does not need to be removed from timber piles .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. construct the detour bridge construct the detour bridge according to drawings approved by the engineer .
b. construct safety features construct either of the following safety features at both ends of the detour bridge num .
guard rail construct according to the construction details shown in the plans .
num .
precast median barrier according to ga. std .
num and num when the precast median barrier option is selected construct the barrier as follows a .
place the precast median barrier on both sides and both ends of the detour bridge unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
b .
ensure that the barrier extends at least num ft num m from the bridge ends unless the plans show otherwise .
section numdetour bridges num c. remove the detour bridge after the permanent construction is open to traffic remove the detour bridge according to section num .
material salvaged from the detour bridge remains the property of the contractor .
consider the salvage value when compiling the bid .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance a .
maintain the detour bridge except as otherwise provided in subsection num.d detours outside rightofway maintain the detour bridge so it can safely carry the design loading at all times .
furnish labor and material to maintain the bridge .
if the engineer determines that the detour bridge endangers public safety promptly repair the bridge .
if the bridge is not repaired immediately the engineer will proceed according to subsection num failure to maintain roadway or structures .
num measurement this work will not be measured separately for payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per detour bridge complete in place maintained and removed .
payment will be made under tem no .
num detour bridge requires width length and sta .
no .
per lump sum num adjustments after the detour bridge is completed the engineer will include num percent of the contract price for the detour bridge in the next statement .
after the detour bridge is satisfactorily removed the engineer will include the remaining num percent in the next statement .
num section numcontractor proposed alternate to reinforced concrete deck girder num general description this specification covers design requirements for superstructures proposed by the contractor as alternates to castinplace reinforced concrete deck girder structures .
this work is limited to construction using precast reinforced or precast prestressed concrete stems including aashto type i beams .
for areas not specifically covered in this specification refer to the applicable portions of the project specifications standard and supplemental specifications of the department and part i of the aashto specifications for highway bridges with interim and guide specifications .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of work b. referenced documents aashto specifications aashto specifications for highway bridges including interim and guide specifications num submittals a .
departments responsibilities the department will quickly review submittals to avoid delaying the contractors scheme .
the department will judge the completeness accuracy and structural acceptability of submittals .
b .
contractors bid price include the following in the bid price costs for complying with this specification costs for completing and revising the department plans c. submittals the contractor may bid based on using precast reinforced or precast prestressed concrete stems .
when bidding is based on an alternate design submit a contractorproposed alternate .
num .
follow submittal guidelines follow these guidelines for submittals a .
submit the plan on reproducible mylar sepias .
b .
submit design notes except for computer printouts on anum paper neatly bound indexed and stamped by the design engineer .
c. allow the department num days from the date it receives the submission to review the construction plan .
d. do not begin bridge construction until the construction plans are reviewed and approved .
section numcontractor proposed alternate to reinforced concrete deck girder num e. ensure that the plans and notes indicate they have been checked by the departments bridge and structural design section .
num .
submit the contractorproposed alternate even when submitting an alternate assume responsibility for the plans and working drawings required by subsection num plans and working drawings .
submit alternate construction plans and design notes that are prepared and stamped by the design engineer .
the alternate plans submitted shall include but not be limited to the items below .
indicate the information using the same format used on the department plans .
a .
general plan and elevation sheet show the following on this sheet for each contractorproposed alternate structure bid span lengths pier locations minimum horizontal clearances from the pier face to the edge of the roadway minimum vertical clearances from the bottom of the lowest portion of the superstructure to the roadway surface outside edge of shoulder to outside edge of shoulder the numday concrete strength for the superstructure and substructure yield and working strengths of the reinforcing steel proposed for the superstructure and the substructure design specifications and interim specifications used during the design of the structure design live loading impact factor and the future wearing surface loading .
b .
details of the proposed structure on projects that involve widening existing structures eliminate the tie strips shown on the department plans .
include in the proposal for the project the cost savings from eliminating the tie strips .
include the following items in the structure details each cross section at the midspan end bent and intermediate bent showing reinforcing steel size spacing and location concrete dimensions relative to computing the structural properties of the members the dimensions of fillets the spacing and size of the web stirrups and longitudinal reinforcing shown in a longitudinal view of the stem design notes indicating how the spacings and sizes of reinforcing bars were obtained c. details of the size and type of tendons for prestressed alternate include on the drawings the size and type of tendons for prestressed alternate the horizontal location and the vertical profile .
also include the following location of the holddown point for the tendons initial prestress force and strength of concrete when the tendons are released method of retaining the depressed tendons in place calculations for determining the tendon elongation required to produce the specified pretensioning force calculations for determining the casting length detensioning schedule d. dead load deflections from the slab stem coping and barrier e. camber for the stems include in the camber the effects of vertical curvature .
section numcontractor proposed alternate to reinforced concrete deck girder num num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
design and construct team contractorproposed alternates are considered a design and construct proposal .
the design and construct team shall consist of a contractor and a design engineer .
num .
contractor the contractor is responsible for engineering design drawing detailing plan preparation printing and other work necessary to modify the department plans for the proposed scheme .
num .
design engineer the design engineer must be registered as a professional engineer in the state of georgia .
the design engineer is responsible for the following remain a part of the team and be available to discuss the project with the department at any time during the project .
keep a record of projectrelated communications with the department including copies of correspondence and transcripts of conversations .
provide copies of the communication record to the department and the contractor .
b .
criteria for contractorproposed alternates contractorproposed alternates shall be subject to the following criteria num .
comply with the traffic handling and sequence of operation schemes found on the plans and specifications .
num .
do not change the following items from the department plans horizontal and vertical alignments beginning and ending bridge stations minimum horizontal clearance span lengths num .
if necessary reduce vertical clearances from those indicated on the plans by following the restrictions below and submitting mathematical computations indicating a check of revised vertical clearance .
section numcontractor proposed alternate to reinforced concrete deck girder num a .
ensure that the minimum vertical clearance as measured from the lowest point of the bridge superstructure to the roadway beneath is no less than num ft num m or the minimum amount shown on the plans whichever is less .
b .
do not reduce the vertical clearance from the bottom of the superstructure to the flood elevations indicated on the plans if either of these situations occur the proposed alternate involves a structure crossing a waterway .
the bottom of the beam intrudes into the numyear flood plain .
num .
construct the bridge superstructure using either a precast reinforced or precast prestressed concrete stem that meet the following criteria a .
the section depth measured from the top of the top slab to the bottom of the stem may deviate from the plans if the vertical clearance requirement in of subsection num.b.num criteria for contractorproposed alternates is satisfied .
the stem depth shall be constant throughout the length of each structure unless indicated otherwise on the plans .
b .
the stem and deck thicknesses may vary from the plans however the centertocenter stem spacing shall not vary .
c. give particular attention to skewed structures .
the plans shall clearly indicate all dapouts and skewed end dimensions .
d. precast stems shall be fabricated at a site approved by the department .
e. precast stems shall be designed for construction without using falsework .
num .
meet the following design criteria for alternate plans a .
the bearing area and edge distance requirements follow aashto specifications .
b .
the substructure remains as designed on the department plans except for the following adjustments elevations that accommodate a deeper superstructure cap widths that provide adequate bearing area the department will not allow adjustments in substructure quantities resulting from adjusting the elevations or cap widths .
c. the design complies with applicable requirements of the following current aashto specifications for highway bridges including interim and guide specifications this specification if this specification and the aashto specifications conflict this specification shall apply .
d. the structure meets the aashto liveloading requirement indicated on the department plans .
e. the design dead load of the structure considers the following weight of the structure weight of the future wearing surface construction loads f. precast prestressed concrete stems meets the following requirements initial tension before losses from creep and shrinkage shall not exceed num psi num mpa or num fci final tension after losses shall not exceed num fc g. concrete is normal weight and has a minimum concrete cylinder compression strength at num days of at least that indicated on the plans .
for design purposes do not consider numday concrete strength above num psi num mpa for castinplace deck construction .
h. the deck has drain openings the same shape size and location as those shown on the plans .
i .
the barrier curbs are not considered effective in resisting longitudinal stresses and are constructed as shown on the plans .
section numcontractor proposed alternate to reinforced concrete deck girder num j .
reinforcing steel in the superstructure having a vertical clearance of num in num mm or less as measured from the top of the top slab to the top of the reinforcing bar is epoxy coated if the plans specify epoxycoated bars .
barrier curb reinforcing steel is epoxy coated as shown on the department plans .
k. the minimum cover for reinforcing steel is as shown on the plans .
l. the effective flange depth is altered as follows num when calculating design section properties deduct num in num mm from the flange depth .
however when calculating the dead load moment shear and reaction include the num in num mm .
num where stayinplace psc deck panels are used deduct num in num mm from the effective flange depth when calculating design section properties .
however when calculating the dead load moment shear and reaction include the num in .
num mm .
m. bearing pads or bearing assemblies are placed normal to beams .
place bearing pads or bearing assemblies no closer than num in num mm to the end of the beams and num in num mm to the edge of the cap .
n. sole plates are beveled .
o .
bent tops are not sloped for bearing purposes .
p. neoprene bearing pads used with a precast beam alternate have numin num mm sealing ribs on the top and bottom of each neoprene pad .
q .
the following dead loads are added to the noncomposite loads for metal stayinplace forms main slab reinforcement normal to beams num lbsft² num kgm² main slab reinforcement skewed to beams num lbsft² num kgm² num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance ensure the following the design meets the specification requirements for final design loads .
calculations and construction engineering ensure that adjustments during construction account for deflections .
proper line grade structural capacity and stresses in the substructure and the superstructure are retained during construction .
num measurement material or work required to construct the contractorproposed concrete superstructures are not measured for payment .
payment for the superstructure will be full compensation for furnishing the labor materials equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work including the following concrete reinforcing steel expansion joint material waterproofing bearing pads barrier concrete design redesign plan preparation shop drawings section numcontractor proposed alternate to reinforced concrete deck girder num concrete finish other superstructure elements necessary for constructing the bridge num limits a .
additional compensation no additional compensation will be made for the following additional material equipment or other items the department requires after its review of the contractors alternate for project specification conformance changes or deviations from the contractors plan as approved by the department additional material equipment or other costs needed because of changes in the contractors plan num payment a .
preparation and review time charge the time required for preparation of construction plans and design notes to the allowable contract time .
b. superstructure work performed and materials furnished in place as required by this specification will be paid for at the contract price bid for lump superstr conc cl br .
no .
and lump superstr reinf steel br no .
c. superstructurebridge complete work performed and materials furnished in place as required by this specification will be paid for at the contract price bid for lump construction of bridge complete to bottom of capalt num .
num adjustments a .
partial payment the department will determine a schedule for partial payments for the lump superstructure items .
section numbridge complete num general description this work consists of constructing the bridge complete as shown in the contract .
the work includes furnishing and placing all bridge components from the bottom of the cap to the top of the superstructure .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numbridge excavation and backfill section numconcrete structures section numreinforcement steel sections num to num section numbridge complete num b. referenced documents aashto specifications num submittals a .
alternative designs the contractor may submit for approval an alternative design for the portion of the bridge between the top of the superstructure and the bottom of the cap .
the alternative design shall meet the following criteria the design conforms to current aashto specifications including the latest interim specifications .
the design live load is hsnum including impact .
submit the design to the bridge engineer for review and approval .
do not begin work or order materials until the bridge engineer approves the plans in writing .
include the following in the alternative design three copies of the plans bearing a professional engineers stamp of approval .
the engineer may require additional copies of the plans .
two copies of complete design notes for the elements of the structure that are a part of the alternate design .
bridge plans developed and published by industry organizations federal highway administration and other states may be acceptable without design notes .
however the bridge engineer will judge the acceptability of the design notes and the plans .
if the bridge engineer does not accept the design construct the bridge according to the contract plans .
num materials use materials that meet the requirements of the applicable materials sections of the specifications .
material references are listed in the specification sections pertaining to the item of work .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. bridge construction construct bridges under this specification according to the drawings .
b .
order lengths for prestressed concrete pile the prestressed concrete pile order lengths shown on the plans are the estimated pile lengths .
section numbridge complete num on bridges with more than four bents the estimated pile lengths shown on the plans apply to the first four bents constructed .
the engineer will adjust the pile order lengths for the remaining bents based on the pile driving for the first four bents constructed .
instead of using plan lengths or lengths determined by the engineer the contractor may determine order lengths by furnishing and driving a test pile in a permanent pile location .
there will be no additional compensation for this test pile .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement bridge construction complete to the bottom of the substructure caps will be measured for payment based on a lump sum basis for the bridge complete accepted in place .
num limits a .
lump sum inclusions and exclusions the lump sum includes payment for superstructure elements and substructure caps .
the lump sum does not include the cost of piling portions embedded in the substructure caps as shown on the plans .
b .
concrete bent measurement where foundation conditions require the use of a concrete bent instead of a trestle pile bent concrete and reinforcement steel below the bottom of the substructure cap will be measured and paid for according to section num section num and section num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract unit price bid .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing all materials and completing the item according to these specifications .
payment will be made under item no .
num construction of bridge complete to bottom of cap per lump sum num adjustments statements for partial payment include item payment caps each num of item num divided by number of caps superstructure per span num of item num divided by number of spans num section numdeck drain system num general description this work includes furnishing deck drainage systems according to plan details .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numrepair of galvanized coatings section numpaint b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals submit complete detail shop drawings for the deck drain system to the engineer for approval .
if the deck drain system is for a railway the engineer will submit the shop drawings to the chief engineer of the railway company for approval .
in either case obtain approval from the engineer prior to fabrication or installation .
num materials use materials that meet plan requirements .
use commercialgrade steel hardware clips brackets bars etc .
unless otherwise noted on the plans .
use galvanizing repair compound that meets the requirements of section num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction repair damaged galvanized areas according to section num .
install deck drain systems according to the plans .
section numdeck drain system num num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work is not measured separately for payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price for deck drain system complete in place .
payment will be made under item no .
num deck drain systembridge no.___ per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numpile encasement num general description this item includes furnishing all labor materials equipment and services necessary to clean and encase steel piles as indicated on the plans .
complete all work according to this specification and to the engineers satisfaction .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures section numepoxy coated steel reinforcement section numfine aggregate b. referenced documents astm num astm c num astm d num astm d num section numpile encasement num num submittals when substituting equal products or systems for one of the two encasement procedures noted in this specification obtain approval from the engineer before use .
submit complete data including company name and address description of the product or system previously used on similar projects and how they were used list of products and their application length of time the products have been in use at least three years length of time the applicator has been in business num materials a .
fabric for pile jacket for encasement systems use pile jacket fabric that conforms to the following requirements requirements for pile jacket material warp num ends per inch num mm num denier fill nylon num fill num picks per inch num mm num denier approximate weight dupont cordura num oz per sq yd num gmnum tensile strength astm d num grab method at num inmin num mmmin in excess of num lbsinch num n per mm in both warp and fill directions tearing strength tongue method astm num lbs num n air permeability astm d num in excess of num ft num m per min .
b. mortar for pile encasement procedure num maintain mortar at a uniform consistency to avoid pumping problems .
when using concrete sand keep mortar consistency in the numsecond to numsecond range through the num in num mm orifice of a standard flow cone as described in astm c num .
when using masons sand keep consistency in the num to num second range through a num in num mm orifice .
num .
admixtures when recommended by the manufacturer use admixtures such as grout super plasticizer waterreducing agent or airentraining agent to improve pumpability or to retard setting time .
the department recommends that a pozzolanic admixture be substituted for up to num percent of the cement .
num .
mortar mix for pile encasement procedure num use mortar mix for pile encasement that conforms to the following proportions cement num lbsyd³ num kgm³ sand concrete or masonry num lbsyd³ num kgm³ subsection num water num lbsyd³ num kgm³ watercement ratio num c. epoxycoated steel reinforcement use epoxycoated steel reinforcement that conforms to subsection num materials .
section numpile encasement num d. class a concrete deposited in water use concrete with a num percent increase in cement factor .
ensure that concrete is air entrained according to section num with a maximum slump of num in .
num mm .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements general provisions num through num .
num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a .
cleaning sandblast piles on existing structures to be encased to remove loose dirt rust scale and other deleterious material from the surface .
rinse thoroughly with clean water .
do not sandblast piles to be used on new construction .
clean new piles with a wire brush to free them of rust or other loose material .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. encasement to perform encasement follow the details of figure num figure num metric and one of the following procedures section numpile encasement num figure num section numpile encasement num figure num metric num .
procedure num form the pile encasement with class a concrete deposited in water and epoxycoated steel reinforcement .
place the concrete according to subsection num.e concrete handling and placing where site construction conditions allow .
the department will not require cofferdams .
concrete may be deposited in water .
num .
procedure num form the pile encasement with a fabriform pile jacket system or an approved equal .
pump mortar into the fabric jacket using two tremie hoses extending to the bottom of the jacket .
withdraw these hoses during pumping so that the lower end remains num to num ft num to num mm under the rising mortar surface .
pump mortar at a rate to provide a rise of approximately num in num mm per minute .
b .
installation after cleaning the pile place steel reinforcement as shown in figure num figure num metric .
place spacers tremie hoses and fabric jacket or forms according to the specifications or the manufacturerrecommended methods .
fill the encasement with concrete or mortar .
section numpile encasement num num quality acceptance a .
limits of encasement ensure that the pile encasement extends from num ft num mm below the existing streambed to the top elevation for pile encasement as shown on the plans .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement pile encasement is measured by the linear footmeter for each pile size indicated .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment pile encasements will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter for the pile size indicated complete in place as specified .
this payment will be full compensation for furnishing all materials tools labor equipment and other items necessary to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num pile encasement ___in.mm pile per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numstorm drain pipe pipearch culverts and side drain pipe num general description this work includes furnishing and installing the following storm drain pipe pipearch and elliptical culverts side drain pipe flared end sections tapered pipe inlets install structures according to the specifications and the details shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num definitions side drain all driveway pipe commercial noncommercial residential utility farm logging and mining .
general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numroadway excavation section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures section numstorm drain pipe pipearch culverts and side drain pipe num section numembankments section numrepair of galvanized coatings section numgraded aggregate section nummasonry materials section numcorrugated aluminum alloy pipe section numiron pipe section numconcrete pipe section numsteel pipe section numsmooth lined corrugated high density polyethylene hdpe culvert pipe section numpolyvinyl chloride pvc drain pipe section nummiscellaneous pipe section numpipe appurtenances b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
gdot manual on drainage design for highways ga. std .
numd ga. std .
nump gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section backfill materials num graded aggregate num reinforced concrete pipe num nonreinforced concrete pipe num mortar and grout num bituminous plastic cement num rubber type gasket joints concrete pipe num preformed plastic gaskets num corrugated steel pipe num bituminous coated corrugated steel pipe num corrugated aluminum alloy pipe num bituminous coated corrugated aluminum pipe num section numstorm drain pipe pipearch culverts and side drain pipe num material section aluminized type num corrugated steel pipe num ductile iron pipe fittings and joints num precoated galvanized steel culverts num smooth lined corrugated high density hdpe polyethylene culvert pipe num polyvinyl chloride pvc profile wall drain pipe num polyvinyl chloride pvc corrugated smooth interior drain pipe num miscellaneous pipe num use any of the following types of pipe reinforced concrete nonreinforced concrete corrugated steel or aluminum smoothlined corrugated high density polyethylene hdpe ductile iron polyvinyl chloride pvc profile wall drain pipe polyvinyl chloride pvc corrugated smooth interior drain pipe use the type of pipe designated on the plans or acceptable alternate types when applicable .
for a display of acceptable alternate pipe types see selection guideline for culvert slope and underdrain pipe in chapter num material selection of the departments manual on drainage design for highways .
this document summarizes general applications for pipe .
for concrete corrugated steel and aluminum pipes see ga. std .
numd for minimum thicknesses minimum cover maximum fill allowable pipe diameters and trench construction detail .
for hdpe and pvc pipes see ga. std .
nump for minimum cover maximum fill allowable pipe diameters and trench construction details .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation and backfill before installing pipe shape the foundation material as shown on the plans .
prepare structure excavations and foundation according to section num .
except use the following backfill material requirements for hdpe and pvc pipe .
num .
for cross drain applications use graded aggregate material meeting subsection num .
num .
for longitudinal and side drain applications use class ii bnum soil or better per subsection num if class ii bnum or better is not available use material conforming to subsection num .
section numstorm drain pipe pipearch culverts and side drain pipe num num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. drainage provide necessary temporary drainage .
periodically remove any debris or silt constricting the pipe flow to maintain drainage throughout the life of the contract .
b .
damage protect the structure by providing sufficient depth and width of compacted backfill before allowing construction over a culvert .
repair damage or displacement from traffic or erosion occurring after installing and backfilling at no additional cost to the department .
c. installation check vertical and horizontal alignment of the pipe culvert or storm drain pipe barrel by sighting along the crown invert and sides of the pipe and by checking for sagging faulting and invert heaving .
repair any issues involving incorrect horizontal andor vertical alignment before backfilling pipe .
num .
concrete pipe lay sections in a prepared trench with the socket ends pointing upstream .
join section using either rubber gasket or preformed flexible sealant installed according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
ductile iron pipe lay pipe sections in a prepared trench with bells pointing upstream .
construct joints according to subsection num.a .
num .
corrugated aluminum or steel pipe and pipearches lay pipe sections in a prepared trench with outside laps of circumferential joints pointing upstream and longitudinal joints at the sides .
join the sections with coupling bands fastened by two or more bolts .
before backfilling the structure a .
repair exposed base metal in metal coating according to section num. b. recoat exposed base metal in bituminous coating with asphalt .
num .
smoothlined corrugated hdpe pipe install smoothlined corrugated hdpe pipe according to astm d num .
use fitting and couplings that comply with the joint performance criteria of aashto standard specifications for highway bridges division ii .
ensure all joints are silt tight as stated in the aashto bridge specifications .
num .
specials wyes tees and bends install wyes tees and bends as shown on the plans or as directed .
num .
tapered pipe inlets locate and install tapered pipe inlet end sections as shown on the plans or as directed .
num .
elongation elongate metal pipe as shown on the plans .
order the elongation of the vertical axis of the pipe to be done in the shop .
ensure the manufacturer ship metal pipe with wire ties in the pipe ends .
remove wireties immediately after completing the fill .
num .
flared end sections use flared end sections on the inlet outlet or on both ends of storm drain pipe according to plan details .
num .
pvc drain pipe section numstorm drain pipe pipearch culverts and side drain pipe num install polyvinyl chloride pvc drain pipe according to astm d num .
use fittings and couplings complying with the joint performance criteria of aashto standard specifications for highway bridges division ii .
ensure all joints are silt tight as stated in the aashto bridge specifications .
num quality acceptance a .
post installation inspection inspect num of pipe under the roadbed num of pipe in a closed drainage system and a minimum of num of all other locations except in side drain application which are short enough to inspect from each end of the pipe .
conduct post installation inspections in accordance with the requirements of this specification and gdt num .
before post installation inspection dewater installed pipe if necessary and provide the engineer with a post installation inspection schedule .
notify the engineer at least seven days in advance of beginning inspection .
perform post installation inspections once compacted backfill has reached a depth of num feet or after completion of the pipe installation and final cover which includes the embankment and all nonasphalt bases andor subgrades .
notify the engineer of problems found during the inspection .
the engineer will determine if corrective action is necessary .
perform post installation inspection with the use of low barrel distortion video equipment with laser profile technology noncontact video micrometer and associated software .
video and laser profiling and measurement technology must be certified by the company performing the work to meet the requirements of gdt num .
inspection contractor personnel completing remote inspections shall be nassco pacp certified technicians .
for video recorded laser profiled pipe indicating deflection is in excess of specification requirements the contractor may elect to further test the pipe with the use of a mandrel .
ensure mandrel meets requirements of gdt num and the engineer has approved before use .
pull the mandrel by hand .
manual post installation inspection allowed for pipe diameters greater than num inches per subsection num.b .
reinspect num of pipe remediation locations or where replacement was required .
b. manual post installation inspections perform a manual inspection by entering the pipe structure to record video and to make measurements .
for all pipe structures considered a confined space provide entry for all project inspection personnel according to osha requirements .
furnish a video recording of each inspection .
on the recording identify the date and time of the inspection a description of the pipe structure location and viewing direction .
record the entire run of pipe .
provide a light source which allows observation of all areas of concern on the video recording .
furnish the video recording in a digital reproducible format on one of the following media types dvd or cd .
measure the deflection of the pipe using either a metal or fabric tape and read to the nearest num inch num mm .
measure crack width using either a crack comparator or a feeler gage capable of measuring num inch num mm .
measure joint gaps using a tape or ruler and read to the nearest num inch num mm .
other measuring devices may be used if approved by the engineer .
record the measurements and include them in the inspection report .
measure and record the following num .
the location length and greatest width of each crack .
num .
smallest inside diameter three times for each pipe section in the run .
take the first measurement vertically from the crown to invert num oclock to num oclock positions .
take the second measurement by rotating num degrees from vertical num oclock to num oclock positions .
take the third measurement by rotating num degrees from vertical num oclock to num oclock positions .
for all measurements stretch tape to full extent across inside of pipe .
num .
widest gap at each joint in the run .
record the location and describe other defects not listed above .
for each measurement location in a pipe record the length from the nearest drainage structure .
section numstorm drain pipe pipearch culverts and side drain pipe num c. inspection report submit inspection report to the engineer after completion of the required post installation inspection .
ensure inspection report meets the requirements of this specification and gdt num .
d. requirements for concrete pipe num .
joints note differential movement cracks spalling improper gasket placement movement or settlement of pipe sections and leakage in the inspection report .
repair or replace pipe sections to the satisfaction of the engineer where joint separation is greater than one inch .
repair or replace pipe sections where soil migration through the joint is occurring .
num .
longitudinal and transverse cracks cracks with a width less than num inch num mm are considered hairline and minor and only need to be noted in the inspection report no corrective action is necessary .
when cracks are wider than num inch num mm and extend for a length of num inch num mm or more regardless of position in the wall of the pipe measure the width length and locations of the cracks and diameter of the pipe both horizontally and vertically use remediation methods in accordance with recommendations of the pipe manufacturer and submit to the engineer for review and approval an evaluation utilizing a professional engineer that takes into consideration structural integrity environmental conditions and the design service life of the pipe .
seal by a method approved by the engineer cracks having widths equal to or greater than num inch nummm that extend for a length of num inch num mm or more and determined to be detrimental .
remediate or replace pipe with cracks widths greater than num inch num mm and determined by the engineer to be beyond satisfactory structural repair .
repair or replace pipes having displacement across the crack .
requirements for smoothlined corrugated hdpe pvc drain pipe num .
joints remediate pipe showing evidence of crushing at the joints .
note differential movement improper joint sealing movement or settlement of pipe sections and leakage in the inspection report .
remediate joint separation of greater than num inch .
repair or replace pipe sections where soil migration through the joint is occurring .
num .
cracks remediate cracks or splits in the interior wall of the pipe .
use remediation methods in accordance with recommendations of the pipe manufacturer and accepted and authorized by the engineer .
num .
buckling bulging and racking note in the inspection report flat spots or dents at the crown sides or flowline of the pipe due to racking .
note areas of wall buckling and bulging in the inspection report .
the engineer will determine if corrective action is necessary .
num .
deflection where pipe deflection exceeds num of the nominal diameter submit to the engineer for review and approval an evaluation utilizing a professional engineer taking into consideration the severity of the deflection structural integrity environmental conditions and the design service life of the pipe .
remediate or replace pipe where the evaluation finds the deflection could be problematic or where pipe deflection exceeds num of the nominal diameter .
f. requirements for corrugated aluminum or coated steel pipe num .
joints remediate pipe showing evidence of crushing at the joints .
note differential movement improper joint sealing movement or settlement of pipe sections and leakage in the inspection report .
remediate joint separation of greater than num inch .
repair or replace pipe sections where soil migration through the joint is occurring .
num .
cracks remediate cracks or splits in the interior wall of the pipe .
use remediation methods in accordance with recommendations of the pipe manufacturer and accepted and authorized by the engineer .
num .
buckling bulging and racking note flat spots or dents at the crown sides or flowline of the pipe due to racking in the inspection report .
note areas of wall buckling and bulging in the inspection report .
the engineer will determine if an additional evaluation by a professional engineer is required .
remediate or replace pipe where the evaluation finds the damaged section could be problematic .
section numstorm drain pipe pipearch culverts and side drain pipe num num .
deflection where pipe deflection exceeds num of the nominal diameter submit to the engineer for review and approval an evaluation utilizing a professional engineer that takes into consideration the severity of the deflection structural integrity environmental conditions and the design service life of the pipe .
remediate or replace pipe where the evaluation finds the deflection could be problematic or where pipe deflection exceeds num of the nominal diameter .
num .
coating note areas of the pipe where the original coating has been scratched scoured or peeled in the inspection report .
the engineer will determine if repair is necessary .
use remediation methods in accordance with recommendations of the pipe manufacturer and accepted and authorized by the engineer .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. excavation and backfill backfill materials types ii and iii are measured according to subsection num measurement .
b .
flat bottom and circular pipe all types the overall length of pipe installed excluding tapered inlets is measured in linear feet meters along the central axis of the diameter of the pipe .
wyes tees and bends are included in this measurement .
c. pipearches the overall length of pipearch installed is measured in linear feet meters along the bottom center line of the pipe .
d. multiple installations in multiple installations each single line of culvert structure is measured separately .
e. tapered pipe inlets tapered pipe inlet sections are measured as a unit do not include them in the overall length of the pipe .
f. flaredend sections flaredend sections are measured separately by the unit and not included in the overall pipe length .
g. smoothflow pipe smoothflow pipe is measured by the linear foot meter along the pipe invert .
h. elliptical pipe elliptical pipe is measured in linear feet meters along the bottom center line of the pipe .
i .
post installation inspection no measurement will be made for post installation inspection .
num limits excavation and normal backfill are not measured for payment .
num payment a. backfill backfill will be paid for according to section num .
section numstorm drain pipe pipearch culverts and side drain pipe num b .
pipe installations pipe installations complete in place and accepted will be paid for at the contract price for each item .
this payment is full compensation for excavating furnishing and hauling materials installing cutting pipe where necessary repairing or replacing damaged sections post installation inspection making necessary connections strutting elongating providing temporary drainage joining an extension to an existing structure where required and removing disposing of or using excavated material as directed by the engineer .
num .
smooth flow pipe the quantity of each diameter and steel thickness of smooth flow pipe as measured will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter bid for the various sizes .
payment is full compensation for furnishing labor materials tools oring mechanical joints equipment and incidentals to complete this item including removing and disposing excavation material .
num .
flaredend sections flaredend sections measured as specified above will be paid for at the contract unit price for each section of the specified size .
payment will also include sawing removing and replacing existing pavement removed to install a new drainage structure .
c. post installation inspection no separate payment will be made for this work .
include the cost in the bid submitted for this pay item .
payment for this item is made as follows one hundred percent of the contract price bid per linear foot meter is paid when the pipe is installed per the specifications including the required material documentation .
the contract price is paid before post installation inspection .
payment will be made under item no .
num storm drain pipe___ in mm h___ per linear foot meter item no .
num side drain pipe___ in mm h___ per linear foot meter item no .
num pipe arch span ____in mm x rise ___inmm per linear foot meter item no .
num tapered pipe inlet ___ in mm per each item no .
num flaredend section ___ in mm per each item no .
num elliptical pipe___ in mm wide x ___ in mm high per linear foot meter num adjustments excavation will not be paid for separately but the other provisions of section num and section num shall govern .
num section numpile protection in earth walls num general description this work includes protecting bridge end bent piles located in the stabilized backfill of earth retaining walls .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numpainting structures section numfine aggregate section numaggregate for drainage b. referenced documents astm a numa numm astm b num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num apha num d num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials a. cans place cans of smooth or corrugated steel pipe over piling .
use cans thick enough to prevent buckling while placing and compacting earthstabilized embankment .
coat both inside and outside of the cans with either of the following material section nump coating num.d galvanizing astm a numa numm b. backfilling cans use aggregate for the backfilling of cans according to section num or section num .
section numpile protection in earth walls num c. corrosion inhibitor grease use grease that conforms to the following requirements .
drop point num f num c minimum astm d num flash point num f num c minimum astm d num water content num maximum astm d num rust test astm d num water soluble ions chlorides num ppm maximum astm b num nitrates num ppm maximum astm d num sulfides num ppm maximum apha num d d. polyurethane foam use foam approved for commercial use in georgia that meets the following requirements minimum density num lbsftnum num kgm³ astm d num compressive strength perpendicular num psi num kpa num percent astm d num e. polypropylene fluted sheets use plastic cardboard ultraviolet stabilized sheets that are at least num in num m long .
score or grease sheets to fold around piling and into hpile web .
when adding sections use at least a num in .
num mm shingle style overlap .
f. duct tape use duct tape to patch and secure plastic cardboard and polyurethane .
keep duct tape from grease or pile .
use duct tape in sandy backfill to seal overlaps and prevent sand infiltration .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction when the plans require protect end bent piles from negative skin friction by using one of the following methods .
a .
method a after driving the end bent piles and before installing the earth reinforcing elements num .
place a cylindrical can over each pile to prevent the earth wall backfill material from contacting the pile .
section numpile protection in earth walls num use a can large enough in diameter to give a numin num mm minimum clearance from the pile to the inside of the can .
num .
place a spacer between the pile and the can to prevent the can from contacting the pile during wall backfilling .
extend the cans from the bottom of the earthstabilized backfill to the bottom of the bridge end bent cap .
num .
after positioning the cans seal them at the top while backfilling to keep rubbish or aggregate out of the can .
keep the cans sealed until fill settlement time has expired .
num .
when the wall backfill has reached the bottom of the cap and fill settlement time has expired fill the cans with aggregate .
b .
method b cover the piles with the following amounts of corrosioninhibiting grease as follows steel piling num in num mm minimum concrete piling num in num mm minimum num .
apply grease only after driving the piles .
treat only the pile portion that will be in contact with the wall backfill .
num .
in addition to the grease install a urethane or polypropylene sleeve to protect the grease coating from the backfill .
num .
use sprayon or preformed sleeves .
replace portions of the sleeve damaged or removed by construction activities during backfill .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement no separate measurement for payment will be made of the materials and labor required to conform with this specification .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment no separate payment will be made for pile protection .
include all costs incurred in complying with this specification in the price bid for the piling .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numtunnel liner num general description this work includes driving a tunnel furnishing and installing steel plates for tunnel liner furnishing and erecting brick portals to close each end of the tunnel when required pressure grouting construct to plan line grade and dimensions according to the applicable specifications .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numbrick masonry section numjacking or boring pipe section numrepair of galvanized coatings section nummasonry materials section numsteel pipe b. referenced documents aashto design specification for tunneling aashto standard specifications for highway bridges section num manual on uniform traffic control devices astm a numa numm num submittals a .
special permit application before working with explosives apply to the department for a special permit .
this permit will be in addition to a tunneling permit not involving explosives .
special permits will be issued when the proposed operational procedures outlined in the permit form are submitted and approved .
b .
design data for projects not under contract to the department but are being performed under permit the owner shall submit complete design data including working or shop drawings for approval before receiving the permit .
include the following applicable design data design data as required by aashto design specification for tunneling subsoil surveys including the elevation of the water table and the classification and relative density of the soils from the ground line to num ft num m below the tunnel liner rock coring data including rock type and core recovery where required section numtunnel liner num water control plans where required c. repair plan if tunneling damages the roadway submit a roadway repair plan for approval .
num materials ensure that materials meet the following requirements material specification section liner plates astm a numa numm galvanizing bituminous coating and bolts num brick for portal num num a. liner plates construct the completed liner with a series of steel liner plates assembled with staggered longitudinal joints and fabricated to fit the tunnel cross section .
num .
characteristics use hotdipped galvanized bituminouscoated steel of the size thickness and sectional modulus specified .
use plates made of hotrolled coldformed steel that conform to astm a numa num m. use plates with the following mechanical properties before cold forming tensile strength num psi num mpa yield strength num psi num mpa elongation num in num mm num percent num .
grout intrusion nipples provide grout intrusion nipples num in num mm or larger in diameter in the top plates at intervals num ft num m or less .
this will permit grouting while the tunnel liner is erected .
for larger tunnels or where conditions make more grout openings advisable install additional plates with nipples at the top quarter points andor on each side between the top openings .
stagger these additional openings but keep the distance between them num ft num m or less in any one line .
num .
flanged joints form plates to provide circumferential flanged joints .
use longitudinal joints that are flanged or offset lap seam type .
punch plates for bolting on both longitudinal and circumferential seams or joints .
space bolts in circumferential flanges according to the manufacturers standard spacing .
space bolts a multiple of the plate length so that plates with the same curvature are interchangeable and will permit staggering of longitudinal seams .
num .
longitudinal seams for lapped longitudinal seams ensure that bolt size and spacing is according to the manufacturers standard but meets the longitudinal seam strength requirements of section num of aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
galvanizing bituminous coating and bolts shall be in compliance with applicable information in section num .
b. grout use grout that consists of one part portland cement two parts masonry lime four parts mortar sand section numtunnel liner num two percent of an approved admixture i.e .
bentonite septamine stearex or hydrocide liquid a retardant where required use enough mixing water to produce a workable mixture of grout capable of being pumped into the voids created by tunneling .
c. brick brick for portal shall conform to section num and subsection num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a. pumping equipment provide pumping equipment for grouting operations .
use equipment with enough pump horsepower and grouting line pressure to completely fill voids without buckling or shifting the liner plates or damaging the roadway .
b .
water control when water control is required operate well points or other drainage systems in the vicinity of the tunnel construction limits .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction excavate the tunnel using any of the following procedures full face heading and bench multiple drift do not use a full or partial shield a tunneling machine or other equipment that exerts a force on the liner plates to propel steer or stabilize the equipment .
prevent the overpassing roadway or railway section from settling when constructing tunnels by using poling plates brest boards shields soil solidification a combination of these methods section numtunnel liner num a .
installation of liner plates use the same type of liner plates for the full length of the tunnel .
flanged and lapped seam methods of construction are acceptable .
num .
general install selfsupporting steel liner plates according to the manufacturers recommendations .
do not leave more than num ft num m of tunnel unlined while tunneling .
do not leave more than num ft num mm of tunnel unlined at the end of the days operation .
num .
sealing before grouting tunnel liner segments seal that segment sufficiently between the liner plates and the surrounding soil to retain the grouting pressure .
place the seals in these locations at the tunnel entrance between grout intrusion nipples within num ft num mm of the end of the tunnel num .
pressure grouting pressure grout voids in the area outside the plates every num ft num m at the end of the work shift .
grout more frequently if soil conditions dictate .
num .
repair repair damaged spelter coating according to section num .
replace plates with damaged spelter or bituminous coatings at no additional cost to the department if the engineer determines they can not be repaired .
b .
safety schedule the work to avoid interfering with or endangering traffic flow on the highway or railway .
follow required safety measures specified in the manual on uniform traffic control devices .
num .
begin tunneling at one end of a pit that has been sheeted and shored as necessary .
comply with section num .
perform work below the level of the roadbed .
num .
complete tunneling at one location before beginning work at another .
num .
if the engineer determines that tunneling is endangering overpassing roadway or the traveling public stop tunneling until making the necessary corrections .
num .
provide a wellbraced temporary bulkhead against the face of the excavation when work stops while the heading is within num ft num m of railroad tracks or highway pavement .
num .
if distress occurs to roadway due to tunneling the contractor shall submit for approval a plan to repair the roadway .
c. portals close tunnel portals at each end using a threecourse mortared brick wall according to plan details .
erect one of the three courses inside the liner .
num quality acceptance ensure that the tunnel has a diameter essentially the same as the outside diameter of the liner plates .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement tunnel liner installed according to the approved design and these specifications is measured by the linear foot meter complete in place .
the liner is measured between the ends of the liner along the invert .
num limits portals are not measured for separate payment .
section numtunnel liner num num payment this work measured as specified above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter of liner for each diameter and plate thickness .
the specified thickness is used for either a twoflange plate or a fourflange plate .
this payment will be full compensation for furnishing materials labor tools and equipment removing and satisfactorily disposing of all excavated materials force grouting providing tunnel portals where required restoring and cleaning including regrassing as required installing liner payment will be made under item no .
num tunnel liner ___ diameter ___ plate thickness num flange or ___ plate thickness num flange per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numstructural plate pipe pipearch and arch culverts num general description this work includes furnishing and installing structural plate pipe pipearch and arch culverts .
use the type of structural plate structure shown on the plans .
install structures according to the specifications and to plan details or as directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numroadway excavation section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures section numembankments section numrepair of galvanized coatings section numcorrugated aluminum alloy pipe section numsteel pipe b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
section numstructural plate pipe pipearch and arch culverts num num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section backfill materials num steel structural plate for pipe pipearches and arches num corrugated aluminum alloy structural plate pipe pipearches and arches num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation prepare structure excavation and foundation according to section num .
before installing structural plate pipe pipearch or arch culverts shape their foundation material as shown on the plans .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. drainage provide necessary temporary drainage .
immediately remove debris or silt that constricts the flow through a structural plate pipe pipearch or arch culvert to maintain drainage throughout the life of the contract .
b .
protection and repair before allowing traffic over a culvert provide compacted backfill of a depth and width to protect the structure .
repair and correct damage or displacement from traffic erosion or negligence at no additional cost to the department .
c. installation erect structural plate pipearches and arches in the sequence recommended by the manufacturer .
num .
bolts tighten the bolts only after erecting the whole structure .
set bolts using drift pins or bars to line up the holes .
tighten bolts with torque wrenches to at least num ftlbs num nm but not more than num ftlbs num nm of torque .
num .
repair if there are damaged spots in the galvanized coating of the pipe pipearch or culvert where the base metal is exposed repair according to section num .
if there are damaged spots in the bituminous coating of the pipe pipearch or arch culvert where the base metal is exposed repair by recoating with asphalt before backfilling the structure .
num .
elongation section numstructural plate pipe pipearch and arch culverts num elongate structural plate pipe as shown on the plans .
have the vertical axis of the pipe elongated in the shop .
ensure that when erection is complete the elongated axis is in a vertical position .
num quality acceptance clean all structures before final acceptance of the work .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. excavation and backfill backfill materials types ii and iii are measured according to subsection num measurement .
b. circular pipe all types the overall length of circular pipe in place and accepted is measured in linear feet meters along the central axis of the pipe diameter .
c. pipearches the overall length of pipearch in place and accepted is measured in linear feet meters along the bottom center line of the pipearch .
d. multiple installations in multiple installations each single line of culvert structure is measured separately .
e. arch culverts arch culverts of the dimensions and materials shown on the plans complete in place are measured as a unit that includes necessary foundations walls and wings .
num limits excavation and normal backfill are not measured for payment .
num payment a. backfill backfill will be paid for according to section num .
b .
structural plate pipe pipearch and arch culvert structural plate pipe and pipearch installations complete in place and accepted will be paid for at the contract price per linear footmeter .
arch culvert installations complete in place and accepted will be paid for per lump sum .
this payment will be full compensation for the item including excavating furnishing and hauling materials installing cutting pipe where necessary repairing or replacing damaged sections making connections strutting and elongating providing temporary drainage section numstructural plate pipe pipearch and arch culverts num joining an extension to an existing structure where required payment will also be full compensation for removing disposing or using excavated materials as directed by the engineer .
payment will be made under item no .
num structural plate pipe ___ in mm h ___ per linear foot meter item no .
num structural plate pipearch span in mm rise in mm per linear foot meter item no .
num structural plate arch culvert structure no.___ per lump sum num adjustments excavation will not be paid for separately but all of the other provisions of section num and section num shall govern .
section numrenovating existing pipe num general description this work includes furnishing and inserting helically corrugated metal pipe smoothlined corrugated polyethylene pipe high density polyethylene profile wall pipe and high density polyethylene solid wall pipe or a polyvinyl chloride pipe inside an existing metal pipe and pressure grouting the space between the two pipes .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numfine aggregate section numportland cement section numadmixtures section numsteel pipe section numsmooth lined corrugated polyethylene pe culvert pipe section numwater section numlime section nummineral filler b. referenced documents gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications section numrenovating existing pipe num material section corrugated steel pipe helically corrugated num smoothlined corrugated polyethylene pe culvert pipe num portland cement types i or ii num mineral filler limestone dust num fly ash type a num water num fine aggregate size no .
num num agricultural lime num use georgia standard numd to determine the metal thickness of the insert pipe .
for this work use agricultural lime that has num percent minimum passing the no .
num num µm sieve and num percent minimum passing the no .
num num µm sieve .
a .
high density polyethylene hdpe profile wall pipe use pipe liner that consists of a hdpe profile wall pipe that conforms to the requirements of astm f num .
polyethylene material shall have polyethylene pipe liners material designation of pe num and shall have a material cell classification per astm d num of numc or higher .
join hdpe profile wall pipe liner by thermal fusion extrusion welding per manufacturer specifications or provide a positive mechanical joint that meets the requirements of astm d num .
the joint shall be able to be pulled or pushed into the host pipe without joint separation .
b .
high density polyethylene hdpe solid wall pipe pipe liner shall consist of a hdpe solid wall pipe that conforms to the requirements of astm f num with an sdr of num .
polyethylene material shall have polyethylene pipe liners material designation of pe num and shall have a material cell classification per astm d num of numc .
join hdpe solid wall pipe liner by butt fusion per astm f num and the manufacturer specifications or provide a positive mechanical joint that meets the requirements of astm d num .
the joint shall be able to be pulled or pushed into the host pipe without joint separation .
c. polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe pipe liner shall consist of pvc corrugated pipe with a smooth interior that conforms to the requirements of astm f num .
pvc pipe shall have a minimum pipe stiffness of num psi num kpa when tested according to astm d num .
use pipe made of pvc compound with a cell classification per astm d num of numb .
join the pvc pipe liner with a pvc coupling that uses elastomeric sealing gaskets .
the assembled joint shall meet the performance requirements of astm d num .
the joint shall be able to be pulled or pushed into the host pipe without joint separation .
ensure that elastomeric seals meet the requirements of astm f num .
d. grout mixtures mix water with the dry ingredients to produce a grout with an efflux time from the flow cone of at least num seconds and no more than num seconds when tested according togdt num .
add cement cement and limestone dust or cement and fine aggregate to the batch proportions to produce the required consistency .
section numrenovating existing pipe num table of grout mixtures mix proportions percent by weight of dry materials dry materials grout types num num num num num cement num num num num num limestone dust num num num fly ash num num fine aggregate num num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a. batching use weight hoppers and scales for each dry material or calibrated volumetric batch hopper .
calibrate volumetric batch hoppers in increments equivalent to one num lb num kg bag of cement .
b. mixing use a watertight batchtype mixer capable of blending the various materials into a homogenous mixture .
c. grout pumping use a positivedisplacement pistontype pump or a screwtype worm pump equipped with the following discharge line with a positive cutoff valve at the nozzle end and a bypass return line to recirculate the grout back into a holding tank or mixer a nozzle or device at the end of the discharge line that will remain secure in the num in num mm grout pipe and free of leaks d. pulling provide equipment capable of pulling the new helically corrugated metal pipe .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. grout mixtures use the table of grout mixtures in subsection num.d grout mixtures .
section numrenovating existing pipe num b .
installation install pipe liner according to the manufacturers guidelines and as specified in the plans with the following requirements num .
clean and inspect the existing pipe before pulling or pushing the new pipe through .
num .
use a nose cone on all on all pipe liners .
the nose cone shall have enough strength to withstand pulling or pushing of the new pipe liner .
weld or bolt the nose cone to the end of the liner .
use a nose cone that includes a ring for attaching the pulling cable .
num .
after pulling or pushing the new pipe through the old one plug the space between the pipes at both ends with concrete or mortar .
insert a num in num mm grout pipe with threaded ends on the outside into the tops of the plugs at both ends of the pipes and screw on a threaded cap .
num .
after the pipe plugs have been in place long enough to develop strength to withstand pressure grouting remove the grout pipe caps .
connect the grout pump to the downstream grout pipe and pump grout into the void until it flows freely from the upstream grout pipe .
num .
after pumping is complete replace the grout pipe caps .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement renovating existing pipe is measured by the linear foot meter of the specified diameter of new pipe installed .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment renovating existing pipe will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per each diameter and metal thickness of new pipe .
this payment will be full compensation for completing all work described in this section including cleaning and restoring damaged areas .
payment will be made under item no .
num renovating existing pipe____ in mm diameter per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numminor drainage structures for detours num general description this work includes selecting constructing and maintaining minor structures used on detours for cross drains or side drains .
remove these structures when the detour is no longer needed .
this item covers only the use of minor structures .
when the plans call for constructing maintaining and removing a detour bridge apply section num .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
section numminor drainage structures for detours num num related references a .
standard specifications section numdetour bridges b. referenced documents aashto hsnum num submittals if using a bridgetype structure instead of one or more pipes present plans of the proposed structure to the engineer for approval before beginning construction .
num materials all selected materials are subject to the following requirements a. bridgetype structure ensure that each bridgetype structure roadway width is at least num ft num mm greater than the approach pavement width or num ft num m whichever is greater .
ensure that load capacity is equivalent to aashto hsnum .
provide suitable hub guards and handrails .
b .
pipe culvert use pipe culverts long enough to accommodate the detour grade and cross section shown on the plans .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction have the engineer approve selected construction methods .
use structures that have adequate openings and are suitable for the purpose intended .
unless otherwise modified by a special provision provide for an uninterrupted flow of traffic over the existing highway or the completed detour as the case may be .
assume all risks involved in the design construction maintenance and removal of each structure including any damage from any cause .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
section numminor drainage structures for detours num num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the entire structure at the location specified is measured for payment .
multiple lines of pipe used instead of a bridgetype structure or a single larger diameter pipe is considered one structure .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this item will be paid for at the lump sum price bid for each structure .
this price includes the materials labor equipment and small tools necessary to construct maintain and remove the structure and to dispose of the materials .
upon removal materials become the property of the contractor .
sixty percent of the lump sum price will be paid when the structure is complete in place .
the remaining num percent will be paid when the maintenance period is complete the structure removed and the materials disposed of .
payment will be made under item no .
num construct maintain and remove detour drainage structure no.___ per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numunderdrains num general description this work includes constructing underdrains with perforated pipe according to the specifications and the details lines and grades shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numaggregate for drainage section numcorrugated polyethylene underdrain pipe section numcorrugated aluminum alloy pipe section numsteel pipe b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
section numunderdrains num num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the specifications below .
use any pipe specified below unless the plans state otherwise .
use only one type of pipe in each continuous interconnecting line .
material specification aggregate for underdrain num corrugated aluminum alloy underdrain pipe num corrugated steel underdrain pipe num corrugated polyethylene underdrain pipe num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction schedule the work so that underdrain installations coincide with other operations on the project to prevent conflict damage or infiltration of materials .
a. excavation to intercept waterbearing strata excavate according to the details and elevation shown on the plans or to an increased depth if the engineer directs .
when the material in the bottom of the trench is unstable remove unstable material add approved granular material and compact to provide a stable foundation for the pipe .
b .
laying pipe lay pipe according to plan details with the perforations on the underside of the pipe unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
num .
lay bell and spigot and tongue and groove pipe with the bell or grooved end upstream and the bells embedded in the foundation material .
num .
firmly connect the joints .
num .
connect pipe and butt joints securely using the appropriate size and type of band or coupling .
num .
install the following miscellaneous items as indicated on the plans or otherwise specified pipe screens caps section numunderdrains num plugs ells wyes tees markers c. backfilling after laying the pipe place drainage aggregate in num in num mm layers .
compact each layer thoroughly until reaching the total plan depth .
do not disturb pipe alignment .
d. marking mark each outlet end of the drainage system according to plan details .
e. protecting from contamination protect the filter material from contamination by foreign matter .
num .
particular attention must be given to the top surface of the filter blanket when it will be covered by an aggregate drainage course .
soil infiltration from placing soil courses over the filter material is incidental to the work and is not considered contamination .
num .
if aggregates become contaminated remove the contaminated portion and replace it with clean filter material before placing succeeding layers of filter blanket or placing aggregate drainage course .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the quantity of underdrain pipe with or without drainage aggregate complete in place and accepted is measured in linear feet meters along each line or lateral from center to center of junctions and fittings .
num limits when the trench is required to be undercut the depth measurement for determining the underdrain pipe payment will be from the bottom of the required undercut to the final elevation established for the top of the trench .
num payment each size of underdrain pipe will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter as follows a. underdrain pipe only payment for pipe under this item will include ground preparation excavation backfilling disposal of surplus material all appurtenances required to complete the item including screens tees wyes ells and markers section numunderdrains num b. underdrain pipe including drainage aggregate payment for pipe under this item will include specified drainage aggregate and all items listed under subsection num.a above .
underdrain pipe including drainage aggregate to depths greater than num ft num m below the final elevation established for the top of the trench will have an adjusted unit price .
this price will be computed by increasing the contract unit price by a percentage based on the extra depth as follows from over num ft num m to and including num ft num m at contract price plus num percent over num ft num m deep by supplemental agreement or force account c. contaminated aggregate removal and replacement of contaminated aggregate will not be paid for separately but will be included in the bid price for underdrain pipe .
payment will be made under item no .
num underdrain pipe only ___ in mm per linear foot meter item no .
num underdrain pipe including drainage aggregate___ in mm per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numedgedrains num general description this work includes constructing edgedrains with perforated pipe according to the specifications and to the details lines and grades shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction section numcoarse aggregate section numcorrugated polyethylene underdrain pipe section numcorrugated aluminum alloy pipe section numconcrete pipe section numfabrics b. referenced documents gdt num qpl num num submittals general provisions num through num .
section numedgedrain num num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications .
use pipe specified below unless the plans state otherwise .
use only one type of pipe in each continuous interconnecting line .
material section corrugated aluminum alloy underdrain pipe num concrete underdrain pipe num corrugated polyethylene underdrain pipe num drainage aggregate backfill size no .
num num asphaltic concrete num plastic filter fabric nonwoven num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation before placing edgedrains pressure grout and cure pavement slabs in the immediate area .
do not begin work until the engineer determines that pavement slabs are stable .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction complete any opened trenches including the asphalt cap each working day .
install edgedrains with other operations on the project to prevent conflict damage or improper infiltration of other materials .
a. excavating excavate according to the details and elevations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
b .
placing filter fabric place filter fabric according to plan details .
if the drainage aggregate or the filter fabric become contaminated or the filter fabric is damaged during the backfilling operation remove the contaminated or damaged materials and replace them at no additional cost to the department .
c. laying pipe lay pipe according to the plan details with perforations on the underside of the pipe unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
num .
lay bell and spigot and tongue and groove pipe with the bell or grooved end upstream and the bells embedded in the foundation material .
num .
firmly connect the joints .
section numedgedrain num num .
connect butt joint pipes securely using the appropriate size and type of band or coupling .
num .
install the following miscellaneous items according to the plans or as otherwise specified pipe screens caps plugs covers ells wyes tees markers d. backfilling after laying the pipe place the additional backfill material in num in num mm layers .
num .
before compacting establish the target density as num times the average of num drydensity determinations made on the material in the trench .
space the num determinations over at least num ft num m and determine them using the numin num mm direct transmission density mode according to gdt num .
num .
thoroughly compact each layer to num percent of the target density and complete to the depth shown on the plans details or as directed by the engineer .
num .
do not disturb the pipe alignment or damage the filter fabric .
num .
place a compacted asphaltic concrete cap on the trench as shown in the plan details or as directed by the engineer .
e. marking mark each outlet end of the drainage system according to plan details .
f. protecting from contamination protect the backfill material from contamination by foreign matter .
if aggregates become contaminated remove the contaminated portion and replace it with clean material before placing succeeding layers .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the quantity of edgedrain pipe including backfill material and filter fabric complete in place and accepted is measured in linear feet meters along each line or lateral from center to center of junctions and fittings .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment each size of edgedrain pipe will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter .
payment for pipe under this item includes preparation section numedgedrain num excavation backfilling specified backfill materials and filter fabric disposal of surplus material screens tees wyes and ells the asphaltic concrete cap over the trench payment will be made under item no .
num edgedrain pipe including backfill material and filter fabric ___ in mm per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numslope drain pipe num general description this work includes furnishing and installing slope drains made of corrugated steel pipe corrugated aluminum pipe or corrugated smoothlined polyethylene pipe where shown on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcorrugated aluminum alloy pipe section numsteel pipe section numsmooth lined corrugated polyethylene pe culvert pipe b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material specification corrugated aluminum alloy slope drain pipe num corrugated steel culvert pipe num corrugated smooth lined pe pipe num ensure that the nominal thickness of the metal for slope drain pipe conforms to the minimum thickness or gauge specified in the design tables unless otherwise shown on the plans .
section numslope drain pipe num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation before placing the pipe compact the foundation until firm and stable .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction place slope drain pipe in an open trench excavated to the line and grade shown on the plans or as directed .
lay pipe sections that have circumferential joints with the outside laps of the circumferential joints uphill .
after installing the pipe num .
immediately backfill the trench with excavated materials or other approved material .
num .
place backfill in layers num in num mm thick or less .
num .
compact each layer until firm and stable .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement slope drain pipe is measured by the actual number of linear feet meters of the size installed and accepted .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment accepted slope drain will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter for the size specified .
this price includes full compensation for labor and incidentals necessary to complete the item .
payment will be made under item no .
num slope drain pipe ___ in mm per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section nummetal drain inlets num general description this work includes installing metal drain inlets according to the specifications and plan details .
on projects where the grading and paving are let simultaneously the item will be designated as metal drain inlets complete assembly .
for this type of construction complete the work in two stages .
perform stage num construction immediately after completing an embankment .
perform stage num construction progressively as the paved shoulders are completed .
on grading projects where no paving is involved limit the installations to stage num construction .
on paving projects where the grading has been completed and metal drain inlets are in place under stage num construction complete each assembly as specified under stage num construction .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numhot mix asphalt concrete construction section numasphaltic concrete curb section nummiscellaneous concrete section numslope drain pipe section numrip rap section numrepair of galvanized coatings section numsteel pipe b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material specification concrete aprons num sandcement bag rip rap num slope drain pipe num asphaltic concrete curb num metal sheeting and spelter coating num for asphaltic concrete spillways use the mixture for asphaltic concrete curb .
section nummetal drain inlets num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication fabricate metal inlets as integral units to the shape and dimensions shown on the plans .
the end section and reducer shall not be corrugated or perforated .
num construction install metal inlet drainage assemblies at locations shown on the plans or where directed by the engineer .
locate inlets to avoid future installations such as guard rail posts and lighting standards .
a .
repair repair damaged galvanized coating according to section num .
b .
stage construction on combination grading and paving projects install metal drain inlet assemblies in two construction stages as follows num .
stage num construction as soon as the initial grading of an embankment is completed a .
install metal drain inlets where shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
each installation includes metal inlet necessary slope drain pipe concrete aprons or rip rap as required by the engineer to control erosion at the outlet end b .
to direct the water to the inlets crown the roadbed and construct a roll of embankment material at the shoulder line .
protect and maintain this drainage system to prevent leakage erosion and scouring .
keep gutters pipes and inlets open .
num .
stage num construction complete this second stage operation immediately after paving shoulders to provide a complete drainage installation and prevent erosion of the embankment slopes .
as soon as a section of paved shoulder is completed a .
remove each adjacent inlet from its position placed under stage num construction and place it in its final position as shown on the plans .
b .
field cut a section of slope drain pipe to the required length to connect the existing slope drain pipe to the metal inlet in its new position .
c. thoroughly compact the embankment material around the inlet including the subgrade under the asphaltic concrete spillway .
finish to a smooth firm surface .
section nummetal drain inlets num d. place the asphaltic concrete mixture for the spillway on the prepared subgrade within the temperature limits set by the engineer .
thoroughly compact by rolling .
use a handoperated roller weighing num lbs num kg or more or a small power roller satisfactory to the engineer .
when areas can not be reached with rollers compact them with vibratory tampers or hand tampers approved by the engineer .
e. after compaction ensure that the surface and texture is smooth even and dense .
shape and complete the shoulders and slopes to conform to the required finished section .
f. as soon as each drainage assembly is completed place the asphaltic curb at the edge of the paved shoulder and connect it to the inlet as shown on the plans .
num .
metal drain inlet complete assembly construction of each metal drain inlet shall include both stage num construction and the stage num construction specified above .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement each of the three different types of metal drain inlet installations is measured separately for payment complete in place and accepted .
in each instance the num ft num mm section of corrugated pipe which is an integral part of each unit is included in the measurement .
measurement of each metal drain inletcomplete assembly and each metal drain inletstage num construction includes the asphaltic concrete spillway and the portion of asphaltic concrete curb included within the limits of each inlet assembly as shown on the plans .
measurement of each metal drain inletstage num construction includes the integral drain unit and rip rap earth roll or other incidental construction necessary to direct water into the inlet .
other items of construction required in the work and eligible for payment such as slope drain pipe asphaltic concrete curb rip rap and concrete aprons are measured for payment according to the applicable specification for such items .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment each of the three types of metal drain inlet installation measured for payment as described above will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment of each metal drain inletcomplete assembly will include both the first stage and second stage construction outlined above .
when first stage construction is completed and the installation is satisfactory to the engineer num percent of the bid price for each such unit will be included for payment on the next statement .
when the second stage construction is completed and the installation is satisfactory to the engineer the remaining num percent of the bid price for each unit will be included for payment on the next statement .
all other items needed to complete the installation and that are eligible for payment will be paid for according to the applicable specification for such items .
payment will be made under section nummetal drain inlets num item no .
num metal drain inletcomplete assembly per each item no .
num metal drain inletstage num construction per each item no .
num metal drain inletstage num construction per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numpot bearings num general description this work includes furnishing and installing pot bearings fixed and expansion types .
use the quality type and size designated in this specification on the plans or ordered by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numsteel structures section numexpanded mortar section numpainting structures section numstructural steel section nummiscellaneous steel materials section numelastomeric bearing pads section numepoxy resin adhesives section numbearing plates with polytetrafluroethylene surfaces b. referenced documents astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num a num grade num a numm grade num num submittals provide the following reports to the project engineer and the office of materials certified test reports materials certificates certificate of compliance to conform with the requirements in this specification shop drawings certification a .
shop drawings before fabricating the bearings submit to the engineer shop drawings according to subsection num.b shop drawings .
include the following on the drawings section numpot bearings num bearing plan and elevation complete details and sections that show the materials incorporated into the bearing astm or other material designations vertical and horizontal load capacity rotation and translation capacity compression stress on sliding surfaces and elastomeric surfaces at maximum and minimum design loads complete design calculations complete erection and installation procedure b .
certification have the pot bearing manufacturer furnish the following to the project engineer and the office of materials certified test reports material certificates certificate of compliance to conform with these specifications for each bearing furnished num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section painting num structural steel num anchor bolts nuts and washers num elastomeric bearing pads num epoxy resin adhesives num bearing plates with ptfe surfaces num a .
metals use the stainless steel sliding surfaces indicated below stainless clad steel plate minimum eight percent stainless steel conforming to the requirements of astm a num both shear strength and bond strength tests in num and num of astm a num are required .
use stainless steel cladding that meets type num .
use backing steel base metal that meets astm designation a num grade numwa numm grade num w. stainless steel plate welded to a steel backup plate use at least num gage num mm thickness of the stainless steel plate that meets astm num type num .
use steel backing plate that meets astm designation a num grade numw a numm grade numw unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
use qualified welders to weld the stainless steel plate to the steel backing .
furnish welding procedures and welder qualification documents to the department for review and approval prior to fabrication .
weld entirely around the perimeter of the stainless steel plate .
solid stainless steel plate millfinish the stainless steel sliding surfaces to a maximum surface roughness of num microinches num m rms according to the requirements of ansi standard b num .
remove and replace at no additional cost to the department bearing plates whose stainless steel sliding surfaces have been scratched or damaged .
b .
structural steel use structural steel for the masonry plates and the components of the bearings that meet the requirements of these astm specifications section numpot bearings num astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num a num grade num a numm grade num machine the base pot from a solid steel plate .
c. anchor bolts use anchor bolts including nuts and washers that meet the requirements of subsection num .
d. elastomeric material ensure that the elastomeric material used as the confined medium within the pot is num percent virgin chloroprene neoprene that meets the requirements of section num .
ensure that the elastomer is a minimum grade num and has a durometer hardness of num num .
ensure that the sealing rings for containing the elastomer in the pot bearings are as specified by the pot bearing manufacturer and meet the following requirements made of brass or stainless steel withstands and transmits all imposed loading allows free movement of the piston contains the elastomer within the pot under the maximum static and dynamic loading prevents contamination of the elastomer with foreign matter e. expanded mortar set anchor bolts in preformed or drilled holes using expanding mortar that meets the requirements of section num .
f. paint paint exposed steel of each bearing assembly other than stainless steel according to system vi of section num .
take care to keep polytetrafluroethylene ptfe or sliding surfaces free of paint .
g. design and applicable codes design fabricate and erect pot bearings according to these specifications and the applicable requirements of the following standard codes and specifications .
section num including supplements current aashto standard specifications for highway bridges additional design parameters with which the pot bearing manufacturer must comply num .
bearing on concrete maximum bearing pressure is as indicated in aashto .
num .
elastomeric disc design compressive strength is num psi num mpa .
num .
sliding surfaces accommodate translation by sliding of a hard mating surface of stainless steel across a ptfe surface .
a .
stainless steel sliding surface accurate flat surface with brinnell hardness of num minimum .
num stainless steel sliding surface to completely cover ptfe surface in all operating positions of the bearing .
num position the stainless steel sliding surface so that the sliding movement causes the dirt and dust accumulation to fall from the surface of the stainless steel .
b. ptfe sliding surface do not use holes of slots in the ptfe sliding surface .
c. static coefficient of friction under a load of num psi num mpa do not exceed num percent for unfilled ptfe nor num percent of filled ptfe surfaces .
d. rotation num radians .
section numpot bearings num e. pistoncylinder clearance limit clearance to num in num mm .
use a brass or stainless steel sealing ring to prevent extrusion of the elastomeric material .
h. substituted bearings pot bearings with a design similar to that shown on the plans may be used provided the bearings to be substituted are approved by the state bridge engineer and comply with the following .
num .
equal or better load carrying and moment capacity .
num .
all control dimensions are maintained and bearings fit within the limits of detailed masonry plate .
num .
use filled or unfilled recessed ptfe .
num .
pistoncylinder clearance is limited to num in .
num mm and a brass or stainless steel sealing ring shall be used to prevent extrusion of the elastomeric material .
num .
elastomeric material is used as a confined medium within the pot .
num .
the elastomeric disc is lubricated by a means acceptable to the engineer .
num .
do not use aluminum or aluminum alloy .
num .
equal or better than the pot bearings shown on the plans in all structural respects and meets all design requirements .
num delivery storage and handling a .
assembling and marking have each pot bearing assembled at the plant marked for identification and delivered to the construction site as a complete unit .
each bearing shall be marked with permanent matchmarks to indicate the normal position of the bearing .
b .
transportation storage and handling during construction follow these guidelines to transport store and handle pot bearings during construction num .
protect each pot bearing from dust and moisture .
num .
store the ptfe surface in the shade to avoid the damaging effects of ultraviolet rays .
num .
protect the pot bearings from damage during construction and prevent contamination of the various components of the pot bearings .
ensure that the fabricator also follows the above requirements .
during transportation and storage cover the bearings with moistureproof and dustproof covers .
num construction requirements num personnel a .
skilled representative have the bearing manufacturer provide a skilled representative who is certified by the manufacturer to be experienced in similar installations .
the representative shall give aid and instruction during the pot bearing installation .
be present during the initial bearing installation .
be present during welding of the pots to the masonry plates if not performed in the manufacturers shop .
remain on the job until the bearing installation proceeds without trouble and until the workmen are experienced with the work for each installation as determined by the engineer .
section numpot bearings num arrange to have the manufacturers skilled representative present whenever requested by the engineer .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication a. polytetrafluroethylene ptfe ensure that the ptfe including its connection to its backup material conforms with the requirements of section num except as modified in this specification .
have the ptfe sliding surface bonded under factory controlled conditions or mechanically connect it to a rigid backup material that can resist bending stresses of the sliding surfaces .
as an alternate ptfe material of twice the thickness specified above may be recessed for half its thickness in the backup material .
ensure that it is at least num in num mm thick .
num .
when shown on the plans weld the pot to the masonry plate before installing the elastomer .
if welding procedures established and approved by the engineer restrict the temperature of the bond area to no greater than num f num c welding to steel plates with a bonded ptfe surface is permitted .
use temperatureindicating wax pencils or other suitable means to determine the temperature .
num .
after fabricating the backup material plane it before bonding the stainless steel or ptfe to a true plane surface .
num .
have the ptfe sheets bonded at the bearing manufacturers factory under controlled conditions according to the approved adhesive system manufacturers written instructions .
num .
when epoxy bonding ptfe sheets ensure that the side of the ptfe sheet to be bonded to the metal is factory treated by the sodium napthalene or sodium ammonia process .
num .
after the bonding operation ensure that the ptfe surface is smooth flat and bubble free .
polish the filled ptfe surfaces .
num .
positively locate the elements of the bearing in the bearing manufacturing and assembling .
num .
if using bearing other than those detailed on the plans obtain approval before constructing the substructure upon which the bearings will be installed .
num .
have each bearing assembled at the manufacturers plant marked for identification and delivered to the construction site as a complete unit .
ensure that the bearings have permanent matchmarks to indicate the normal position of the bearing .
num construction a. erection place bearings at their proper locations before erecting the superstructure supported by the bearings .
num .
install pier tops install pier tops horizontal at the correct elevation with a plus or minus tolerance of zero .
do not install the masonry plates until the engineer accepts the pier tops .
num .
install the anchor bolts cast anchor bolts in the concrete or set them in preformed holes unless otherwise shown on the plans .
if setting them in preformed holes fill the preformed holes in the concrete substructure with epoxy grout .
a. insert the anchor bolts to the prescribed depth .
b .
place additional grout as required in the annular space around the anchor bolts until the grout is well packed and flush with the top surface of the concrete .
section numpot bearings num c. wipe clean the exposed surfaces of the anchor bolts and substructure .
do not allow a load on grout that has not been in place at least num days .
num .
install masonry plates set the masonry plates to the proper elevation on the previously finished concrete pads .
num .
install the bearings a .
place the bearing at the predetermined locations when erecting the superstructure .
b .
remove the temporary restraints as directed by the bearing manufacturer .
c. adjust the bearings as follows adjust the expansion bearings from the normal position at num f num c to allow for the ambient temperature during erection or casting .
adjust the pot bearings to allow them to move when dead loads are applied .
ensure that the bearing is properly positioned and parallel free from rotation after applying the dead load .
adjust the bearings horizontally on the masonry plate to properly fit the superstructure members being erected .
d. after adjustments and approval by the engineer weld the bearings to the masonry plate .
num quality acceptance instruct the manufacturer to furnish facilities to test and inspect the completed bearings in the plant or at an independent test facility .
an approved testing laboratory or the manufacturer supervised by an approved independent expert shall perform the testing .
follow these testing guidelines instruct the manufacturer to allow the engineer and inspectors access to the plant and test facilities .
furnish certified test reports materials certificates and a certificate of compliance to conform with the requirements in the specifications .
perform testing according to section num and this specification .
the department reserves the right to sample and test the material and pot bearing assemblies as shown in section num .
test complete bearing assemblies or a specially manufactured pot bearing prototype that has a capacity of num kips num num kg .
successfully tested fullsize bearings that meet the requirements of this subsection and have no damaged components finishes or surfaces may be used in construction .
provide prototype pot bearings if used at no additional expense to the department .
specific items tested are as follows a. coefficient of friction perform tests to determine the static coefficient of friction of the first movement under a load of num psi num mpa on a piston area applied continuously for num hours before testing .
determine under a load of num psi num mpa on a piston area the following num .
the static coefficient of friction value shall not exceed num percent for filled ptfe surfaces and num percent for unfilled ptfe surfaces .
num .
the first movement static and dynamic coefficient of friction at a sliding speed of less than num in per min num mm per sec .
values shall not exceed num percent for filled ptfe surfaces and num percent for unfilled ptfe surfaces .
num .
the static and dynamic coefficient of friction is determined after the bearing is subjected to num design movements at a speed of less than num ft per min num mm per sec .
values shall not exceed those indicated in step num above .
signs of bond failure or other defects are cause for pot bearing rejection .
b .
proof loading perform under maximum design loads proof loading and compression deflection tests on a fullsize pot bearing .
section numpot bearings num c. cold flow subject an approved sample of filled ptfe or unfilled ptfe to a static pressure of num psi num mpa for at least num hours .
ensure that the ptfe material is bonded or mechanically connected to its backup material in the same way as the pot bearing .
apparent cold flow of the ptfe material is cause for pot bearing rejection .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement pot bearing assemblies are measured by lump sum for each bridge .
determine the actual quantities required before submitting the bid .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the work in this specification will be paid for on a lump sum basis .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials and equipment including structural steel components of the bearings masonry plates top plates sole plates ptfe elastomers anchor bolts and welding designing the pot bearing performing tests furnishing prototype bearings and test samples performing work as described and specified in this specification or the plans providing incidentals to complete the work payment will be made under item no .
num pot bearings bridge no.___ per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numrock dowels num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numfiber reinforced polymer fpr composite material num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numcontrolled low strength flowable fill num general description this work consists of furnishing and placing readymixed or volumetric mixed flowable fill as an alternate to compacted soil as approved by the engineer .
applications for this material include beddings encasements and closures for tanks and pipe and general backfill for trenches and abutments .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references standard specifications section numconcrete structures section numfine aggregate section numportland cement section numadmixtures section numwater referenced documents sopnum general provisions num through num .
num submittals mix designs for flowable fill and other documentation listed in subsection num .
num materials all materials shall meet the requirements of the following specifications material section fine aggregate subsection num portland cement subsection num fly ash subsection num airentraining admixtures subsection num water subsection num notes gradation requirement is waived .
the requirements of subsection num will be waived for fly ash .
high air generators or foaming agents may be used in lieu of conventional air entraining admixtures and may be added at the job site and mixed according to the manufacturers recommendation .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section numcontrolled low strength flowable fill num num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation mix design flowable fill can be batched by readymix or volumetrically mixed on site .
readymixed flowable fill is a mixture of portland cement fly ash fine aggregate air entraining admixture and water .
ready mixed flowable fill contains a low cement content for reduced strength development .
volumetric mixed flowable fill is a mixture of class c fly ash or portland cement class f fly ash and water mixed on site .
num .
submit mix designs for flowable fill to the engineer for approval by the office of materials .
the following table lists mix design proportion ranges for excavatable and nonexcavatable flowable fill table nummix designs for flowable fill readymixed volumetric mixed excavatable nonexcavatable excavatable nonexcavatable cement type i num lbsydnum num kgmnum num lbsydnum num kgmnum num lbsydnum num kgmnum num lbsydnum num kgmnum class c fly ash num lbsydnum num kgmnum num lbsydnum num kgmnum class f fly ash num lbsydnum num kgmnum num lbsydnum num kgmnum num lbsydnum num kgmnum water air num to num num na na numday compressive strength maximum num psi num kpa minimum num psi num kpa maximum num psi num kpa minimum num psi num kpa unit weight wet num lbsftnum num kgmnum num lbsftnum num kgmnum num lbsftnum num kgmnum num lbsftnum num kgmnum amounts singly or in combination to make the mix yield one cubic yard meter .
mix designs shall produce a consistency that will result in a flowable selfleveling product at time of placement .
the requirements for percent air compressive strength and unit weight are for laboratory designs only and are not intended for jobsite acceptance requirements .
section numcontrolled low strength flowable fill num num fabrication readymixed ensure readymixed flowable fill is manufactured at plants that qualify as approved sources according to the standard operating procedure for quality assurance for readymix concrete plants in georgia sopnum .
mix and deliver according to subsection num of the specifications or other methods approved by the engineer .
revolution counter requirements are waived .
volumetric mixed ensure volumetric mixed flowable fill is manufactured through the use of volumetric mixers according to subsection num of the specifications or other methods approved by the engineer .
num construction when using as backfill for pipe where flotation or misalignment may occur assure correct alignment of the pipe by using straps soil anchors or other approved means of restraint .
protect flowable fill from freezing for num hours after placement .
num quality acceptance jobsite acceptance acceptance of flowable fill is based on documentation as outlined in subsection num of the specifications and a minimum temperature of flowable fill at the point of delivery of num f num c. num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement flowable fill will be measured for payment in cubic yards meters in place and accepted when shown as a pay item in the contract .
when flowable fill is not shown as a pay item include the cost of the work in the bid price for the appropriate item .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment when shown as a pay item in the contract flowable fill complete in place and accepted will be paid for per cubic yard meter .
payment will be made under item no .
num flowable fill per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numcriblock retaining wall num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numrip rap num general description this work includes placing protective coverings of sandcement bag rip rap or stone rip rap .
when required this work includes placing crushed stone filter material or plastic filter fabric beneath stone rip rap on fill slopes cut slopes end rolls shoulders ditches stream banks channel banks other locations num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcoarse aggregate section numfine aggregate section numrip rap and curbing stone section numgraded aggregate section numportland cement section numcuring agents section numwater section numfabrics b. referenced documents aashto t num qpl num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that the materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material specification portland cement num rip rap stone num membrane curing compound num section numrip rap num material specification stone filter blanket num or num size no .
num fine aggregate for sand cement rip rap num water num woven plastic filter fabric num except that up to num is allowed to pass the no .
num num mm sieve .
a .
bags for sandcement bag rip rap use cotton burlap or fiber reinforced paper bags that can contain the sandcement mixture without leaking during handling and placing .
do not use bags that previously held sugar or other material that will adversely affect the sand cement mixture .
ensure that the capacity is at least num ft³ num m³ but not greater than num ft³ num m³ .
b .
stone dumped rip rap stone dumped rip rap is designated on the plans as type num or type num as defined in subsection num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction construct this work according to the following requirements a .
preparing the foundations prepare the ground surface where the rip rap will be placed to conform with the correct lines and grades before beginning the placement .
num .
when filling depressions compact the new material with hand or mechanical tampers .
dispose of excess material by spreading it neatly within the rightofway as an incidental part of the work .
num .
unless otherwise shown or provided below begin placing the rip rap in a toe ditch constructed in original ground around the toe of the fill or the cut slope .
ensure that the toe ditch is num ft num mm deep in original ground and the side next to the fill or cut has the same slope .
section numrip rap num num .
after placing the rip rap backfill the toe ditch and spread the excess dirt neatly within the rightofway as an incidental part of the work .
num .
when beginning rip rap in water or below normal water level substitute an apron of rip rap for the toe ditch .
ensure that the width and thickness of this apron is as shown on the plans or determined by the engineer .
b .
placing stone rip rap place rip rap to the limits shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
place and classify rip rap as follows num .
stone plain rip rap dump and handle stone plain rip rap into place to form a compact layer to the design thickness .
ensure that the thickness tolerance for the course is plus num in num mm with no undertolerance .
if the plans do not show a thickness place stone rip rap to at least num in num mm thick but no greater than num ft num mm thick .
num .
stone dumped rip rap dump stone dumped rip rap into place to form a uniform surface as thick as specified in the plans .
a .
ensure that the thickness tolerance for the course is minus num in num mm and plus num in num mm .
if the plans or proposal do not specify a thickness place the course to at least num ft num mm thick .
b .
recycled concrete that meets the requirements of subsection num may be used instead of stone when shown on the plans or approved by the engineer .
use recycled concrete only when materials do not contain steel after processing .
note do not use recycled concrete in aesthetically sensitive areas .
num .
stone grouted rip rap place stone grouted rip rap according to specifications for stone plain rip rap and these guidelines a .
prevent earth from filling the spaces between the stones .
b .
after placing the stone fill the spaces between them with num grout composed of portland cement and sand mixed thoroughly with enough water to make a thick creamy consistency .
c. place the grout beginning at the toe .
finish it by sweeping with a stiff bristle broom .
d. after grouting cover the rip rap and keep it wet for num days or cover and keep wet for num hours and then coat with white pigmented membrane curing compound .
c. placing filter place woven plastic filter fabric under all rip rap .
follow these requirements for placing the filter fabric num .
prepare the surface to receive the fabric until it is smooth and free from obstructions depressions and debris .
num .
place the fabric with the long dimension running up the slope .
minimize the number of overlaps .
num .
place the strips to provide a width of at least num ft num mm of overlap for each joint .
num .
anchor the filter fabric in place with securing pins of the type recommended by the fabric manufacturer .
place the pins on or within num in num mm of the centerline of the overlap .
num .
place the fabric so that the upstream strip will overlap the downstream strip .
num .
loosely place the fabric to prevent stretching and tearing during stone placement .
do not drop the stones more than num ft num m during construction .
num .
always protect the fabric during construction from clogging due to clay silts chemicals or other contaminants .
num .
remove contaminated fabric or fabric damaged during installation or rip rap placement .
replace with uncontaminated or undamaged fabric at no expense to the department .
d. placing sandcement bag rip rap place rip rap to the limits shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
section numrip rap num num .
proportioning materials mix sand and portland cement at the maximum ratio of num by weight .
a .
obtain a minimum compressive strength of num psi num mpa in num days .
b .
for sandcement bag rip rap use enough water to make up the optimum moisture content of the aggregate and cement as determined by aashto t num. c. when sandcement rip rap is to be prebagged mix the sand cement dry .
after placing each course wet the bags until the bags are wet enough for proper cement hydration .
num .
placement before placing sandcement bag rip rap fill the bags full but allow room to tie the bags .
a .
place the bagged rip rap by hand with the tied ends facing the same direction .
produce close broken joints .
b .
place header courses when directed by the engineer or required by the plans .
c. after placing the bags ram or pack them against one another to produce the required thickness and form a consolidated mass .
d. do not allow the top of each bag to vary more than num in num mm above or below the required plane .
e. placing stone blanket protection ensure that the stone blanket protection meets the materials specifications for stone filter blanket as specified in subsection num materials except stone size no .
num will be allowed instead of size no .
num .
place stone blanket protection to the limits shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
uniformly place this material to the thickness shown on the plans and to a thickness tolerance of num in num mm .
do not use stone blanket protection on slopes steeper than two horizontal to one vertical or in areas highly susceptible to erosion .
do not use plastic filter fabrics with stone blanket protection .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work is measured for payment in square yards meters of accepted material of the specified thickness .
area measurements are made parallel to the surface on which the material is placed .
plastic filter fabric will be measured as the area of rip rap placed and accepted .
no separate measurement will be made for fabric overlap joints seams or vertical sections at toe of slopes .
no separate measurement is made for grout or cushioning sand .
plan dimensions are figured by the use of filled bags num by num by num in .
num by num by num mm thick .
when filled bags are less than plan dimensions or are of varying lengths or width plan square yards meters will be used to determine pay quantities if overall dimensions are equal to or greater than those shown on the plans .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per square yard meter of material complete in place .
payment will be made under item no .
num stone plain rip rap ___ in mm thick per square yard meter item no .
num stone dumped rip rap type____ in mm thick per square yard meter section numrip rap num item no .
num stone grouted rip rap thick per square yard meter item no .
num filter blanket per square yard meter item no .
num sandcement bag rip rap ____ in mm thick per square yard meter item no .
num stone blanket protection ____ in mm per square yard meter item no .
num plastic filter fabric per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numrubble masonry num general description this work includes constructing rubble masonry from classes such as coursed random and random range work from roughly squared and dressed stone laid with or without mortar as specified on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummasonry materials b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section stone for masonry num mortar and grout num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
section numrubble masonry num num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction construct rubble masonry as follows a .
shaping the stone roughly square the stones on joints beds and faces .
at angles and ends of walls use selected stone roughly squared and pitched to line .
if specified finish the corners or angles in exterior surfaces with a chisel draft .
before laying the stone in the wall shape and dress it so that it will not loosen after it is placed .
no dressing or hammering which will loosen the stone will be permitted after it is placed .
b .
laying the stone num .
decrease the stone thickness from the bottom to the top of wall .
num .
ensure that the headers in the heart of the wall are the same size as shown in the face and extend at least num in num mm into the core or backing .
num .
ensure that headers in walls num ft num mm or less in thickness extend entirely through the wall .
the headers shall occupy at least num percent of the face of the wall .
num .
lay the masonry to line and in roughly leveled courses .
ensure that the bottom of the foundation is large selected stones .
num .
lay the courses with leaning beds parallel to the natural bed of the material .
num .
regularly diminish the thicknesses of the courses if varied from the bottom to the top of the wall .
keep a surplus supply of stones at the site to select from .
num .
when mortar masonry is specified a .
clean each stone and saturate it with water before setting it .
clean and moisten the bed that will receive it .
b .
bed the stones in freshly made mortar with full joints .
carefully settle the stones in place before the mortar sets .
c. do not permit spalls in the beds .
ensure that the joints and beds have an average thickness of not more than num in .
num mm .
d. ensure that the vertical joints in each course break with the adjoining courses at least num in .
num mm .
e. do not place vertical joints directly above or below a header joint .
if a stone is moved or if the joint is broken after the mortar has set take the stone up and thoroughly clean the mortar from the bed and joints .
reset the stone in fresh mortar .
do not lay the masonry in freezing weather or when the stone contains frost except by permission and subject to required conditions .
note do not lay the masonry in freezing weather or when the stone contains frost except with permission .
f. whenever possible properly point the face joints before the mortar sets .
if joints can not be pointed rake them out to a depth of num in num mm before the mortar sets .
do not smear the stone face surfaces with the mortar forced out of the joints or the mortar used in pointing .
g. thoroughly wet the joints pointed after the stone is laid with clean water and fill with mortar .
h. drive the mortar into the joints and finish with an approved pointing tool .
i .
keep the wall wet while pointing .
in hot or dry weather protect the pointed masonry from the sun and keep it wet for at least three days after the pointing is finished .
section numrubble masonry num note do not perform pointing in freezing weather or when the stone contains frost .
j .
after the pointing is completed and the mortar is set thoroughly clean the walls and leave them in a neat condition .
num .
dry rubble masonry when laying dry rubble a .
take care that each stone takes a firm bearing no less than in three separate points upon the underlying course .
b .
ensure that face joints are no greater than num in num mm wide .
c. chink the open front and rear joints with spalls fitted to take firm bearing upon the top and bottom surfaces throughout the length of the stone .
d. fill the interstices in the heart of the wall with spalls .
when specified thoroughly slush the open joint on the rear surfaces with mortar to prevent water from seeping through the joints .
c. weep holes provide adequate drainage for retaining walls with weep holes as shown on the plans or required by the engineer .
when backfilling at weep holes build chimneys and french drains extending through the parts of the fill to be drained .
the cost of chimneys weep holes and french drains is included in the contract price for rubble masonry .
d. copings use copings bridge seats and back walls made from the materials shown on the plans .
if not otherwise specified they shall be class a concrete .
make concrete copings in sections at least num in num mm thick and from num to num ft num to num m long extending the full width of the wall .
cast the sections in place or precast and set them in place in free mortar beds .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work is measured in cubic yards meters of accepted masonry .
the dimensions shown on the plans shall be used except for changes made by the engineer .
excavation for rubble masonry is not measured for separate payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per cubic yard meter for mortar rubble masonry or dry rubble masonry complete in place .
payment will be made under item no .
num mortar rubble masonry per cubic yard meter item no .
num dry rubble masonry per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numbrick masonry num general description this work includes laying brick in mortar .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures section nummasonry materials b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that the materials meet the requirements of the following specifications brick for masonry num mortar and grout num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
brick selection select brick for exposed surfaces corners etc .
from brick approved as to color and uniformity .
b .
laying brick follow these guidelines when laying brick section numbrick masonry num num .
saturate the brick with water before laying it .
num .
lay the brick using the shovejoint method to bond it thoroughly into the mortar .
num .
arrange headers and stretchers to bond the mass thoroughly .
num .
for straight masonry walls using stretcher courses ensure that at least num course in num is a header course .
num .
finish joints properly as the work progresses .
create joints at least num in num mm but no more than num in num mm thick .
note do not use spalls or bats except to shape around irregular openings or to use at corners .
num .
lay brick evenly and neatly .
c. observing weather limitations do not lay brick in freezing weather or when the bricks contain frost except with permission from the engineer and when required .
in hot and dry weather protect the masonry and keep it wet for at least num hours after laying the brick .
d. backfilling do not place backfill against the masonry until it is at least num days old .
during cold weather the restricted period may be longer as directed .
num quality acceptance all brick masonry shall present an even uniform neat and workmanlike appearance .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work is measured for payment by one of the two methods specified below .
the unit of measurement is stated in the contract .
separate payment is not made for brick masonry used in catch basins inlets manholes and similar items which are measured and paid for per each .
excavation and backfill for this work is not measured for payment except as specified in section num .
mortar is not paid for separately and the cost is included in the contract price for brick masonry .
a .
measurement by cubic meter when brick masonry is measured by the cubic yard meter the volume measured is the brick and mortar placed within the lines indicated on the plans and typical cross sections or as directed by the engineer .
b .
measurement by number of bricks when brick masonry is measured by the brick the unit of measurement is each thousand m bricks and fraction placed within the lines indicated on the plans and typical cross sections or as directed by the engineer .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per cubic yard meter or per thousand m bricks for brick masonry complete in place .
payment will be made under section numbrick masonry num item no .
num brick masonry per cubic yard meter item no .
num brick masonry per thousand m num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numremoval of portland cement concrete roadway slabs num general description this work includes removing the full depth of existing jointed portland cement concrete pavement slabs of various lengths .
the slabs to be removed are shown on the plans or are designated by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numepoxy resin adhesives b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction the engineer will determine which slabs to remove and replace and whether to use full or partial slab replacement .
section numremoval of portland cement concrete roadway slabs num a .
partial slab replacements the engineer will determine the limits of removal .
remove and replace at least num ft num m of slab measured longitudinally and num ft num m measured transversely .
any slab removal beyond the limits determined by the engineer will be at no additional cost to the department for removal and replacement .
num .
saw the slab full depth longitudinally along the centerline joint and shoulder joint and transversely along the area marked for removal including transverse joints where applicable .
a .
if approved by the engineer omit the shoulder joint cut if doing so does not damage the shoulder .
b .
if necessary and if approved by the engineer make additional cuts within the removal area to remove the damaged slab more easily .
num .
thoroughly remove saw slurry and other contaminants from the overcutting beyond limits of the removal area .
repair by filling the overcuts with type ii epoxy adhesive that meets the requirements of section num .
clean and fill the overcuts as soon as possible but no later than when the joints are sealed .
num .
remove the damaged slabs by lifting .
do not fragment the slabs for removal unless approved by the engineer .
num .
drill holes in each slab section to accommodate the expanding type lift anchors .
remove sections nearest the centerline joint first to minimize damage to the shoulder .
note during removal avoid damaging the pavement base shoulder or sides that will not be removed .
num .
repair the damaged shoulder area to the engineers satisfaction at the contractors expense .
num .
if the adjacent concrete pavement is damaged during removal enlarge the removal area to include the damaged sections of adjacent concrete .
all applicable rules regarding the minimum size of remaining slab will apply as shown on the plans .
remove and replace additional slab lengths damaged from removing the initial slab at the contractors expense .
num .
remove loose underlying base material to produce a sound wellcompacted base .
num .
thoroughly tamp the material loosened in the removal process to the engineers satisfaction before replacing the slab .
num .
dispose of the slabs and underlying base material removed during this work .
num .
obtain the disposal site and necessary permits and agreements .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement slabs and portions of slabs removed are measured by the square yard meter using the average squared dimensions .
removing underlying base material and cleaning and repairing overcuts is not measured for payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment slabs and portions of slabs measured as specified in subsection num measurement above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid .
payment is full compensation for sawing cleaning repairing overcutting and removing and disposing of the concrete and any underlying base material .
payment will be made under section numremoval of portland cement concrete roadway slabs num item no .
num remove roadway slab per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numremoval of miscellaneous roadway items num general description this work includes removing salvaging or disposing of items listed in the proposal as pay items to be removed and backfilling the excavations made during removal .
remove structures not separately listed as pay items in the contract as specified in sections num num or num .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numclearing and grubbing rightofway section numrandom clearing and grubbing section numroadway excavation section numembankments section numremoval of existing bridge section numrelaying reconstructing or adjusting to grade of miscellaneous roadway structures b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials num delivery storage and handling a .
materials retained by the department unless removed under sections num num or num or unless otherwise provided for in the plans or proposal carefully remove materials with a salvage value .
num .
neatly stack or stockpile the materials along the rightofway near the removal point and above high water .
num .
store highway signs standing on edge and protected from the elements .
num .
replace materials damaged defaced or destroyed by removing them carelessly at no cost to the department .
num .
notify the engineer when the materials have been stockpiled and are ready to be transported .
num .
keep materials secure and replace at the contractors expense materials lost stolen or missing within a maximum of num days after the engineer has been notified that the materials are ready to be transported .
section numremoval of miscellaneous roadway items num b .
materials reused in the work maintain structures portions of structures and other materials to be salvaged and reused in reconstruction work .
assume responsibility for the material until project final acceptance .
repair or replace materials lost or stolen before reuse at the contractors expense .
spread suitable surplus excavation material on the slopes of the roadway embankments .
otherwise dispose of the waste materials off the rightofway at the contractors expense .
c. bridge components dispose of bridge components according to section num .
replace or repair at the contractors expense structures portions of structures or materials to be salvaged retained or used in the reconstructed work but that were carelessly damaged or destroyed by the contractor .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation if removing a structure may endanger a new construction finish that part of the work before beginning the new construction .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
protection of remaining structures do not use explosives equipment or devices that may endanger structures facilities or other property to remain in place .
if parts of structures are to remain in place protect them from damage during construction .
protect and preserve the salvage value of materials to be salvaged .
b .
extent of removal separate and remove existing structures with their attached parts and connections as shown on the plans or designated to be removed .
num .
when a part of an existing structure is to remain in place ensure that the part to be removed extends to a construction joint or is cut off to the lines shown on the plans leaving reasonably smooth faces .
remove walls and other masonry construction to the bottoms of the foundations unless otherwise specified .
num .
remove walls and their foundations within the roadbed area to an elevation at least num ft num mm below the top of the finished subgrade unless otherwise specified .
num .
see subsection num.c.num.c abandoned obstructions for guidelines for rigid surfaces .
c. railway tracks removing railway tracks includes removing rails ties switches towers concrete structures sign posts and other related railway structures .
leave ballast in place unless otherwise specified .
section numremoval of miscellaneous roadway items num d. inlets catch basins manholes and culverts num .
remove gratings traps and other metal castings of inlets catch basins and manholes without damaging them .
reuse them on new structures or salvage them whichever the engineer directs .
num .
remove old culverts down to the ground level or to the adjacent water level unless otherwise shown on plans .
num .
remove the bottom slabs of inlets catch basins manholes and culverts .
if the engineer permits them to remain in place break them up so that water will readily pass through them .
e. removing pipe uncover the pipe to remove it without damage .
exercise care in removing the pipe .
replace pipe sections damaged by negligence at the contractors expense .
after removing the pipe clean it and neatly stack it at points directed by the engineer along the line of the work .
unless otherwise specified the pipe is the property of the department .
f. septic tanks when encountering septic tanks completely remove the contents of each tank .
num .
remove and dispose of the tanks contents as required by the state department of health and local health authorities .
num .
before backfilling the remaining portion of the septic tank drill holes in the bottom of the tank or break it up as the engineer directs to permit drainage .
g. backfilling backfill trenches and other excavations dug for removing miscellaneous structures .
num .
use approved materials in the backfill .
num .
compact the backfill in layers no more than num in num mm thick and with the proper moisture content .
use pneumatic tampers or other approved equipment .
num .
under the roadway ensure that the degree of compaction conforms to section num .
elsewhere compact the backfill equal to the soil surrounding it .
h. structures to remain preserve unharmed the miscellaneous structures including fences buildings pipe lines pole lines water and sewer lines and other improvements that owners or the department will retain or that others will remove .
i. culverts to be extended where concrete culverts are to be extended remove a minimum amount of concrete in parapets wing walls and wing wall footings to clear the new construction .
make the joint or connection as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
j .
fences when removing fences do not allow livestock to escape .
if fences are to be reset according to section num protect the spelter coating of fence fabric steel fence posts and braces .
the engineer will require that reusable posts removed be clean and free of concrete .
if desired furnish new posts instead of cleaning the old ones at no additional cost to the department .
k. raised edge curb remove raised edge curb to a reasonably true line at the elevation of normal finished pavement .
if the average of the plus and minus deviations approximate the original normal edge of pavement a tolerance of approximately num in num mm above or below this elevation will be accepted .
section numremoval of miscellaneous roadway items num do not shatter pavement that will be retained .
l. highway signs remove the entire sign from the supports and remove the supports from the concrete foundation .
m. lighting standards and appurtenances disassemble the lighting standard and separate each component part including the transformer base .
cut the underground duct before removing these items .
n. removal of existing building structures demolish remove and dispose of all building structures within the right of way and easement areas including concrete slabs footings foundations etc .
as shown on the plans .
grade all disturbed ground to a reasonably smooth and pleasing appearance free from loose boulders and other debris that would interfere with the use of power mowers .
grass all disturbed areas .
prior to demolition or removal num .
inspect all building structures for the presence of asbestos .
the inspection shall be done by an epa asbestos hazard emergency response act ahera accredited inspector whose certification is current .
num .
provide a copy of all inspection reports including the inspectors credentials to the engineer .
num .
provide written notice of intent to demolish to the georgia environmental protection division epd of the georgia department of natural resources in accordance with epd regulations with a copy to the engineer .
this notice is required even if there is no asbestos present .
if there is asbestos present its removal shall be done by a contractor licensed with the epd in accordance with the rules of georgia department of natural resource environmental protection division chapter num .
all asbestos removal and disposal shall be done in accordance with epd regulations .
all asbestos removal shall be considered as extra work and payment will be made in accordance with subsection num .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement removing miscellaneous roadway items is measured to determine the unit or units of each type specified in the proposal and on the plans .
only when listed as a pay item in the contract will a removed item be measured for separate payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment removing miscellaneous roadway items will be paid for at the contract unit price .
payment is full compensation for removing and disposing of the structures according to these specifications .
payment will be made under item no .
num remove______ per unit shown in proposal num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numrelaying reconstructing or adjusting to grade of miscellaneous roadway structures num general description this work includes relaying reconstructing resetting adjusting to grade capping minor structures resetting guard rail or adjusting other miscellaneous roadway structures as specified in the proposal or on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numremoval of miscellaneous roadway items section numguard rail section nummiscellaneous drainage structures section numcastings and forgings b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials most materials for the work in this specification are salvaged from the removal of existing structures .
the engineer will determine the suitability of the salvaged material for use .
use other materials to complete the structure such as mortar sandcement grout sand for sand cushion bituminous filler brick and other materials that meet the requirements of the applicable specifications for such materials for use in new structures of the same character and type .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numrelaying reconstructing or adjusting to grade of misc .
roadway structures num num construction a. miscellaneous roadway items follow these procedures to construct miscellaneous roadway items num .
remove existing structures to be rebuilt according to section num .
num .
clean the material salvaged for use in the rebuilt structure and stockpile it in convenient places .
protect it from damage until it is used .
num .
dispose of the portions of structures not suitable for reuse as provided in section num .
replace them with suitable new material .
num .
relay or rebuild the structures according to the specifications for new structures of the same type .
num .
adjust to the required grade miscellaneous structures specified in the proposal or on the plans by raising or lowering the upper portion of the fixture including sleeve extensions adjustable manhole rings gaskets mastic mortar masonry and other material .
num .
furnish materials such as mortar sandcement grout sand cushion bituminous filler brick castings and other materials to excavate trench prepare earth foundation backfill and other work necessary to complete the item .
b .
capping an existing structure when capping an existing structure requires removing adjacent existing pavement sidewalk curb gutter or other improvement not otherwise affected by the work follow these guidelines num .
remove the improvements to expose only the portion of the structure to be modified .
num .
replace the removed improvements to the engineers satisfaction without additional compensation .
num .
remove enough existing masonry to lower the top elevation to a point not less than the thickness of the cap plus num ft num m below subgrade elevation unless otherwise indicated .
num .
cap the remaining portion of the structure with a fitted reinforced concrete cover constructed to the general details shown on the plans .
grates rings plates covers hoods or other castings or fittings removed while capping and not reused become the property of the department unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
c. resetting guard rail when resetting the guard rail is specified in the proposal num .
reset guard rail removed according to section num where the plan indicates and to the required post spacing .
num .
furnish materials including additional hardware offset blocks and posts .
num .
replace posts that do not conform to the plans .
num .
follow the applicable provisions of section num .
d. raising manholes when raising manholes num .
adjustments may be made by using adjustable extension rings that do not require removing the existing manhole frame .
num .
ensure that the extension device locks to the existing frame and permits height and diameter adjustment .
the adjustable extension ring to be used shall have the engineers prior approval .
num .
choose an extension ring compatible with the existing casting and cover .
ensure that the adjustment range conforms to the finished pavement surface .
a .
use an adjustable extension ring made of materials that meet the requirements of subsection num or are manufactured from astm a numa numm steel and approved by the office of materials .
b .
ensure that the extension ring and cover are machine ground to reduce contact irregularity .
ensure that the grates are rattleproof .
section numrelaying reconstructing or adjusting to grade of misc .
roadway structures num c. obtain the engineers approval for the type of adjustable extension ring used .
e. replacing fences replace fences removed under section num in kind using the removed materials as far as possible .
unless the plans provide for new fence at the particular location include new materials required in the bid price for resetting fence .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement relaying reconstructing or adjusting to grade capping minor structures resetting guard rail or adjusting other miscellaneous roadway structures is measured to determine the unit or units of each type completed and accepted .
manhole tops to be raised or lowered num ft num mm or less are considered adjust to grade .
manhole tops to be raised between num ft num mm and num ft num m or tops to be lowered more than num ft num mm are considered reconstruct manhole and are paid as shown in subsection num payment .
remove manholes to be raised more than num ft num m as clearing and grubbing and construct a new manhole in its place according to section num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment relaying reconstructing resetting adjusting to grade capping minor structures resetting guard rail or adjusting other miscellaneous roadway structures will be paid for at the contract unit price .
payment is full compensation for relaying resetting reconstructing or adjusting to grade the structures as specified in this specification .
excavation and backfill necessary for capping is considered incidental to the item and is not paid for separately .
tapping a new pipeline into an existing structure is not considered reconstruction of the existing structure .
payment will be made under item no .
num relay per unit shown in proposal item no .
num reconstruct per unit shown in proposal item no .
num reset per unit shown in proposal item no .
num adjust to grade per unit shown in proposal item no .
num cap minor structures per unit shown in proposal num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numconstruct maintain and remove median crossover num general description this item includes constructing maintaining and removing median crossovers according to the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numgrassing b .
related documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials furnish materials that meet the following requirements a. drainage use temporary drainage structures if required as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
use structures satisfactory for the required use .
they do not have to be new .
b .
other materials ensure that other materials meet the applicable requirements of the specifications .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. constructing the crossover construct the crossover according to the details shown on the plans and these guidelines section numconstruct maintain and remove median crossover num num .
place the materials to construct each crossover according to the applicable specifications and as directed by the engineer .
num .
place and remove barricades and warning signs as directed by the engineer .
num .
when the engineer determines that the crossover has served its purpose remove and dispose of the materials including temporary drainage structures used in its construction .
num .
reshape the area where the crossover was removed to comply with the appropriate typical section and grass the reshaped area .
num .
grass according to section num .
substitute loose sod if the engineer approves .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance maintenance includes but is not limited to filling washes as they occur and repairing defects in the pavement as directed by the engineer .
num measurement median crossovers constructed maintained and removed are measured by the individual unit .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment crossovers measured as shown above will be paid for at the unit price for each crossover constructed maintained and removed .
payment is full compensation for earthwork materials pavement drainage structures signs and barricades used and reused as directed on the plans .
removal and disposal of materials when the crossover is no longer needed grassing or regrassing of the disturbed areas the first monthly statement following satisfactory construction will pay num percent of the unit price bid .
the remaining num percent will be paid upon removal and restoration of the site .
payment will be made under item no .
num construct maintain and remove median crossover station _____ per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numdocks num general description this work includes constructing docks according to plan details and locations maintaining the docks and or removing the docks as specified by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numpreservative treatment of timber products b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals when the proposal includes constructing docks submit to the engineer for approval three prints or a reproducible drawing showing the proposed construction details for each dock .
the engineer will check the design and request changes to ensure the design conforms with the specifications and the intended purpose .
after making the required changes resubmit the drawings to the engineer for final approval .
do not begin work on the dock until the drawings receive the engineers final approval .
num materials ensure that dock timber except timber used for handrails is creosotetreated according to section num .
piles for docks may be untreated but they must be peeled and have a minimum num in num mm butt diameter .
use piles of a wood species that will withstand driving and will support the load required by the engineer .
nails and hardware do not need to be galvanized .
materials used to construct these expendable items will not be pre inspected sampled or tested .
replace repair or strengthen defective worn deteriorated corroded or unsatisfactory material according to subsection num.a dock maintenance .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
section numdocks num num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction ensure that the dock is suitable for its intended purpose .
select construction methods approved by the engineer .
drive piling deep enough to provide a safe dock under weather and construction conditions peculiar to the project area .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance a. dock maintenance maintain the docks to the satisfaction of the engineer .
follow these guidelines num .
immediately replace repair or strengthen defective unduly worn corroded deteriorated or otherwise unsatisfactory material at the engineers request .
note if repairs are not made promptly the engineer may make the repairs and have the costs deducted from the monies due the contractor .
num .
if the dock will not be removed as part of the work maintain it as directed by the engineer to keep it in serviceable condition for future use before moving off the project or relinquishing it to a subsequent contractor .
num .
when the dock was constructed for use on a previous project or contract assume responsibility for the dock and promptly restore and maintain it in a safe and satisfactory condition as directed by the engineer .
maintain the dock for the duration of the contract as directed by the engineer .
b. dock removal when the dock is no longer needed the engineer will direct in writing to remove it .
the salvaged material becomes the contractors property .
num measurement this work is not measured separately for payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this item will be paid for according to the plans proposal and the following a. construct maintain and remove dock after the dock is constructed satisfactorily num percent of the lump sum price bid will be included in the next monthly statement .
if the dock maintenance is satisfactory monthly increments of num percent of the lump sum price bid will be paid based on the percent complete of the contract .
when the dock is no longer required and has been removed the remaining num percent of the lump sum price bid will be included in the next monthly statement .
each dock complete in place and accepted suitably maintained until no longer needed and satisfactorily removed will be paid for at the lump sum price bid which is full compensation for the item .
section numdocks num b. construct and maintain dock after the dock is constructed satisfactorily num percent of the lump sum price bid will be paid .
if the dock maintenance remains satisfactory the remaining num percent of the lump sum price bid will be paid in monthly increments based on the percent complete of the contract .
c. maintain and remove dock when the dock was constructed for use on a previous project or contract as defined in subsection num.a.num the contractor who satisfactorily maintains and removes the dock will be paid num percent of the lump sum price bid in monthly increments based on the percent complete of the contract .
when the dock is removed the remaining num percent of the lump sum price bid will be paid on the next monthly statement .
d. maintain docks when the contractor assumes satisfactory maintenance of the dock as provided in subsection num.a the lump sum price bid will be paid in monthly increments based on the percent complete of the contract .
payment will be made under item no .
num construct maintain and remove dock no.____ per lump sum item no .
num construct and maintain dock no._____ per lump sum item no .
num maintain and remove dock no._____ per lump sum item no .
num maintain dock no._____ per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num section numjacking or boring pipe num general description this work includes installing different sizes and types of pipe by jacking or boring through various materials .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numroadway excavation section numembankments section numstorm drain pipe pipearch culverts and side drain pipe section numiron pipe section nummiscellaneous pipe b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
section numjack or boring pipe num num submittals a .
handling method furnish for the engineers approval a plan showing the proposed method of handling including design for the jacking head jacking support or back stop arrangement and position of jacks pipe guides etc .
complete as assembled b. welding procedure before welding steel pipe or ductile iron pipe as casing and carrier submit to the state materials engineer a written welding procedure .
include joint details preheat temperature and electrodes to be used .
do not use welded steel pipe as a sanitary sewer carrier .
num materials use pipe types and sizes that conform to the plans and the following material section corrugated metal pipe num concrete pipe num steel pipe num ductile iron pipe plain ends num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction dispose of the excavated material from the following jacking or boring operations or use it as directed by the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
a. jacking follow these requirements when jacking num .
excavate suitable pits or trenches for the jacking operation and for placing the end joints of pipe when required .
securely sheet and brace the pits or trenches to prevent caving where necessary .
num .
when installing pipe under railroads highways streets or other facilities by jacking or boring perform construction and prevent section numjack or boring pipe num interfering with the facility operation weakening the roadbed or structure num .
to force the pipe through the roadbed use a jack with a head constructed to apply uniform pressure around the ring of the pipe .
num .
set the pipe to be jacked on guides braced together to properly support the pipe section and to direct it to the proper line and grade .
num .
excavate the roadbed as follows a. excavate roadbed material just ahead of the pipe .
b .
remove the excavated material through the pipe .
c. ensure that the excavation diameter conforms to the outside diameter and circumference of the pipe as closely as possible .
num .
force the pipe through the roadbed into the excavated space .
num .
use an approved mix to pressure grout voids that develop during installation and that the engineer determines are detrimental to the work .
num .
ensure that the excavation does not extend beyond the pipe more than num ft. num mm .
decrease the distance at the engineers direction or if the character of the excavated material allows .
num .
jack the pipe from the low or downstream end .
the line and grade from the pipes final position established by the engineer may vary no more than two percent in lateral alignment and one percent in vertical grade .
ensure that the final grade of the flow line is in the direction indicated on the plans .
num .
use a cutting edge around the head end .
extend it a short distance beyond the pipe end with inside angles or lugs to keep the cutting edge from slipping back into the pipe .
num .
once the pipe jacking has begun proceed with the operation without interruption to prevent the pipe from becoming firmly set in the embankment .
num .
remove and replace pipe damaged in jacking operations at no additional expense to the department .
num .
after completing the jacking immediately backfill the excavated pits or trenches .
b. boring proceed with the boring from a pit provided for boring equipment and workmen .
complete these steps num .
excavate for pits and shoring installation as outlined above .
num .
locate the pit at the engineers approval .
num .
bore the holes mechanically using a pilot hole approximately num in .
num mm in diameter that is bored the entire length of the installation .
a .
check the pilot hole for line and grade on the opposite end of the bore from the work pit .
b .
use the pilot hole to serve as the center line of the larger diameter hole to be bored .
num .
place excavated material near the top of the working pit and dispose of it as required .
use water or other fluids with the boring operation to lubricate the cuttings .
do not perform jetting .
num .
in unconsolidated soil formations use a gelforming collodial drilling fluid with at least num percent of high grade carefully processed bentonite to consolidate excavated material seal the walls of the hole and lubricate subsequent removal of material and immediate pipe installation .
num .
ensure that the diameter of the excavation conforms to the outside diameter of the pipe as closely as possible .
num .
see subsection num.a jacking for the allowable variation from line and grade .
num .
use an approved mix to pressure grout voids that develop during the installation operation and that the engineer determines are detrimental to the work .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
section numjack or boring pipe num num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement pipe installed by jacking or boring is measured by the linear foot meter of pipe complete in place .
measurement is made between the ends of the pipe along the control axis as installed .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment work performed and materials furnished as prescribed by this item and measured as provided above will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter for jacking and boring of the pipe type size and class specified .
payment is full compensation for furnishing the pipe and the incidentals to complete the item .
excavation will not be paid for separately but will conform to section num and section num .
payment will be made under item no .
num jack or bore pipe type class size per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numpermanent anchored walls num general description this work includes furnishing materials labor tools equipment and other incidental items to design detail and construct an anchored wall .
this specification applies to any contractorproposed alternate design of departmentfurnished plans .
num definitions anchorsynonymous with the terms tieback or tiedown .
the term anchored wall includes the following items anchors soldier piles lagging facing drainage num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures section numreinforcement steel section numreinforcement and tensioning steel section numpermanent anchored walls num b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals a .
proof of ability submit the following proof of ability or ability of the subcontractor when requested by the department to design or construct anchored walls evidence of successfully completing at least num projects similar in concept and scope to the proposed wall .
resumes of foremen anchor testing personnel and drilling operators to be employed on this project .
show the type length and number of ground anchors each has installed or tested within the past num years .
evidence of experience in anchor testing .
persons performing anchor testing must prove experience by performing sample tests supervised by the engineer .
the department is the sole judge of the qualifications of the foreman drilling operator and testing personnel .
do not begin wall construction until the engineer has approved proof of ability .
b .
design criteria for alternate design if the department receives more than num submittals of the plans and calculations for review the contractor will be assessed num per hour of engineering time for reviews in excess of the num submittals .
c. construction drawings and design notes if a contractorproposed alternate anchored wall is a part of the low bid submit construction drawings and design notes within num days of the date of award of the contract .
the design engineer shall prepare and stamp the submission .
include design notes and reproducible drawings in the submission concerning the following details dimensions and schedules of reinforcing steel including dowels or studs for attaching the facing to the tied back wall details of the anchors and soldier piling including spacing and size of piles and spacing and angle of anchor installation detailed plans for anchor proof and performance testing that show loading and measuring devices used and procedures followed d. wall final plans and calculations submit final wall plans and calculations to the department for review and approval before beginning construction on the wall the time required for plan and calculation preparation and review will be charged to the allowable contract time .
the department has num days for plan and calculation review per item after receiving the structure calculations and drawings .
new submittals from the contractor showing corrections from the departments review or changes to ease construction or to correct field errors have a numday review .
the department is the sole judge of information adequacy .
the departments review and acceptance of the final plans and construction methods does not relieve the contractor from successfully completing the work .
time extensions are not granted for contractor delays from untimely submissions and insufficient information .
e. admixture literature before using an admixture submit to the engineer the manufacturers literature .
indicate the admixture type and the manufacturers recommendations for mixing the admixtures with grout .
section numpermanent anchored walls num f. structural steel submit to the engineer the mill test reports for each heat or lot of prestressing material used to fabricate tendons .
num materials a .
concrete use concrete that conforms to section num .
b .
reinforcing steel use reinforcing steel that conforms to section num .
c. structural steel use structural steel as follows num .
use prestressing bars made of continuously threaded fulllength steel that conforms to astm designation a num type ii .
do not use couplers .
ensure material requirements coating application and epoxy coating sampling and testing conform to section num .
num .
use fulllength prestressing strands and wires according to section num .
d. cement grout produce cement grout using portland cement that conforms to aashto m num type i ii or iii and potable water .
use cement that is fresh and free of lumps and hydration .
follow these restrictions if using admixtures num .
do not use admixtures with chemicals that may harm the prestressing steel or cement .
num .
do not use expansive additives that cause air bubbles in the grout .
num .
if approved by the engineer use admixtures that will impart low water content flowability and minimum bleeding in the cement grout .
e. plastic for corrosion protection use polypropylene plastic that conforms to designation grade ii numd as per astm dnum .
ensure that the environmental stress crack resistance of the material prevents failures at num hours when tested by astm dnum .
f. corrosion inhibitor use corrosion inhibitor grease that conforms to the following test requirements drop point num f num c minimum by astm dnum flash point num f num c minimum by astm dnum water content num percent maximum by astm dnum rust grade num or better after num hours aggressive conditions rust grade num or better after num hours by astm bnum and astm dnum watersoluble ions must follow these requirements num .
oil separationnum percent by weight maximum at num f num c by fimsnumb method num num .
soak testnum percent salt fog at num f num c num mils num mm q panel type s. immerse panels in num percent salt solution and expose to num percent salt fogno emulsification after num hoursby astm bnum modified .
chlorides num ppm max by astm bnum nitrates num ppm max by astm dnum section numpermanent anchored walls num sulfates num ppm max by aphanumd num delivery storage and handling a .
protection systems protect prestressed rock and soil anchors against corrosion by properly storing fabricating and handling the tendon components before inserting them into the borehole .
avoid prolonged exposure of the tendon components to the elements and avoid mechanical or physical damage that reduces or impairs the components ability to resist adverse conditions during service .
tendon components will be rejected for heavy corrosion or pitting but not for a light coating of rust .
use the protection systems as follows num .
prestressing steel protect the entire length of prestressing steel from the anchor plate to the end of the tendon from corrosion .
a. encase the prestressing steel in a corrugated plastic tube .
b .
use cement grout to fill the voids between the tube and the prestressing steel and the tube and the soil .
fill the cement grout between the soil and the tube to at least num in num mm thick and extend the entire length of the tendon .
c. provide centralizers spaced a maximum of num ft num m centertocenter throughout the bond length .
do not use wood or material harmful to the tendon steel or corrugated plastic tubing as centralizers .
d. provide a smooth piece of plastic sheath to encapsulate the entire free length .
do not splice the sheath .
ensure that the sheath is at least num in num mm thick .
e. place a grease film compounded to lubricate and inhibit corrosion between the sheath and the prestressing steel in the entire free length .
ensure that the plastic sheath is seamless hot melt extruded polypropylene shrunk tightly onto the grease .
ensure that the sheath has a coefficient of friction with the steel of less than num and a wall thickness of at least num in .
num mm .
f. ensure that the sheath exerts a positive pressure on the grease .
ensure that the grease film is at least num in num mm thick .
minimize the void space between the sheath and the steel by filling visible void spaces with grease and sealing the bottom to keep the grout out .
num .
area underneath anchorage protect the area immediately behind the stressing anchorage .
a. weld a pipe sleeve to the bearing plate and seal the pipe sleeve to the anchor sheath at the other end of the sleeve .
b .
clean the pipe sleeve to remove dirt rust or other harmful material before inserting the tendon into the pipe sleeve .
c. if a seal is not provided at the lower end of the pipe sleeve during installation and grouting fill the lower end of the pipe sleeve with grout .
keep the pipe sleeve free of harmful material until the upper portion of the pipe sleeve and anchor head is filled with grout .
d. after stressing the anchors fill the void inside the sleeve and anchor head with antibleed expansion grout .
num .
anchorage encase the anchorage system head at each lift into a corrosion protective system before proceeding to the next lift .
install the protective system for each lift within num days after installing the anchors for that lift .
ensure that the anchorage system has a cover of at least num in num mm once the wall face is placed .
section numpermanent anchored walls num num construction requirements num personnel a .
contractor qualifications the contractor and subcontractor shall be experienced in designing or constructing permanently anchored walls .
provide at least one registered professional engineer licensed to perform work in the state of georgia and a supervising engineer for the project with at least num years of experience in constructing permanently anchored walls .
furnish verification of these qualifications to the engineer before beginning operations .
b .
design engineer the design engineer shall be registered as a professional engineer in the state of georgia have considerable knowledge and experience designing and constructing anchored walls be available at any time during the contract to discuss the design of the walls with the department c. registered professional engineer retain the services of a second registered professional engineer licensed to perform work in the state of georgia and prequalified by the department .
the engineer shall operate independently from the professional engineer of subsection num.a contractor qualifications .
this engineer will independently check the design calculations and plan details for the permanent anchored walls before submitting them to the department for review .
num equipment a. anchorage and hardware use anchorage and hardware suitable for the type of anchor tendon used .
ensure that anchorage and hardware are capable of the following developing num percent of the guaranteed specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the tendon when tested in the unbonded state and without failure of the tendon holding a load of prestressing steel that produces a stress of at least num percent of the guaranteed specified minimum ultimate tensile strength of the prestressing steel without exceeding the anticipated set and without causing anchorage or prestressing steel failure liftingoff detensioning or retensioning a tendon before secondary grouting to fill voids at the top of the pipe sleeve b. anchor nut and plate for bars use anchor nuts and plates for bars that have complementary spherical shapes at the contact areas .
num preparation before beginning the work survey the condition of the adjoining properties .
keep records and photograph settlement or cracking of adjacent structures that may become the subject of possible damage claims .
deliver the report to the department before beginning work at the site .
obtain a foundation investigation report from the geotechnical engineering bureau of the department to assist in evaluating existing conditions for design and construction .
section numpermanent anchored walls num num fabrication a. tendons fabricate the tendons according to the approved details .
num .
keep the tendons free of dirt rust or other harmful substances .
num .
use a plastic sheath that is a single piece without splices .
num .
install the sheath at the fabrication shop not in the field .
num .
before installation handle and store the tendons so as to avoid corrosion and physical damage .
tendons will be rejected for damage such as abrasions cuts nicks welds weld splatters or heavy corrosion and pitting .
replace the tendons at the contractors expense for material replacements or time delays .
num .
repair damaged coatings in the field at the engineers approval .
num construction a .
design criteria for alternate design the design criteria for a proposed alternate or design include num .
design rock anchors and soil anchors according to this specification .
num .
assume responsibility for lagging .
design the lagging with sound engineering principles .
num .
use reinforced concrete facing according to the latest aashto standard specifications for highway bridges including interims .
ensure that the facing structural thickness is at least num in num mm .
perform architectural facing treatment as shown on the department drawings .
num .
ensure that the concrete strength for a proposed alternate is at least num psi num mpa numday strength .
extend the facing num ft num mm below the gutterline or if applicable the ground line adjacent to the wall unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
num .
design soldier piles for shear bending and axial stresses according to the latest aashto design criteria .
use steel or concrete soldier piles with a steel yield strength at least num psi num mpa .
ensure that the concrete has a numday strength of at least num psi num mpa .
num .
design and install permanent drainage systems behind the wall .
connect drainage systems to the nearest drop inlet using pipe or free drainage through traffic barriers or other obstructions .
ensure that holes through traffic barriers or facing are no higher than num in num mm above the gutterline or ground line .
num .
have the wall design account for live load dead load and wind load from traffic barriers lights overhead signs or other appendage on top or adjacent to the wall .
figure num figure num and figure num indicate loading conditions for soldier piles lagging and anchors at critical stages of construction .
section numpermanent anchored walls num figure num load case num soldier piles and lagging cantilevered during excavation for top row of anchors surcharge h temporary bottom of excavation a kp a ka b ka h ka ha ka a b ha kp hb kp design pressure diagram shall include the effect of surcharge loading note the above diagrams apply for cohesionless soils .
for cohesive soils the effect of cohesion may be considered .
where lagging is in place active earth pressure acts over the entire wall surface .
below lagging active earth pressure acts on ly on the soldier pile width and passive earth pressure is generated as follows a in sands and saprolitic soils with blow counts of num or greater passive pressure is generated over num times the soldier pile width .
b in clays nonsaprolitic silts and saprolitic soils with blow counts of num or less passive pressure is generated over the wid th of the soldier pile .
vertical component of anchor force must be resisted by embedded length of soldier piles below assumed excavation .
is the soil unit weight in pounds per cubic foot .
section numpermanent anchored walls num figure num anchor force final grade y b kp y h b ka y h ka b h num y h ka surcharge see note figure num .
design pressure diagram shall include the effect of surcharge loading .
ka coefficient of active earth pressure kp coefficient of passive earth pressure g soil density load case ii intermediate excavations for subsequent anchor installations section numpermanent anchored walls num figure num num .
ensure that the wall is compatible with horizontal and vertical criteria indicated on the department plans .
num .
include the following on the design criteria for rock anchors a .
determine the tendon size to ensure that the anchor design load is no greater than num percent of the guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the tendon .
b .
ensure that the free stressing length is no less than num ft num m. c. estimate the bond length using the following equation lb pnum d tw where lb bond length not less than num ft num m p design load for the anchor d diameter of the drill hole tw bond stress in the interface between the rock and grout when determining the bond stress consider the critical nature of the anchor application rock property variations and installation procedures .
anchor force final grade b kp h b ka h ka b h num h ka surcharge see note figure num .
design pressure diagram shall include the effect of surcharge loading .
ka coefficient of active earth pressure kp coefficient of passive earth pressure g soil density load case ii final constructed condition assuming excavation for drainage facilities in bottom of lagging excavation for roadway drainage facilities a b front of wall section numpermanent anchored walls num num .
include the following in the design criteria for soil anchors a. analyze the anchor structure system to ensure a wellanchored structure .
b. analyze the overall earth mass stability and the assumed failure plane to ensure that the anchor bond length is started at least num ft num m beyond the failure plane .
consider the following in the analysis type of foundation nearness and susceptibility to movement of adjacent buildings see figure num .
interaction of anchor groups when the anchor centertocenter spacing is less than or equal to num times the bulb diameter figure num c. determine the tendon size so that the anchor design load does not exceed num percent of the guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the tendon .
d. ensure that the free stressing length is at least num ft. num m. e. use the existing theoretical and empirical methods only to predict anchor capacity for preliminary design estimates .
verify the final anchor capacity by field testing each anchor .
num .
retain a second registered professional engineer to operate independently from the design engineer professional engineer of subsection num.b .
have this engineer independently check the design calculations and plan details of the permanent anchored walls before submitting them to the department for review .
b .
ground movements and load transfer instruments the department may install devices to monitor ground movements and load transfers during and after construction .
the department will schedule installation to minimize interference with the contractors operations .
cooperate with the instrumentation installers .
anticipate delays of two to four hours per instrumented anchor .
although the instrumentation specialist maintains the instruments assume responsibility for damage to the instruments connections or readouts from operations .
replace and install damaged equipment at the departments approval and at the contractors expense .
section numpermanent anchored walls num c. rock anchors num .
when required on the plan or by the engineer use a prestressed rock anchor made of highstrength steel tendon fitted with a stressing anchorage at one end and a way to transfer force to the grout and rock on the other end .
num .
insert the rock anchor tendon into a prepared hole of suitable length and diameter fixed to the rock and stressed to a specified force .
the basic components of a prestressed rock anchor are as listed below a. prestressing steel may be single or multiple wires strands or bars .
the rock anchor length is composed of these two parts bond length socketthe portion of the anchor that transmits the force to the surrounding rock free length stressing lengththe portion of the anchor free to elongate elastically during stressing b .
the stressing anchorage is the device that permits the stressing and anchoring of the prestressing steel under load .
c. the fixed anchorage is a mechanism opposite the stressing anchorage on the tendon that transfers the induced force to the surrounding grout or rock .
deformed bars and strand tendons do not have fixed anchorages since the anchor load is transferred to the grout by bond .
d. provide grout vent pipes and miscellaneous appurtenances to inject the anchor grout .
pump grout through the drill casing or rods .
d. rock anchor installation install the rock anchors as follows num .
before installation visit the site to observe existing conditions that may affect the work or design if applicable and to review the geotechnical data available for the project .
num .
drive or drill the holes for the anchors by core drilling rotary drilling auger drilling or percussion drilling .
if using water in the drilling operation dispose of the water to minimize wall erosion .
repair water erosion damage to the site at no cost to the department .
num .
if the hole will not stand open install casing to maintain a clean and open hole .
ensure that the hole diameter is at least num in num mm if no pressure grouting is used .
pressure grouting is grouting with a pressure greater than num psi num kpa .
num .
ensure that the drill bit diameter is not less than num in num mm smaller than the specified hole diameter .
num .
start anchor holes within an angle tolerance of num to num degrees from the inclination specified on the approved design plans .
do not allow holes to deviate from a straight line by more than num to num in .
num to num mm in num ft. num m. do not allow holes to extend outside the rightofway limits .
thoroughly clean holes of rock dust rock chips grease or other material before inserting the tendon .
num .
install the tendon in the casing or in a hole drilled for the anchor .
ensure that the tendons corrosion protection is not damaged during handling or installation .
num .
install the tendon in the bond length to achieve at least num in num mm of grout cover .
degrease the bond length of strands or wires before installing by using acetone mek or mibk .
do not leave residue on the tendon .
use other substances only after the departments approval .
include the costs of cleaning tendons in the price bid for contract items .
num .
if using multielement tendons without a fixed anchorage at the lower end adequately space the tendon elements to achieve proper grout coverage .
note do not use anchors to ground electric equipment and do not subject anchor tendons to sharp bends .
num .
provide centralizers spaced a maximum of num ft num m center to center throughout the bond length .
do not use wood spacers or other material harmful to the tendon steel or sheathing .
num .
inject the grout at the lowest point of the anchor and place over the entire anchor length .
a .
ensure that the grouting equipment can continuously mix and produce lumpfree grout .
section numpermanent anchored walls num equip the grout pump nozzle with a grout pressure gauge capable of measuring pressure of at least num psi num kpa or twice the actual pressure used .
b .
base the material proportions used in the grout on grout tests made before beginning the grouting .
or select the proportions based on prior documented experience with similar materials and equipment under comparable field conditions .
c. use the minimum water content necessary for proper placement and do not exceed a watercement ratio of num .
do not leave grout in the mixer longer than num minutes .
only fill voids at the top of the free length with grout after final lockoff .
num .
after grouting do not disturb the tendon until the grout has reached a cube strength of num psi num mpa .
keep the mouth of the hole clean after grouting .
record the following data in a project field book during the grouting operation type of mixer watercement ratio type of additives grout pressure type cement test sample strengths before stressing volume of grout placed in bond and free lengths num .
if using pressure grouting choose whether to perform a watertightness test .
however if injecting grout with a pressure of num psi num kpa or less always perform a watertightness test .
perform the test as follows a .
fill the entire hole in the rock with water and subject it to a pressure of num psi num kpa in excess of the hydrostatic head as measured at the top of the hole .
b .
if after num minutes the leakage rate from the hole exceeds num gal per inch diameter per foot of depth per minute num ml per num mm diameter per meter of depth per minute consolidate grout redrill and retest the hole .
if the second watertightness test fails repeat the entire process .
c. during the tests observe holes adjacent to the hole being tested for watertightness to detect and seal interhole connections .
d. if finding artesian or flowing water in the drilled hole maintain the pressure on the consolidation grout until the grout has initially set .
e. cutting of tendon protrusions after the engineer accepts an anchor the portion of the anchored tendon protruding over the anchor may be cut if it is not required for use in retesting .
cut the tendon according to the tendon manufacturers recommendations as approved by the engineer .
do not damage the tendon anchor .
f. redesign if the anchors fail during performance tests or proof tests modify the design or construction tests and procedures .
the design is subject to department review .
these modifications may include reducing the anchor design load by increasing the number of anchors increasing the grout pressure requiring postgrouting or increasing the bond length modify the design or construction procedures install the redesigned anchors in the wall and test as previously defined at no cost to the department .
anchors that fail the performance or proof tests may be incorporated in the wall .
propose a reduced design load and retest as noted above .
the department will determine acceptance of such anchors .
section numpermanent anchored walls num g. soil anchors a prestressed soil anchor is a highstrength steel tendon fitted with a stressing anchor at one end and an anchor device that transfers force to the soil on the other end .
these anchors are used in clay silt sand or gravel and are inserted in a prepared hole that is drilled or driven into the ground .
the following are the two soil anchors considered for use friction typerely on friction between the drilled borehole walls anchor groutrely on an enlarged pressuregrouted bulb or an underreamed bulb to provide resistance to pull out test the soil anchors after placing the anchor grout and after the curing period .
the basic components of the soil anchor are identical to the rock anchor as described previously .
for installation see subsection num.d rock anchor installation except watertightness tests are not required .
test and stress soil anchors according to num.a anchor testing and stressing except that num of the anchors remaining after the initial testing shall be performance tested .
h. cutting of tendon protrusions see subsection num.e cutting of tendon protrusions .
i. redesign see subsection num.f redesign .
num quality acceptance a. anchor testing and stressing perform testing and stressing according to this subsection .
test each anchor to ensure that the maximum test load does not exceed num percent of the guaranteed ultimate tensile strength of the tendon .
performance test the first num anchors installed of each design load capacity and num to num percent of the remaining anchors the engineer will choose the locations .
proof test the remaining anchors .
num .
performance test by incrementally loading and unloading the anchor according to the following schedule .
cycle load num al al alignment load nump al num nump nump al num nump nump nump al num nump section numpermanent anchored walls num cycle load nump nump nump al num nump nump nump nump nump a l num nump nump nump nump nump nump test conditionshold for at least num mins .
num .
record the tendon movement at each increment to the nearest num in num mm referring to an independent fixed reference point .
num .
monitor the jack load with the production gauge and load cell calibrated as a set .
num .
adjust to a transfer load of nump .
actual lockoff loads may be somewhat higher to account for seating losses .
num .
to prevent misalignment of testing equipment maintain an alignment load al of at least nump .
num .
hold the load at each increment long enough to obtain the movement reading .
submit the loading and unloading rates tons megagrams per minute for approval .
each load must be applied in less than num seconds after starting the jack pump .
num .
perform the creep test by holding the nump load for num minutes while maintaining the load constant .
record the anchor movement total movement referenced to a fixed point at num seconds num num num num num num num num num num num num and num minutes .
begin the observation time when the jack begins to load the anchor from nump to the test load .
num .
if performance tests indicate that the loaded substrata is sensitive to creep maintain the load for an additional num minutes and record the movements at num num num num num num num num num num and num minutes .
num .
have the engineer review the performance tests to determine if the anchor is acceptable .
an anchor is acceptable if the total movement obtained exceeds num percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the free length and is less than the theoretical elastic elongation of the total of the free length plus num percent of the bond length .
the creep movement does not exceed num in num mm during num to numminute time increments regardless of tendon length and load .
if held for an additional num minutes creep movement does not exceed num in num mm from the num minute to the numminute time increment regardless of tendon length and load .
num .
perform proof tests as follows a. incrementally load the anchor according to the following schedule al section numpermanent anchored walls num nump nump nump nump nump nump test conditionshold for at least num minutes b .
at each increment record the movement of the tendon to the nearest num in num mm referring to an independent fixed reference point .
c. monitor the jack load with a production gauge that was calibrated with the load cell used for the performance test .
if required by the engineer monitor the jack load with the production gauge and load cell that were calibrated as a set .
d. adjust to a transfer load of nump .
actual lockoff load may be somewhat higher to account for seating losses .
e. to prevent misalignment of testing equipment maintain an alignment load al of at least nump .
f. perform the creep test by holding the nump load for num minutes while maintaining the load constant .
record the anchor movement total movement referenced to a fixed point at num seconds and num num num num num num and num minutes .
begin the observation time when the jack begins to load the anchor from nump to the test load .
g. if the movement between the numminute and numminute readings exceed num in num mm maintain the load for an additional num minutes .
record the movements at num num num num num and num minutes .
h. have the engineer review the proof tests to determine if the anchor is acceptable .
an anchor is acceptable if the total movement obtained exceeds num percent of the theoretical elastic elongation of the free length and is less than the theoretical elastic elongation of the total of the free length plus num percent of the bond length .
the creep movement does not exceed num in num mm during the numminute to numminute increment regardless of tendon length and load .
if held for an additional num minutes creep movement does not exceed num in num mm during the num to numminute increment regardless of tendon length and load .
num .
use the following test equipment a .
use a dial gauge that can measure elongation to the nearest num in .
num mm .
b .
use a production gauge with an accuracy of at least num to num percent of full scale with gradation no greater than num psi num kpa .
ensure that it has a nonparallax dial .
c. use test gauges with an accuracy of at least num of num percent of full scale with gradations no greater than num psi num kpa .
ensure that they have a nonparallax dial .
d. use a load cell with a resolution of at least num of num percent constructed to eliminate inaccuracy with uneven loading .
e. ensure that the jack gauges and load cell are calibrated as a set and independently .
check the pressure gauge and load cell calibration every week or when erratic results are found against a test gauge that is kept onsite for this purpose .
have the departments inspector witness these calibration checks .
perform installation testing and stressing in the department inspectors presence .
num .
perform liftoff tests when using anchors .
make a liftoff reading after transferring the load to the end anchorage and before removing the jack .
a .
determine the load within num percent of nump .
if the liftoff load is less than nump reset the end anchorage and make another liftoff reading .
b .
perform additional liftoff tests num days after the load was lockedoff in the anchor .
after performing num additional liftoff tests perform liftoff tests randomly .
the total number of tests will be performed on no more than num percent of the remaining anchors .
section numpermanent anchored walls num num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement permanently anchored walls are not measured separately for payment .
num limits in cases where additional wall area is required due to unforeseen foundation conditions or other reasons as approved by the engineer or if the wall area is decreased measurements based on plan dimensions will be used to adjust the lump sum price bid referenced under payment .
num payment payment for this work is made per lump sum .
payment includes costs for concrete reinforcing steel excavation backfill lagging piles anchors labor design and other materials and equipment .
payment also includes grouting drilling holes post tensioning performing and evaluating tests and submitting records of tests tools and other items to complete the work .
payment will be made under item num permanent anchored wall wall no.___ per lump sum num adjustments additional wall area required because of unforeseen foundation conditions or other reasons that are approved by the engineer will be paid for by increasing the lump sum price bid .
the increase in wall area will be multiplied by an adjustment price of num per square foot num per square meter .
if the wall area is decreased the lump sum price bid is adjusted proportionally to the decrease in wall area .
the adjustment price is the lump sum price bid divided by the original plan area of the wall .
no additional compensation will be made for additional material equipment design or other items to comply with the project specifications as a result of the departments review of an alternate design .
if based on a redesigned wall the bid price includes costs to comply with the requirements of this specification .
no additional compensation will be made for subsequent changes or deviations from the approved plan for additional material labor or equipment that may be required to comply with the acceptance criteria of this specification .
num section numpermanent anchored tiedown wall num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numpermanent anchored slurry diaphragm wall num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numtemporary barrier num general description this work provides for method num and method num temporary barrier systems .
num definitions method num method of furnishing placing maintaining moving and reusing where required and removing temporary barrier of the length and at the locations shown on the plans .
method num barrier is not suitable on bridges where the distance from the centerline of the barrier to the free edge of the bridge deck is less than num num num m measured normal to the barrier .
method num method of furnishing placing maintaining moving and reusing where required and removing manufactured barrier of the length and at the locations shown on the plans .
method num barrier is to be used on bridges and bridge approaches where the distance from the centerline of the barrier to the free edge of the bridge deck is less than num num num m measured normal to the barrier .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures section numsteel structures section numreinforcement steel b. referenced documents general provisions num through num national cooperative highway research program nchrp report num .
manual of assessing safety hardware mash .
num submittals method num submit certification from the manufacturer that the proposed barrier and its interconnecting hardware replicates an nchrpnum test level num approved barrier documented in an acceptance letter from fhwa or certification that the barrier meets the requirements of ga. std .
num .
submit all certification documents to the engineer prior to delivery of the barrier to the project .
method num submit certification from the manufacturer that the proposed barrier and its interconnecting hardware replicates an nchrpnum test level num approved barrier documented in an acceptance letter from fhwa and that the barrier does not deflect more than num num nummm under nchrp test conditions .
attach the acceptance letter stating that the proposed section numtemporary barrier num barrier is in compliance with nchrpnum test level num and that the barrier meets the deflection criteria to the certification .
submit all certification documents to the engineer prior to delivery of the barrier to the project .
num materials a .
method num supply a temporary barrier .
ensure that materials are in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations specifications and details or that the materials meet the requirements of the standard specifications and ga. std .
num .
b .
method num supply a temporary barrier .
ensure that materials used in the barrier are in accordance with the manufactures recommendations specifications and details .
num delivery storage and handling a .
general deliver store and handle barrier in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
repair damage to the barrier and its connections in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations at no additional cost to the department prior to acceptance for use by the department .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num num fabrication a .
method num perform barrier fabrication as detailed on ga. std .
num or in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
b .
method num perform barrier fabrication in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
num construction a .
general handle and transport units to prevent damage andor as recommended by the manufacturer .
when required use units at one or more sites on the same project .
ensure that the units are complete and in acceptable condition and located where designated on the plans or directed by the engineer before acceptance by the department .
use the plan quantity of barrier effectively to complete the work within the contract time .
if scheduling the work requires additional barrier furnish it at no additional expense to the department .
use only one section shape length and connection type in a single run of interconnected barrier .
section numtemporary barrier num interconnect all barrier sections within each single run of barrier .
b .
method num rigidly attach the barrier to the bridge deck and extend it off the bridge a transition distance indicated in the standard plans .
use nonshrink grout to fill all holes remaining in permanent bridge decks after barrier is removed .
num quality assurance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work will be measured per unit per linear foot meter of accepted barrier delivered and used .
the quantity shall be computed by multiplying the number of units by the length of each unit as per standard num or approved alternate subject to the maximum amount specified in subsection num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work is paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter of temporary barrier method numor barrier method num as designated complete in place .
payment includes fabrication use moving reuse and removal of the units .
no separate payment will be made for moving andor reusing units during the work or for using additional units beyond the plan quantity to facilitate the construction schedule .
no separate payment will be made for filling holes used to bolt method num barrier to bridge decks .
the first num percent of the contract unit price bid will be paid on the first monthly estimate following initial delivery installation and acceptance .
the remaining num percent will be paid when the project is complete or when the material is no longer needed and removed from the project whichever applies .
payment will be made under item no .
num temporary barrier method no .
num per linear foot meter item no .
num temporary barrier method no .
num per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numconcrete barrier num general description this work includes constructing portland cement concrete barriers according to these specifications and in conformance with the lines grades type and typical sections shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
this specification may require barriers suitable for medians or side installation on both roadways and bridges .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numreinforced concrete approach slabs section numconcrete structures section numjoint fillers and sealers section numreinforcement and tensioning steel b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt numa gdt numb gdt num gdt num gdt num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use materials that meet the requirements of the following specifications material section portland cement concrete class a or aa num steel bars for concrete reinforcement num joint fillers and sealers num ensure that barrier walls and parapets on bridges are class aa concrete unless otherwise specified on the plans .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section numconcrete barrier num num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a. subgrade preparation follow these guidelines for preparing the subgrade num .
finish the subgrade to the required lines grade and cross section shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
num .
compact the subgrade to num percent of the maximum laboratory density for the depth shown on the plans .
num .
determine the maximum laboratory dry density from representative samples of the material being compacted using gdt num gdt numa gdt numb or gdt num whichever is applicable .
num .
use gdt num gdt num or gdt num to determine the inplace density of the compacted subgrade .
b .
base preparation follow these requirements for preparing the base num .
place the base as shown on the plans and compact it to num percent of the maximum laboratory dry density .
num .
use gdt num to determine the maximum laboratory dry density from representative samples of the material being compacted .
use gdt num or gdt num to test inplace density of the base .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
formed or slip formed barrier ensure that the barriers are class a concrete as defined in section num and are constructed according to plan details .
num .
place the concrete using conventional forms or an approved selfpropelled extrusion machine .
when using forms give the barrier a type iii finish and cured according to section num .
num .
construct joints of the type and at the locations specified on the plans .
a .
when emergencies interrupt placement the engineer will decide whether to allow a construction joint and will direct where and how to construct the joint .
b .
joints may be sawed or formed .
if the joint is sawed within num hours of placement to at least num in num mm deep using a template immediately remove the following material material that may damage the adjacent concrete by blocking the sawed joint material that may prevent later operation or cleaning after the sawing operation is complete c. saw the joints through the footing .
num .
the outside vertical face of the side barrier or parapet may be battered as directed by the engineer .
radii as approved by the engineer may be used at intersecting surfaces of the barrier .
make approved requested changes at no cost to the department .
b. slipformed barriers when placing barriers using slipform methods follow these requirements num .
to place barriers use extrusion machines designed to place concrete barrier or parapet without using forms .
section numconcrete barrier num extrusion machines may be either crawler or rubber tired .
num .
conform the barrier or parapet to the established shape line grade and dimensions shown on the plans .
num .
obtain the proper density and cross section by forcing an approved concrete mix through a mold of the proper cross section .
num .
ensure that the extrusion machine consolidates the freshly placed concrete in one complete pass and that internal vibrators can consolidate the concrete along the faces of the forms and adjacent to joints .
perform this work to minimize hand finishing and to produce a dense and homogenous barrier free from voids and honeycomb .
c. finish use a steel trowel to repair or correct the concrete surface .
do not overfinish the surface .
keep hand finishing to a minimum .
correct the exposed surfaces that are not satisfactory to the engineer in color texture smoothness or patching .
d. curing cure as specified in subsection num.z cure concrete and as follows if an approved membraneforming curing compound is used .
num .
use a type num class b curing compound .
num .
uniformly spray the concrete surface with curing compound immediately after obtaining the surface finish .
applying protective surface treatment to the barrier or parapet surfaces is not required .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the barrier is measured for payment in linear feet meters of each accepted type shown on the plans .
the barrier is measured along the top of the various types .
side barriers are measured for payment in linear feet meters of each accepted type shown on the plans .
the barrier is measured along the top of the various types .
barriers on bridges are measured separately for payment as defined in subsection num.c .
barriers placed on approach slabs are measured for payment as defined in section num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work measured as specified above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter for each barrier type .
payment is full compensation for providing materials forms and equipment preparing subgrade and base and providing labor incidentals and direction to complete the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num concrete barrier type per linear foot meters item no .
num concrete side barrier type per linear foot meters section numconcrete barrier num num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numpneumatically applied concrete num general description this item includes manufacturing and pneumatically placing concrete at locations and to the dimensions shown on the plans .
follow the requirements of section num and section num for this work .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummiscellaneous concrete section numconcrete structures section numcoarse aggregate section numfine aggregate section numportland cement section numcuring agents section numjoint fillers and sealers section numreinforcement and tensioning steel section numwater b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
qpl num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use materials that meet the requirements of these specifications material section coarse aggregate class a or b stone num portland cement num fine aggregate size no .
num num water num preformed joint filler num section numpneumatically applied concrete num hot poured joint filler num elastomeric polymer type joint compound num welded steel wire for concrete reinforcement num curing agents num silicone joint sealer num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel have qualified machine nozzle and rebound operators prepare and apply pneumatically applied concrete under the supervision of qualified superintendents .
furnish documentation of personnel qualifications upon request .
num equipment use equipment in good operating condition to work on the project .
have all necessary equipment on the project prior to beginning application .
num preparation a .
earth foundation prepare earth foundations for application as follows num .
thoroughly compact and finish the area upon which the pneumatically applied concrete will be placed to the lines and grades shown on the plans .
num .
ensure that the foundation contains enough moisture to provide maximum density and to avoid absorbing water from the concrete .
ensure that the foundation does not contain free surface water .
b .
bonding foundation when bonding pneumatically applied concrete to a previously placed structure ensure that the surface is rough and clean .
num .
remove unsound or deteriorated concrete loose particles dust and dirt .
num .
thoroughly clean steel members by sand blasting loose rust scale or other deleterious material that would prevent or lessen the bond between concrete and steel .
num .
keep the bonding surface wet for at least one hour before applying the concrete .
remove any free water immediately before placing .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
earth foundation num .
use gauging wires to establish finish grade lines surface planes and the plan thickness .
num .
place joints side forms shooting strips weep holes and reinforcement according to plan details .
b .
bonding foundation num .
reinforce and form concrete according to plan details .
section numpneumatically applied concrete num num .
when sloping vertical or overhanging work surfaces require successive layers or thicknesses allow enough time between application of layers to permit an initial but not a final set .
when the initial set is developing clean the surface to remove laitance and to ensure bonding .
c. placing reinforcement place reinforcement if required as shown on the plans .
num .
when dowels or anchor bolts are specified securely fasten the reinforcing steel to them .
num .
lap the welded wire fabric at least num in num mm and firmly tie the full area of mesh or fabric in position with wire ties .
num .
place welded wire fabric around the top of slabcarrying beams and girders before pouring the slab and extend at least num in num mm below the slab .
locate the fabric to properly lap the web reinforcement .
num .
place the reinforcement at least num in num mm from the surface on which the concrete is to be placed .
ensure that there is at least num in num mm from the outside surface of the reinforcing to the finished surface of the concrete .
d. composition use pneumatically applied concrete composed of one part portland cement to three parts fine aggregate by volume .
thoroughly mix the dry ingredients before placing them into the applicator hopper .
the contractor may submit mix design proportions for approval from an approved producer qpl num who has the capability of producing transitmixed concrete .
num .
substitute a maximum of num percent by volume of no .
num stone for an equivalent amount of fine aggregate when approved by the engineer .
num .
discard material not used within one hour after combining cement and aggregates .
do not remix or temper the material .
e. transporting and placing when premixing the materials and transporting them to the job site follow the applicable requirements of section num and these guidelines num .
do not place pneumatically applied concrete under these conditions the ambient temperature is below num f num c. the subgrade is frozen .
wind velocity prevents homogenous and uniform application .
num .
place the approved mix by pneumatic pressure through a machine with the proper amount of water for hydration applied at the mixing nozzle .
num .
maintain water pressure in the delivery pipe approximately num psi num kpa above the air pressure in the machine .
num .
maintain a constant pressure of at least num psi num kpa in the placing machine when the applicator hose length is num ft num m or less .
increase the pressure at least num psi num kpa for each additional num ft num m of hose length or fraction thereof or for each num ft num m vertically that the nozzle is above the machine .
num .
when placing concrete on slopes pneumatically limit the height to num ft num m lifts measured along the slope .
num .
direct the applicator nozzle to minimize rebound .
maintain the nozzle velocity at a constant level and rate determined by the job conditions .
f. finishing after placing the concrete to the required depth and before the initial set screed the surface and check it with a num ft num m straightedge .
immediately correct irregularities in excess of num in .
in num ft. num mm in num m. section numpneumatically applied concrete num remove and replace loose areas of pneumatically applied concrete at the contractors expense .
before application protect the adjacent areas not to be covered and clean after application if necessary .
g. curing cure pneumatically applied concrete according to the applicable requirements of subsection num.z.num general curingsupplying additional moisture .
h. joints construct joints at locations indicated on the plans and as specified in section num .
slope construction joints to a clean edge of approximately num degrees .
before resuming the placing clean and moisten the joint .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement pneumatically applied concrete placed on slopes or plane areas are measured for payment by the square yard meter of accepted surface areas constructed to the neat lines indicated on the plans or as directed .
where pneumatically applied concrete is used for patching grouting plastering or buildups it is measured by the ton megagram of cement actually used .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment pneumatically applied concrete will be paid for at the contract price per square yard meter of paving or per ton megagram of cement as specified complete in place .
no separate payment will be made for reinforcing steel jointfilling materials cleanup or disposal of rebound .
payment will be made under item no .
num pneumatically applied concrete per square yard meter item no .
num pneumatically applied concrete per ton megagram of cement num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numsound barriers num general description this work includes furnishing and installing a sound barrier according to this specification and conforming to the locations dimensions lines and grades shown on the plans .
unless a specific type is required by the contract documents select one of the following barrier types .
type b interlock steel panels type c precast concrete panels section numsound barriers num type d treated timber panels type f glass reinforced thermoset composite structural panels type g precast autoclaved aerated concrete paac panels num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numclearing and grubbing rightofway section numroadway excavation section numborrow excavation section numembankments section numgrading complete section numconcrete structures section numpiling section numgrassing section numvine shrub and tree planting section nummanufacturing of prestressed concrete bridge members section numelastomeric bearing pads b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt numa gdt numb gdt num gdt num qpl num qpl num federal specification qqsnumc aashto astm m numm numm m numm numm m numm numm m numm numm a numm a numm a numm b num b num c num d num d num d num d num d num d num e num g num section numsound barriers num num submittals submit shop drawings to the engineer for review and approval .
prepare shop drawings for each sound barrier .
show all details necessary for field erection .
the minimum requirements are complete elevation view showing the top and bottom elevations the required wall envelope the roadway grade and ground line at the wall .
diameter and depth of caissons at each post post size complete plan view with dimensions stations and offset have the manufacturer certify to the department that a specimen of the proposed barrier meets or exceeds a minimum weighted sound transmission loss of num dba .
furnish test results for barrier material types except type c. the transmission or loss results must be based on the generalized truck spectrum when tested according to astm e num .
num materials ensure that other materials not listed herein meet the requirements of the appropriate specification to which they pertain .
a .
type b num .
interlocking steel panels use cold formed configured steel panels that meet these requirements use steel sheet conforming to astm a numm or astm a numm structural steel ss grade num class num with a minimum thickness of num inches num mm provides friction interlocking with adjacent panels has a malefemale rib that provides a friction interlock connection with adjacent panels or is joined adequately according to the manufacturers specifications provides sufficient friction interlock connection strength to support its own weight without using fasteners when connected to another panel and held in a vertical or horizontal position use a panel size and shape shown on the plans or an alternate approved by the engineer .
coat galvanize the panels with either a gnum znum weight of zinc according to astm a numm or an aznum azmnum weight of num aluminumzinc alloy according to astm a numm .
num .
protective color coating use one of the following coatings a .
system athe coating is polyvinylidene fluoride num percent resin minimum enamel pvfnum .
num apply the coating system including primer at a total minimum film thickness of num mil num mm per coated side .
num cure the polyvinylidene fluoride film to at least num mil num mm film thickness .
b .
system bthe coating is polyvinyl fluoride plastic film pvfnum and has a thickness of at least num mils num mm coated on both sides .
num have the coating applied at the factory to thoroughly cleaned and pretreated galvanized steel according to astm d num method f. num laminate the coating to the galvanized steel using heat and adhesive to form a uniform and durable coating pigmented to obtain optimum color performance .
num use a color from the federal standard color number indicated on the plans .
ensure that caulking is color pigmented to match the wall color specified .
num .
post use a post for steel walls with these features section numsound barriers num hot rolled shape conforming to aashto m numm numm gr numgr num hotdip galvanized by an approved galvanizer as listed on qplnum and in accordance with aashto m numm numm coating that weighs at least num ouncesftnum num gm² on all sides each post requires preinspection by the office of materials research as evidenced by a gdt stamp affixed near one end of each post num .
steel flashing and caps use flashing and caps for steel walls that are the same material and color coating as the panels .
fasten steel flashing and caps with selftapping screws .
ensure that anum screws are class num stainless steel and conform to federal specification qqsnumc or are cadmium coated according to astm b num .
num .
fasteners attach panels to posts using a powderactuated fastening system .
fasteners shall be stainless steel or shall be hotdip galvanized as per astm a num class c or shall have a mechanically deposited zinc coating as per astm b num class num .
b .
type c use precast concrete panels that meet these requirements class aa concrete section num reinforcing aashto m numm numm and m numm numm pilinggalvanized steel section num and aashto m numm numm elastomeric bearing pads section num use piling bolts and fittings that are hotdip galvanized when the barrier rests on another concrete structure .
c. type d use treated timber panels that meet these requirements type d.num see plan detail dnum type d.num see plan detail dnum class a concrete section num bolts and washers plan details pile plan details d. type f num .
structural plank .
use continuous glass fiber reinforced structural planks that meet these requirements are constructed of a durable uv resistant flame retardant thermosetting composite material are resistant to degradation from ozone hydrocarbons and freezethaw cycling match the federal standard color number indicated on the plans meet the following minimum mechanical properties property minimum value test method flexural modulus num psi num num mpa astm d num flexural strength num psi num mpa astm d num tensile strength num psi num mpa astm d num section numsound barriers num tensile modulus num psi num num mpa astm d num elongation num astm d num compressive strength num psi num mpa astm d num barcol hardness num astm d num specific gravity num astm d num num .
filler .
use either hollow structural planks or planks filled with a recycled tire rubber compound comprised of sorted and graded ground tire rubber num num inch num num mm .
num .
flashing and caps .
use flashing and caps of the same material and color as the panels .
num .
caulking .
use caulking that is color pigmented to match the wall color specified .
num .
posts .
use posts fabricated from hot rolled sheet conforming to astm a num a num m and hot dip galvanized in accordance with astm a numanumm except coating weight shall be a minimum of num ozftnum num gmnum on all sides .
num .
other materials .
use materials that meet the requirements of the appropriate section in the standard specifications to which they pertain .
e. type g num .
precast autoclaved aerated concrete paac wall units .
use paac wall units cast from a mixture of portland cement fine aggregate water gypsum lime and an expansion agent .
after setting and before hardening the paac is machine cut to the required size then steamcured under pressure in an autoclave .
use paac that meets the following physical requirements has a minimum average compressive strength of num psi num kpa when three specimens are tested in accordance with astm c num with no single specimen having a compressive strength of less than num psi num kpa .
has a maximum shrinkage of num when tested in accordance with astm c num has a dry bulk density between num num kgmnum and num lbftnum num kgmnumwhen tested in accordance with astm c num num .
reinforcing .
use reinforcing that conforms to aashto mnum or mnum .
num .
galvanized steel supports .
use supports that conform to drawing no .
hnum as shown on the plans with the distance between wall supports no greater than num feet num meters on center .
num .
welds .
use welds conforming to drawing no .
hnum as shown on the plans .
num .
coatings .
use only approved coating systems on all exposed surfaces including steel supports .
use the same topcoat color on both the paac panels and the steel supports .
submit independent laboratory test results for num hours of accelerated weathering in accordance with astm g num .
submit results that show ratings of at least num in the following categories color change chalking checking cracking blistering flaking and rusting .
submit a certification stating that the paac topcoat is graffiti resistant .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
section numsound barriers num num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction perform the following work according to the specifications a .
clearing and grubbing when necessary clear and grub according to section num as applicable .
b. excavation borrow embankment perform excavation borrow and embankment according to section num section num section num or section num .
the scope and dimensions of the work are shown on the plans .
c. grassing perform grassing according to section num as specified on the plans .
d. vine shrub and tree planting plant vine shrub and trees according to section num as specified on the plans .
e. miscellaneous construction items when items are shown on the plans but are not covered in this specification the plans and standard specifications govern the work .
f. walls follow these requirements to construct each type of wall num .
type b wall install steel noise barrier walls according to the manufacturers recommendations and plan details .
repair cut scratched or marred surfaces according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
type c wall when using precast concrete panels a .
cast them in a precasting facility approved by the engineer .
b .
have the engineer determine panel acceptability from the compressive strength of cylinders made and cured the same as the panels and from inspection during manufacture .
have the panel manufacturer furnish facilities and assistance to sample and test quickly and satisfactorily .
c. cast the panels on a steel surface with steel side forms .
d. place concrete in each panel without interruption .
consolidate the concrete using vibrators supplemented by hand tamping and rodding to force the concrete into the corners of the forms to eliminate stone pockets cleavage planes and air bubbles .
e. give the panels a type iiirubbed finish on the upper surface as cast according to subsection num.ab finish concrete .
when an architectural finish is specified for one side of the barrier provide a similar finish to the opposite side unless noted otherwise in the plans .
f. cure the panels as specified in subsection num.z.num general curingsupplying additional moisture wet cure long enough for the concrete to develop the specified compressive strength .
section numsound barriers num num ensure that the curing period is at least num hours under normal summer temperature conditions .
in colder weather extend the curing period as directed by the engineer num protect the panels from freezing from the time the concrete is placed until curing is complete .
num instead of the wet cure method steam cure the panels as specified in subsection num.b.num.g.num if desired .
g. mark each panel with the date cast and the inspectors approval stamp .
note even with the inspectors acceptance at the precast yard panels can still be rejected at the erection point if they are damaged .
h. erect the panels according to plan details and dimensions .
place bearing pads as shown in the plans and tighten the restraining bolts .
i .
after erection is complete and before final acceptance of the project clean the sound barrier to remove dirt or stains .
num .
type d wall the plans shall designate the correct type of d wall type d.num or type d.num .. a .
type d.num wall construct this wall of tongue and groove panels placed in a horizontal configuration supported by vertical posts set on concrete piers .
follow the plan details for information on sizes timber treatment and erection .
b .
type d.num wall construct this wall of double wood panels staggered to provide a numwidth overlap .
the supports are posts set in a concrete footing .
follow the plans for full details of materials and erection sizes and timber treatment .
num .
type f wall install in accordance with manufacturers recommendations and plan details .
do not install walls with burns discolorations cracks or other objectionable marks that would adversely affect the performance of the system .
num .
type g wall a .
cast the paac panels in a precasting facility approved by the engineer .
b .
have the engineer determine panel acceptability from the compressive strength of cylinders made and cured the same as the panels and from inspection during manufacture .
have the panel manufacturer furnish facilities and assistance to sample and test quickly and satisfactorily .
c. cast the panels on a steel surface with steel side forms .
when an architectural finish is specified for one side of the barrier provide a similar finish to the opposite side unless noted otherwise in the plans .
d. place concrete in each panel without interruption .
consolidate the concrete using vibrators supplemented by hand tamping and rodding to force the concrete into the corners of the forms to eliminate stone pockets cleavage planes and air bubbles .
e. after machine cutting to the required size cure the paac units by highpressure steam autoclaving so that the units meet the physical requirements of subsection num.g.num .
f. mark each panel with the date cast and the inspectors approval stamp .
note even with the inspectors acceptance at the precast yard panels can still be rejected at the erection point if they are damaged .
g. erect the panels according to plan details and dimensions .
h. after erection is complete and before final acceptance of the project clean the sound barrier to remove dirt or stains .
i .
use coatings that are approved by the laboratory .
num paac panels .
apply the coating with a spongetextured roller in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
cover all exposed galvanized steel surfaces for protection from splattering .
apply the section numsound barriers num coating at a minimum thickness of num dry mils num mm .
apply the coating only when the ambient temperature is greater than num of num oc and rising .
do not apply any coating during rainfall or when rainfall is forecast overnight .
num galvanized steel supports .
apply a corrosion resistant coating by brush roller or airless spray in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
protect the adjacent paac surfaces from overspray .
apply the coating at a minimum thickness of num dry mils num mm .
use a color that matches the paac final topcoat color .
apply the coating only when the ambient temperature and relative humidity fall within the limits stated by the manufacturer .
num .
all walls before beginning earthwork on the project stake the noise barriers in the field and establish the final groundline elevations at the barrier walls .
furnish these elevations to the supplier who will develop the shop plans including a complete elevation view of each barrier indicating top and bottom elevations and the roadway grade .
a .
protect the final ground elevations established in the field for the duration of the project .
do not adjust them without the engineers approval .
b .
install sound barriers according to the plans and shop drawings approved by the engineer .
c. secure joints and connections to be structurally sound with no visible openings for sound transmission .
ensure that vibration from metal barriers is not a secondary source of noise transmission .
d. repair marred chipped scratched or spalled barrier areas according to the manufacturers recommendations and as directed by the engineer at the contractors expense .
e. to substitute welded for fixedbolt connections or vice versa on metal barriers meet these conditions submit load calculations for the specific connection to be modified .
use a safety factor of at least num. f. place trench backfill for sound barrier construction according to section num .
use select material to backfill .
if the engineer believes the trench is too narrow for compaction backfill the trench excavation with concrete grout to the engineers satisfaction .
no additional compensation will be made for the concrete grout .
g. dispose of excess excavation to the engineers satisfaction .
h. keep rightofway fence in place that is scheduled to be salvaged until the barrier is constructed or as long as the engineer deems practical .
i .
after erecting the barrier leave the disturbed area in a finished condition at the engineers direction and plant grass or sod .
j .
payment for establishing grass is described in subsection num.c grassing .
k. ensure that the barrier meets these tolerances num vertical alignment for barriers and posts is num in num mm for barrier heights to num ft num m num in num mm for barrier heights to num ft num m num in num mm for barrier heights to num ft num m num horizontal alignment for barriers is close to that shown on roadway plans .
num post spacings are within num in num mm of their intended location .
l. for sound barriers built on top of earth berms construct the berms of earthwork fill material and compact to num of the maximum density as determined by gdt num gdt numa gdt numb or gdt num as applicable .
determine inplace density according to gdt num gdt num or gdt num as applicable .
g. graffitiproof coating this work includes providing graffitiproof coating on both faces of concrete and masonry barriers from the ground line to the top of the wall .
num .
materials .
use materials as noted on qpl num .
section numsound barriers num num .
delivery and storage .
ensure that the materials are delivered in manufacturers original containers with labels intact .
store the materials out of the weather in a single location and as specified by the manufacturer .
num .
job conditions .
protect the coating from the weather and work conditions as follows a .
apply the graffitiproof coating in weather recommended by the manufacturer .
b .
mask cover or otherwise protect finished adjacent surfaces from damage that work in this section could cause .
c. protect finished coatings from staining marring and damages from other trades .
num .
quality criteria .
use materials that are products of one manufacturer .
use application equipment recommended or approved by the coating manufacturer for use on this project .
use equipment in good operating condition .
num .
application .
ensure that the moisture content of surfaces to receive coating are within the limits recommended by the coating manufacturer .
a .
apply coating after applying a type iii finish of concrete or after thoroughly cleaning the concrete block .
b .
apply coating at rate of num gal per num to num ft² num l per num to num m² .
apply three coats using a lowpressure spray .
c. begin the coating application at the uppermost surfaces and work down .
d. remove loose particles dirt grease oil and other foreign materials following application .
num quality acceptance the panels are subject to rejection if they fail to meet the requirements specified above .
the following defects are also cause for rejection defects from imperfect mixing and casting honeycombed or open texture exposed reinforcement failure to meet the required num psi num mpa compressive strength at num days num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a .
clearing and grubbing clearing and grubbing will not be measured separately for payment .
b. excavation borrow and embankment excavation borrow and embankment are measured according to section num section num section num or section num as applicable .
the scope and dimensions of the work are as shown on the plans .
c. grassing grassing is not measured separately for payment unless shown on the plans as a payment item .
in this case the work is measured according to the requirements of section num for the type of grassing required .
d. vine shrub and tree planting vine shrub and tree planting shown on the plans is measured according to section num .
e. items not covered in this specification items shown on the plans but not covered in this specification are measured for payment according to the applicable portions of the specifications .
section numsound barriers num f. walls num .
type b wall steel wall is measured in square feet meters of wall surface installed before backfilling complete in place according to subsection num measurement and quantities .
posts flashing caps concrete post embedment or other incidental items required for construction are not measured separately .
num .
type c wall precast concrete sound barriers are measured in square feet meters of wall surface before backfilling including pile flanges complete in place and accepted .
no separate measurement is made for pile anchor bolts plates connections neoprene bearing pads connecting bolts or other sound barrier components .
num .
type d wall treated timber walls are measured in square feet meters of wall surface installed before backfilling .
no separate measurement is made for posts caps foundations footings hardware timber treatment pile or cover boards .
num .
type f wall glass reinforced thermoset composite structural panel walls are measured in square feet meters of wall surface installed before backfilling .
no separate measurement is made for posts top caps bottom caps side caps flashing strip seals mounting brackets and hardware concrete post embedment or other incidental items required for construction .
num .
type g wall precast autoclaved aerated concrete walls are measured in square feet meters of wall surface installed before backfilling .
no separate measurement is made for steel supports or other incidental items required for construction .
num .
all walls only authorized changes required to adjust plan ground elevations and other authorized changes will be measured .
payment will be made based on plan quantity unless changes are authorized .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a .
clearing and grubbing the cost of clearing and grubbing is included in the lump sum item for the project .
when clearing and grubbing is not shown as a payment item the cost is included in the overall contract price for the work covered in this specification .
b. unclassified excavation and borrow unclassified excavation and borrow will be paid for and included in the normal excavation and borrow for the project unless shown on the plans as a separate payment item for sound barriers .
in that case payment will be made under section num section num section num or section num as applicable .
c. grassing grassing will be paid for and is included in the normal grassing for the project according to section num unless shown on the plans to be included in the price bid for sound barriers .
d. vine shrub and tree planting when the plans state that this item will be paid for payment will be made under section num .
section numsound barriers num e. items not covered by this specification items shown on the plans to be paid for but are not covered by this specification will be paid for according to the applicable portions of the specifications .
f. walls unless a specific wall type is specified in the contract identify in the proposal which wall type will be used .
num .
type b wall steel wall will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square foot meter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing materials providing post and post embedment and providing labor equipment and incidentals to complete the work .
num .
type c wall precast concrete sound barrier will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square foot meter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials including piling and attachments and for erecting the sound barrier including graffitiproof coating .
num .
type d wall treated timber wall will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square foot meter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials including concrete and steel and for erecting the sound barrier .
num .
type f wall glass reinforced thermoset panel walls will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square foot meter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing materials including post and post embedment and for erecting the sound barrier .
num .
type g wall precast autoclaved aerated concrete sound barrier will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per square foot meter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials including steel supports and for erecting the sound barrier including graffitiproof coating additional wall payment criteria walls will be paid at the plan quantity plus or minus any authorized changes or adjustments due to ground line elevation varying from plan .
payment will be made under item no .
num sound barrier type ___ per square foot meter .
item no .
num sound barrier per square foot meter .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numvisual barrier num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls num general description this specification covers the required materials fabrication construction measurement and payment for mechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls .
the scope of work of wall erection includes grading for wall construction compacting the wall foundation general and local dewatering as necessary constructing leveling pads erecting precast panels placing soil reinforcing devices placing and compacting special embankment backfill within the reinforced volume furnishing and placing precast or castinplace concrete coping and castinplace or precast traffic barrier on top of the wall if shown on the plans the wall foundation includes areas underlying the leveling pad and the reinforced volume .
ensure that items used to construct the mechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls but not mentioned in this specification conform to the applicable sections of the standard specifications .
ensure that the architectural treatment of the precast panels is according to the plan details .
for patented mechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls obtain panels soil reinforcing devices connecting devices joint materials attachments and expertise to construct the walls .
num definitions wall foundationthe area underlying the leveling pad and the reinforced volume .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numembankments section numconcrete structures section numreinforcement steel section numepoxy coated steel reinforcement section numpainting structures section numrepair of galvanized coatings section numgeogrid section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls num section numbackfill materials section numpipe appurtenances section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members section num epoxy coated reinforcement strips section numpaint b. referenced documents aashto m num aashto t num astm a num astm a numa numm astm a numa numm astm a num astm a num astm a num astm a numm astm a num astm a numa numm astm a num astm a numm astm b num astm d num astm f num astm f numm gdt num gdt numa gdt numb gdt num gdt num qpl num qpl num standard operating procedure num precastprestressed concrete bridge members num aashto specifications for highway bridges section num elastomeric bearings num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials a .
soil reinforcing devices num .
reinforcing and tie strips section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls num use tie strips shopfabricated of hot rolled steel that conform to the minimum requirements of astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num .
hot roll reinforcing strips from bars to the required shape and dimensions .
their physical and mechanical properties shall conform to astm a num grade num astm a numm grade num .
num .
soil reinforcing mesh use soil reinforcing mesh shopfabricated of cold drawn steel conforming to the minimum requirements of astm a num .
num .
backfill stabilizing geogrid use backfill stabilizing geogrid that conforms to the requirements of section num .
b .
connecting devices num .
fasteners use highstrength bolts and nuts that are hexagonal cap screw and that conform to astm a numa numm galvanized .
ensure that they are of the diameter shown in the plansnum in num mm long with num in num mm thread length .
use galvanized washers with galvanizing fastener elements conforming to astm a numa numm .
num .
steel strap connectors use materials that conform to the following standards material conforms to the requirements of steel strap connection bar and plate astm a num grade num steel astm a num grade num bolts astm a num astm a numm nuts astm a num washers astm f num astm f numm coatings for connecting devices as specified in the subsection below num .
attachments a .
use clevis loops and mesh loops fabricated of cold drawn steel wire that conforms to astm a num and are welded according to astm a num .
ensure that they develop a stress of at least num times the steels yield strength .
use loops galvanized according to astm a numa numm class b num or astm a numa numm .
b .
use a connector bar that is fabricated of cold drawn steel wire that conforms to astm a num and is galvanized according to astm a numanumm .
num .
geogrid connection bar use a connection bar num inch num mm by num inches num mm thick by roll width plus num inches meeting the same physical and chemical properties as the backfill stabilizing geogrid .
c. concrete use class aa concrete for precast panels except ensure that the numday strength is at least num psi num mpa .
except as indicated in the approved mix design admixtures will not be allowed .
do not use admixtures containing chlorides .
use class a concrete for leveling pads traffic barriers and coping .
d. joint fillers treat joints between panels as listed in this subsection .
in flood plains or other intermittently inundated areas cover the different joint types as follows joint type action joints between panels from an elevation num ft num m above the numyear flood elevation to the bottom of cover on the back side of the wall with a woven plastic filter fabric sheet .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls num joint type action the wall joints between panels from num ft num m above the numyear high water elevation to the top of the wall cover on the back side of the wall with a woven or nonwoven plastic filter fabric sheet .
all other locations cover joints between panels with a woven or nonwoven plastic filter fabric sheet place in horizontal joints between panels two num inch by num inch by ¾ inch num mm by num mm by num mm ribbed bearing pads or elastomeric pads as specified on the plans .
use ribbed bearing pads made of sbr rubber with a durometer hardness of num plus or minus num as determined by astm d num .
use elastomeric pads that are num virgin chloroprene neoprene and meet the requirements of the num aashto specifications for highway bridges section num elastomeric bearings .
caulk the openings on either side of and between the pads with num inch by num inch num mm by num mm opencell urethane foam strips or equal as approved by the engineer in addition to any other joint treatment that is required .
caulk vertical joints with num inch by num inch num mm by num mm open cell urethane foam strips .
piece the urethane foam strips together with a minimum overlap of num inches num mm .
use plastic filter fabric sheets with a minimum width as follows for vertical joints num inches num mm wide for horizontal joints num inches num mm wide overlap the joint with the filter fabric by at least num inches num mm .
when piecing together the filter fabric overlap by at least num inches num mm .
glue the filter fabric to the panels using any adhesive on the qualified products list qpl .
use any woven and nonwoven plastic filter fabric listed on the qpl for work in this specification subject to the above requirements .
e. mse wall backfill material use material in the mse wall backfill volume that conforms to the requirements of subsection num .
in addition obtain approval for use of the material by the office of materials .
f. coatings for steel soil reinforcing devices apply coatings to the soil reinforcing devices as follows num .
galvanize the entire surface of reinforcing and tie strips mesh and connecting devices according to astm a numa numm .
or galvanize it mechanically according to astm b num class num unless otherwise specified on the plans .
also galvanize the surfaces created by punching holes for bolts .
num .
repair damage sustained by the connecting devices bolts or reinforcing devices during phases of fabrication storage or erection according to section num .
repair by brush coating with an approved galvanizing repair compound as specified in subsection num.a.num to the engineers satisfaction at no increase in contract cost .
num .
galvanize the parts of the connecting devices that are threaded according to astm a numa numm class c. hot dip galvanize alignment pins .
num .
when the type nump coating is required on the plans a .
after manufacturer galvanizing is complete shopcoat the entire surface for the length indicated on the plans with a twocomponent coal tar epoxy system indicated in subsection num.d prepare steel piling swaybracing and concrete piling surfaces for special protective coatings for a type nump coating according to subsection num.a.num .
b .
use type nump coating to fieldcoat galvanized nuts bolts and washers used to connect reinforcing and tie strips .
repair damage to the coating on connecting devices or reinforcing devices from shipping storage or erection to the engineers satisfaction at no additional cost .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls num c. use type nump coating to fieldcoat the parts of the connecting devices exposed after installing the soil reinforcing devices .
num .
epoxy coat the entire surface according section num and section num when required on the plans .
a .
do not galvanize the soil reinforcing devices if this coating method is used .
b .
use type nump coating to fieldcoat galvanized nuts bolts and washers used to connect reinforcing and tie strips .
c. use type nump coating to fieldcoat the parts of the connecting devices exposed after installing the soil reinforcing devices .
num .
repair damage to the coating on the connecting devices or soil reinforcing devices from shipping storage or erection to the engineers satisfaction at no additional cost .
g. reinforcing steel use reinforcing steel that conforms to the requirements of section num .
h. welded wire fabric for precast panels use welded wire fabric that conforms to the requirements of astm a num .
i .
certification the department will use certified test report as specified in subsection num materials certification and perform routine tests as a basis for material acceptance furnished for the work .
j .
corrosion inhibiting material for the corrosion inhibiting material use a bituminous plastic cement material that conforms to the requirements of section num aashto m num trowel grade asphalt mastic or use an approved corrosioninhibiting grease .
num delivery storage and handling handle store and ship panels to eliminate the danger of chipping cracking discoloring fracturing and excessive bending stresses .
repair at the plant the panels damaged during handling or storage at the casting plant as directed by the engineer .
panels damaged during handling storing or shipping may be rejected upon delivery at the engineers discretion .
support panels in storage on firm blocking located immediately adjacent to embedded connecting devices to avoid bending the connecting devices .
repair the coating on ties or soilreinforcing devices damaged during handling or placing to the engineers satisfaction .
num construction requirements num personnel a .
wall crew supervisor ensure that the wall crew supervisor has previous satisfactory experience in erecting mechanically stabilized walls .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a .
prepare the foundation before beginning construction prepare the foundation as follows num .
grade the foundation for the mechanically stabilized embankment retaining wall level to a width equal to or exceeding the width of the reinforced volume and leveling pad .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls num use the top of the leveling pad as the grade elevation .
num .
before beginning the wall and leveling pad construction compact the foundation to at least num percent of maximum laboratory dry density as determined by gdt num .
num .
where walls are used as a bridge abutment compact the foundation material as follows a .
when a portion of the wall is a bridge abutment ensure that portions of the wall within num ft num m of the lateral limits of the bridge have foundation material compacted to at least num percent of maximum laboratory dry density as determined by gdt num. b .
when walls are used solely as bridge abutments compact the foundation material for the entire wall to at least num percent of maximum laboratory dry density as determined by gdt num .
place and compact the embankment beneath the wall according to section num .
num .
if excavating below the leveling pad elevation reconstruct the area as embankment .
num .
remove and replace foundation soils that are incapable of sustaining the required compaction as directed by the office of materials .
num .
at each panel foundation level provide a nonreinforced concrete leveling pad as shown on the plans .
a .
place leveling pads so they are level within num in num mm per pad or per num ft num m whichever length is greater .
b .
repair or replace leveling pads that do not meet this requirement as directed by the engineer at the contractors expense .
c. if using bearing pads on the leveling pad on the initial row of panels also use them on all the leveling pads of that wall .
d. fill the horizontal joint between the leveling pad and panels with num in by num in num mm by num mm polyether foam strips and cover with filter cloth .
e. use neoprene strips num in num mm thick as necessary to level panels .
do not use more than num in num mm of neoprene strips .
f. if more leveling is required take other corrective action such as replacing the leveling pad or replacing panels .
num .
embed the wall at least num ft num m into an embankment when shown on the plans .
construct the embankment before constructing the leveling pad and placing backfill for the wall .
for step details on leveling pads see plans and construction details .
num fabrication a. soilreinforcing devices have steel soilreinforcing devices shop fabricated .
use shop fabricated steel mesh of cold drawn steel welded into the finished mesh fabric according to astm a num .
cut soilreinforcing devices to lengths and tolerances shown on the plans .
punch holes for bolts in the location shown .
ensure that soilreinforcing devices are true to size and free of defects that may impair the strength or durability .
b .
connecting devices use connecting devices of the dimensions shown on the plans .
assemble connecting members and soilreinforcing devices before galvanizing the connecting devices .
ensure that the connecting devices are true to size and are free of defects that may impair the strength or durability .
tie strips may be partially bent to no more than a num in num mm radius before they are shipped to the precast yard .
perform final bending at the precast yard .
do not allow connecting devices reinforcing steel or welded wire fabric used in the panels to contact each other .
c. bolts and nuts ensure that the nominal diameter is as defined in subsection num.b connecting devices .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls num d. precast panels use precast panel materials as specified in subsection num materials .
before casting set the following in place to the dimensions and tolerances shown on the drawings tie strips mesh attachment straps coil embeds coil bolts reinforcing steel welded wire fabric connecting pins handling devices do not allow the metal connecting devices and reinforcing steel to contact each other when in their final position in the panel .
num .
testing and inspection use precast concrete panels that are cast at a class a or b plant that conforms to standard operating procedure num precastprestressed concrete bridge members .
see qpl num for a list of approved plants .
num .
casting cast the panels using steel forms .
a .
cast the front face of the panel the face exposed to view when installed in the wall against a steel form or architectural form liner .
float finish the back face .
b .
place the concrete in each panel without interruption and consolidate it using an approved vibrator .
supplement vibration with hand tamping as necessary to force the concrete into the corners of the forms and prevent the formation of stone pockets or cleavage planes from forming .
c. use clear form oil from only one manufacturer throughout the casting operation .
num .
curing cure the panels as specified in subsection num.z cure concrete or subsection num.b.num concrete curing .
cure for at least num hours or until the concrete develops the specified compressive strength .
the engineer will reject panels that do not reach specified strength within num days .
num .
removing forms keep forms in place until they can be removed without damaging the panel .
num .
concrete finishing and tolerances finish the concrete surface for the front face as designated on the plans .
floatfinish the rear face enough to eliminate open aggregate pockets and distortions greater than num in .
num mm .
only use panels manufactured within the following tolerances all dimensions are within num in .
num mm .
angular distortion in the panels height does not exceed num in .
num mm in num ft. num m. diagonal tolerance from plan dimensions is no more than num in .
num mm .
for textured finishes surface defects greater than num in .
num mm in num ft num m will be rejected .
num .
determining compressive strength perform compression tests to determine the minimum strength requirements on cylinders .
a .
make at least three cylinders to determine when the units may be put into service from each days production and cure according to gdt num.d.b.num .
make two additional cylinders from each days production or from each num cubic yards of concrete placed whichever is the lesser amount of concrete to determine the numday strength .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls num b .
ensure that the shipping strength is equal to the required numday strength for each days production or for each num yd³ num m³ of concrete placed whichever amount of concrete is less .
c. cure according to gdt num.d.b.num .
ensure that the numday compressive strength is at least num psi num mpa .
perform compressive strength tests according to aashto t num .
num .
rejection panels will be rejected if they do not meet the requirements above .
the following defects are also cause for rejection indications of imperfect molding that result in tolerances being exceeded honeycombed or open texture concrete num .
marking clearly and permanently mark on the rear face of each panel the date of manufacture lot number and type of panel .
e. precast coping and precast traffic barrier to construct the precast portion of the coping or precast traffic barrier use materials that conform to subsection num.c concrete .
use the same procedures for precasting testing and inspection as those for precast panels .
num construction a .
wall erection place precast panels so that their final position at the completion of the wall is vertical .
num .
adjust the batter to allow for the effect of backfill type equipment and construction method on panel movement .
num .
in general batter the panels num in .
num mm in num ft num m into the reinforced volume to allow the panel to move during backfill placement and compaction .
num .
place panels in successive horizontal lifts as backfill is placed .
a .
when placing backfill behind a panel maintain the panel in a vertical position by placing clamps and temporary wooden wedges in the joints at the junction of two adjacent panels on the external side of the wall .
b .
use external bracing for the initial lift .
keep the wedges in place until the fourth layer of panels is placed then remove the bottom layer of wedges .
c. remove each succeeding layer of wedges when placing the succeeding panel layers .
d. when the wall is completed remove the wedges .
do not use the wedges to level the panels on leveling pads .
e. remove the wedges placed below the groundline on the front face of the wall before backfilling this area .
num .
alignment and tolerance are as follows a .
ensure that the horizontal and vertical joint openings between panels are uniform .
ensure that the opening is num in num in .
num mm num mm .
b .
ensure that the vertical tolerance plumbness and horizontal alignment tolerance as the wall is constructed does not exceed num in num mm when measured along a num ft num m straightedge .
c. ensure that the overall vertical tolerance of the wall plumbness from top to bottom in its final position does not exceed num in per num ft num mm per num m of wall height .
d. place castinplace concrete on top of the wall panel to bring the precast coping elements on top of the wall to proper grade .
see the plans or construction details .
before placing special backfill material on a soilreinforcing device complete the connections to the panels .
b .
joint fillers treat joints between the panels as follows num .
in flood plains or other intermittently inundated areas cover the joints as follows use a woven plastic filter fabric sheet to cover the joint on the back side of the wall between panels from num ft num m above the numyear flood elevation to the bottom of the wall .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls num use a woven or nonwoven plastic filter fabric sheet to cover the joint on the back side of the wall between panels from num ft num m above the numyear highwater elevation to the top of the wall .
num .
at other locations cover joints between panels with a woven or nonwoven plastic filter fabric sheet .
num .
ensure that horizontal joints between panels contain two num by num by ¾ in num by num by num mm ribbed bearing pads or elastomeric pads as specified on the plans .
use ribbed bearing pads that are sbr rubber with a durometer hardness of num plus or minus num as required in astm d num .
num .
use elastomeric pads that are num percent virgin chloroprene neoprene meeting the requirements of the num aashto specifications for highway bridges section num elastomeric bearings .
num .
caulk the openings on either side of and between the pads with num by num in num by num mm open cell urethane foam strips or equal as approved by the engineer in addition to other required joint treatments .
num .
caulk vertical joints with num by num in num by num m or open cell urethane foam strips .
when piecing the urethane foam strips together overlap them at least num in .
num mm .
num .
ensure that the minimum width of the plastic filter fabric sheets are as follows for vertical joints num in num mm wide for horizontal joints num in num mm wide num .
overlap the filter fabric with the joint at least num in .
num mm .
num .
when piecing the filter fabric together overlap at least num in .
num mm .
num .
glue the filter fabric to the panels .
use an adhesive on qpl num .
c. mse wall backfill place backfill shortly after erecting each lift panel .
follow these guidelines num .
place backfill lift to a uniform thickness and place it from the back face of the wall to num ft num mm beyond the end of the soilreinforcing devices .
num .
at each soilreinforcing device level compact the backfill to the full length of reinforcing devices and slope it to drain away from the wall before placing and attaching the next layer of reinforcing devices .
num .
level the compacted backfill with the connecting device before connecting the reinforcing device .
num .
repair damaged soil reinforcing devices or panels before attaching and backfilling the reinforcing devices .
num .
place soil reinforcing devices at num degrees to the face of the wall unless otherwise indicated on the plans or by the engineer .
num .
ensure that the maximum lift thickness is num in num mm loose and closely follows panel erection .
decrease this lift thickness to obtain the specified density if required .
num .
compact the embankment backfill material to at least num percent of maximum laboratory dry density as determined by gdt num or gdt numa gdt numb method a or b for full depth of the material .
num .
compact the embankment backfill material without disturbing or displacing the reinforcing devices and panels .
num .
compact from the area nearest the wall face to the back of the reinforcing devices except for a strip num ft num m wide adjacent to the backside of the wall .
after compacting the remainder of the layer compact this num ft num m strip with light mechanical tampers without causing the panels to move outward .
num .
whenever a compaction test fails on a special embankment backfill lift do not place additional material over that area until the lift is recompacted and obtains a passing compaction test .
num .
ensure that the stabilizing geogrid at any layer is held taut by mechanical means free of wrinkles bends or undulations until the special backfill material has been placed and compacted above the restrained layer to the level of the next layer of stabilizing geogrid .
release the uppermost layer of stabilizing geogrid after the final layer of special backfill is placed and compacted .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls num d. storm drains provide precast panels that have the appropriate storm drain openings into panels at the elevation and locations indicated on drainage profiles .
place catch basins so that pipes will enter perpendicular plan view to the panels or below the leveling pads as shown on the plans .
coordinate the catch basin construction and the storm drain placement with the wall construction .
e. dewatering furnish install operate and maintain satisfactory dewatering systems to maintain the site in a dry and workable condition to permit grading compacting the wall foundation and erecting and backfilling the wall .
furnish dewatering system equipment and materials and continue the system as long as necessary .
f. catch basins and longitudinal pipes when catch basins are located behind the wall and the wall plans do not indicate a specific construction method use the method outlined in the construction details .
when longitudinal pipes are located behind the wall follow this procedure if specific details are not shown on the wall plans num .
bend the soilreinforcing device around the pipe without damaging the device its coating or its attachment to the precast panel .
see the construction details .
num .
if the pipe is too close to the wall to bend the soilreinforcing device without damaging it the engineer will investigate relocating the pipe .
the engineer will contact the design office that designed the drainage system or the office responsible for the pipe and will investigate the pipe relocation .
num .
if the pipe can not be relocated or if the pipe is too large for relocation to be feasible use the backup panel procedure indicated on the construction details .
use precast concrete or castinplace concrete for drainage structures that are within the special embankment backfill drainage structures that are outside the special embankment backfill but that are within num ft num m of the front face of the wall num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement when a mechanically stabilized embankment retaining wall is built to plan dimensions the plan quantities are the pay quantities .
when the engineer changes plan dimensions during construction or when original plans are in error the revised plan quantities are the pay quantities .
a. excavation and shoring excavation including removing unstable material and shoring for construction of the mechanically stabilized embankment retaining wall will not be measured and paid for separately .
b. precast concrete panels the panels complete in place and accepted are measured for payment by the square foot meter .
the area of drains through the wall are not deducted .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls num c. soil reinforcing devices the reinforcing strips backfill stabilizing mesh or backfill stabilizing geogrid is measured for payment by the linear foot meter of strip mesh or geogrid .
d. backfill the special embankment backfill used in the mechanically stabilized embankment retaining wall volume is measured for payment by the cubic yard meter and as shown on the plans .
the limits of the mechanically stabilized embankment retaining wall volume are as follows num .
the width shall be the length of the reinforcing devices plus num in num mm .
where reinforcing device length changes the volume width change will occur midway between reinforcing device layers .
num .
the height shall extend from the top of the leveling pad to at least num in num mm or to a maximum of num ft num m above the uppermost reinforcing device layer .
the uppermost reinforcing device layer may be attached to the wall traffic barrier or bridge cap .
num .
the length shall extend for the entire length of the wall .
num .
backfill material required by construction procedures to extend beyond the mechanically stabilized embankment retaining wall volume is incidental and is included in the price bid for contract items .
num .
if the mechanically stabilized embankment retaining wall volume increases from undercut ordered by the engineer and requires special embankment backfill to provide stability as determined by the engineer this will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price bid per cubic yard meter for special embankment backfill .
if undercuts are not provided for on the plans and the engineer determines that special embankment backfill is not appropriate backfill with foundation material conforming to subsection num foundation backfill type ii .
payment for foundation backfill material used in this application is at the contract price bid per cubic yard meter for special embankment backfill .
backfill for undercut areas that do not require materials of grades higher than common excavation soils will not be measured or paid for separately .
e. concrete leveling pads concrete leveling pads are measured for payment by the linear foot meter .
this includes steps shown on the plans .
f. dewatering no separate measurement or payment will be made for dewatering .
include the cost of dewatering in the price bid for special embankment backfill .
g. units mounted on the mechanically stabilized embankment retaining wall units on the mechanically stabilized embankment retaining wall complete in place and accepted will be designated on the plans and paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter for each of the following unit types castinplace coping a castinplace coping b precast coping traffic barrier v traffic barrier h use traffic barrier h and castinplace coping b whenever noise walls light standards or other appurtenances are mounted on top of the barrier or coping .
use traffic barrier v and castinplace coping a when no appurtenance is used on top of the barrier or coping .
cast all traffic barriers in place except traffic barrier h which is precast when detailed as precast on the plans .
num limits general provisions num through num .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls num num payment when mechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls are built to plan dimensions the plan quantity will be the pay quantity .
when plan dimensions are revised at the engineers direction mechanically stabilized embankment retaining wall will be paid for using the revised plan quantities .
payment is full compensation for fabricating transporting and erecting material according to the plans and specifications .
separate measurement or payment is not made for tools superintendence labor fasteners coatings joint materials including but not limited to sbr or elastomeric pads polyether foam and filter fabric site preparation filler concrete or other incidentals for performing the work .
soilreinforcing devices attached to the traffic barrier or coping are not measured separately for payment but are included in the price bid for traffic barrier or coping .
concrete side barrier noise walls light standards vgutters guard rail fencing and handrail when shown on the plans will be paid for according to the applicable sections of the project specifications .
anchor bolts for sleeves for mounting fencing and light standards or noise walls on the wall are included in the price bid for wall items .
payment will be made under item no .
num concrete facia panels per square foot meter item no .
num backfill stabilizing devices per linear foot meter item no .
num mse wall backfill material per cubic yard meter item no .
num concrete leveling pad per linear foot meter item no .
num castinplace coping a per linear foot meter item no .
num castinplace coping b per linear foot meter item no .
num traffic barrier v per linear foot meter item no .
num traffic barrier h per linear foot meter item no .
num precast coping per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining wall contractor design num general description this specification covers the required materials fabrication construction measurement and payment for contractor designed mechanically stabilized embankment mse retaining walls .
the scope of work of wall erection includes grading for wall construction compacting the wall foundation general and local dewatering as required constructing leveling pads erecting precast panels placing soil reinforcing devices placing and compacting special embankment backfill within the reinforced volume section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining wallscontractor design num furnishing and placing precast or castinplace concrete coping and castinplace or precast traffic barrier on top of the wall if shown on the plans providing downdrag protection for piles furnishing and placing precast or castinplace concrete coping and precast or castinplace traffic barrier on the top of the wall if these items are shown in the plans .
the wall foundation includes areas underlying the leveling pad and the reinforced volume .
ensure that items used to construct the mechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls but not mentioned in this specification conform to the applicable sections of the standard specifications .
for patented mechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls obtain panels soil reinforcing devices connecting devices joint materials attachments and expertise to construct the walls .
num definitions wall foundationthe area underlying the leveling pad and the reinforced volume .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numembankments section numconcrete structures section numreinforcement steel section numepoxy coated steel reinforcement section numpainting structures section numrepair of galvanized coatings section numbackfill materials section numpipe appurtenances section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members section numpaint b. referenced documents gdt num num aashto specifications for highway bridges section num elastomeric bearings num submittals submit construction drawings and design notes to the engineer for review and approval .
the submission shall be prepared and stamped by the design engineer who shall be registered as a professional engineer in the state of georgia .
include in the submission design notes and reproducible drawings concerning the following a .
details dimensions and schedules of all reinforcing steel including dowels andor studs for attaching the facing to the backfill reinforcement .
b .
details of backfill stabilizing devices including the length spacing and size and type material .
c. for mse walls at bridge ends ensure that mse wall backfill extends vertically to the bottom of the approach slab .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining wallscontractor design num ensure that the mse wall backfill extends horizontally to the back of the mse backfill for the wall below the approach slab or num inches num mm beyond the end of the stabilizing devices attached to the bridge whichever is greater .
show details of attachments to be cast into the bridge endbent endwall and backwall .
do not make attachments to bridge endwalls that are integral to the bridge superstructure and are subject to movement due to superstructure expansion and contraction .
d. use traffic barrier h and castinplace coping b whenever noise walls light standards or any other appurtenance is mounted on top of the barrier or coping .
use traffic barrier v and castinplace coping a when no appurtenance is used on top of the barrier or coping .
traffic barriers shall be cast in place except that traffic barrier h shall be precast when detailed as precast on the plans .
e. ensure that plans match gdot plans in size format borders title block etc .
f. prepare the plans in microstation.dgn format .
g. itemize the wall quantities as follows num .
wall envelope quantities in the plans .
num .
changed quantities based on the survey verification of the wall envelope adjusted wall envelope .
the time required for preparation and review of plans and calculations will be charged to the allowable contract time .
the final plans and calculations for a wall shall be approved prior to beginning construction on the wall .
the department will be allowed num days to review the plans and calculations and provide either approval or review comments to the contractor .
the numday review time will begin when the department has received all of the calculations and drawings concerning the structure .
each new submittal from the contractor as a result of corrections resulting from the departments review or changes that are made by the contractor to expedite construction or to correct for field errors will have a num day review time .
the department will be the sole judge of the adequacy of the information submitted .
the review and acceptance of the final plans and methods of construction by the department will not in any way relieve the contractor of responsibility for the successful completion of the work .
contractor delays due to untimely submissions and insufficient information will not be considered as justification for time extensions .
within num days of receiving department approval of the plans submit stamped reproducible mylar originals for inclusion in the project plans .
also submit electronic files of the final plans .
for any changes made during construction of the wall submit as built reproducible mylar originals and as built electronic files .
num materials meet the requirements of subsection num materials of the specifications .
num construction requirements num personnel meet the following personnel requirements a .
design use a design engineer with the following qualifications to design the wall and prepare and submit plans for approval is a registered as a professional engineer in the state of georgia .
has knowledge and experience with the design and construction of mse walls .
is available at any time during the life of the contract to discuss the design of the walls directly with the department .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining wallscontractor design num b .
construction the contractor or subcontractor shall meet the following requirements be experienced in the construction of mechanically stabilized embankment walls .
include on staff a supervising engineer for the project with at least five years of experience in the construction of mechanically stabilized embankment walls .
submit the following proof whenever requested by the department of the ability to design andor construct mechanically stabilized embankment walls .
evidence of the successful completion of at least five projects similar in concept and scope to the proposed wall .
resumes of the supervising engineer and foremen to be employed on this project showing the type and number of mechanically stabilized embankment walls each worked on within the past five num years .
the department will be the sole judge of the acceptability of the qualifications of the design engineer supervising engineer and foreman .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a .
general requirements designing and detailing the departments plans will include a wall envelope .
the wall envelope will show the existing and proposed ground line the maximum elevation of the top of the leveling pad the proposed top of coping or the proposed gutterline elevations where the barrier is attached to the wall the soil parameters for the wall design the location of any internal walls required the location of other appurtenances including but not limited to light standards sound barriers sign supports other obstructions in the wall backfill including but not limited to drainage structures and pipes bridge columns caps wingwalls bridge piles details of any proposed ditches at the top of the wall proposed pay quantities ensure that the wall design is compatible with all horizontal and vertical criteria and backfill loading conditions .
verify the wall location according to subsection num.e and subsection num.d before the final wall design is submitted .
include in the verification the top and bottom of the wall envelope backfill design conditions depth of wall embedment section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining wallscontractor design num location of drainage structures and other obstructions in the wall backfill other appurtenances located on the wall .
if any changes to the wall envelope are required by the field survey submit plan sheets to the engineer for approval showing the wall envelope as detailed in the plans with the required changes noted .
b .
wall design use the following design criteria for a contractor designed wall num .
provide one of the following wall systems ares tensar earth technologies reinforced earth wall the reinforced earth company tricon retained soil wall tricon precast stabilized earth wall tb structural systems num .
design the mse wall according to the current aashto standard specifications for highway bridges including interims .
mechanically stabilized earth wall design section num num .
design the mse wall to account for all live load dead load and wind load from all traffic barriers lights overhead signs sound barriers and other appurtenances located on top and adjacent to the wall .
design mse walls to account for all external forces .
also design abutment walls for all horizontal and vertical loads applied by the bridge .
num .
assume responsibility for all temporary shoring that may be necessary for wall construction .
design the shoring using sound engineering principles .
num .
use permanent concrete wall facing panels that are at least num in num mm thick .
num .
provide a minimum length of soil reinforcement of num feet num m or seventenths num of the wall height whichever is greater .
num .
ensure that the special wall backfill extends a minimum of num in num mm past the end of the soil reinforcement .
num .
use the architectural treatment of facing panels as indicated on the departments drawings .
num .
provide internal walls to allow for future widening if shown on the wall envelope .
ensure the internal walls have galvanized wire or concrete facing .
ensure as a minimum that the facing of the internal walls extend to the back limit of the mse wall backfill for the permanent wall .
num .
ensure the maximum panel area does not exceed num square feet num square meters .
num .
design the barrier for num lbs .
per linear foot num kilograms per linear meter loading applied horizontally along the top of the barrier .
the barrier shall be continuous or have a counterweight slab continuous over not less than four panels .
num .
a foundation investigation report may be available from the geotechnical engineering bureau of the department .
the information contained in this report may be used by the contractor to assist in evaluating existing conditions for design as well as construction .
however the accuracy of the information is not guaranteed and no requests for additional monies or time extensions will be considered as a result of the contractor relying on the information in this report .
num .
ensure the following requirements are met the gutterline grade on the proposed top of wall submitted matches the gutter elevations required by the plans .
the top of coping is at or above the top of coping shown on the envelope .
the leveling pad is at or below the elevation shown on the wall envelope .
any changes in wall pay quantities due to changes in the wall envelope are noted in the contractors plans section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining wallscontractor design num all changes in quantities due to the proposed walls being outside the wall envelope step locations ending wall at full panel etc .
are shown as separate quantities .
num .
ensure the minimum embedment of the wall top of leveling pad is at least num feet num mm .
if the soil slopes away from the bottom of the wall lower the bottom of the wall to provide a minimum horizontal distance of num ft num m to the slope .
i.e .
a num slope in front of the wall requires num ft num m of embedment a num slope in front of the wall requires num ft num mm of embedment num .
if the departments review of the submitted plans and calculations results in more than two submittals to the department by the contractor the contractor will be assessed for all reviews in excess of two submittals .
the assessment for these additional reviews will be at the rate of num per hour of engineering time expended .
num fabrication meet the requirements of subsection num of the specifications .
num construction meet the requirements of subsection num of the specifications .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. excavation and shoring excavation including any required removal of unstable material and shoring necessary for construction of the mse wall will not be measured for payment .
b. mse wall face the area of wall face complete in place and accepted will be designated for payment by the square foot meter for each height .
the area of drains through the wall will not be deducted .
the wall area measured for payment will be the area from the proposed top of coping or the proposed gutterline or top of sidewalk elevations to the maximum elevation of the top of the leveling pad for each height wall .
any area of castinplace facing around drainage structures within the approved wall envelope will be measured as mse wall face .
dummy panels will not be measured for payment .
no separate measurement will be made for internal wall facing .
the entire vertical section of wall will be measured for the greatest height within each section .
i.e .
the entire envelope area of a num ft num m long section of wall that measured from num ft num m high to num ft num m high will be measured for payment as mse wall face wall no .
_ num num num m ht .
the height will be measured from the maximum elevation of the top of the leveling pad to the num .
top of coping or num .
gutterline elevation at the barrier or num .
top of sidewalk at parapet c. backfill stabilizing devices the backfill stabilizing devices will not be measured separately .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining wallscontractor design num d. backfill the mse backfill material used in the mse wall volume will not be measured separately except as noted below .
the mse backfill required behind bridge endwalls or backwalls and above the top of coping will be measured as additional mse wall backfill .
any additional mse backfill required as a result of an undercut ordered by the engineer and requiring the mse backfill material to provide stability as determined by the engineer will be measured and paid for as additional mse wall backfill .
backfill of undercut areas not requiring classes of soils higher than common excavation soils will not be measured separately .
backfill material required by construction procedures to extend outside the mse wall volume shall be considered incidental and will not be measured separately .
e. concrete leveling pads concrete leveling pads will not be measured separately .
f. castinplace coping a castinplace coping b precast coping traffic barrier v traffic barrier h mounted atop the mse wall these units complete in place and accepted will be designated on the plans and measured per linear foot meter for each type unit .
the quantities of coping and barrier will be measured as horizontal lengths in linear feet meters .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the pay quantities will be the wall envelope quantities shown in the plans unless the engineer approves an adjusted wall envelope .
in this case the pay quantities will be the adjusted wall envelope quantities .
no additional compensation will be made for any additional material equipment design or other items found necessary to comply with the project specifications as a result of the departments review except for changes made necessary by the survey verification required by subsection num.e and subsection num.d or other changes approved by the engineer .
include in the unit bid prices all costs necessary to comply with the requirements of this specification .
no payment will be made for wall area outside of the adjusted wall envelope .
a. excavation and shoring excavation including removing unstable material and shoring for construction of the mechanically stabilized embankment retaining wall will not be paid for separately .
b. mse wall face the area of wall face complete in place and accepted will be paid for by the square foot meter for each height .
the area of drains through the wall will not be deducted .
any area of castinplace facing around drainage structures within the approved wall envelope will be paid as wall face .
payment will include all costs for concrete reinforcing steel in the castinplace areas .
no additional payment will be made for any dummy panels required .
if the wall height changes to a height greater than the maximum included in the pay items the area of wall with a height greater than the maximum will be paid at num of the bid price of the maximum height pay item included in the plans .
section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining wallscontractor design num the entire vertical section of wall will be paid at the unit price for the greatest height within each section .
i.e .
the entire envelope area of a num foot num m section of wall that measured from num ft num m high to num ft num m high will be paid as mse wall face wall no .
_ num num num m ht no separate payment will be made for architectural treatment .
no separate payment will be made for internal wall facing internal wall backfill stabilizing devices or additional mse backfill necessitated by the internal wall .
c. backfill stabilizing devices the backfill stabilizing devices will not be paid for separately .
include this cost in the unit price bid for mse wall face .
d. backfill the mse backfill material used in the mse wall volume will not be paid for separately except as noted below .
when not paid for separately include the cost in the unit price bid for mse wall face .
exceptions the cost of mse backfill required behind bridge endwalls or backwalls and above the top coping will be paid for as additional mse wall backfill .
any additional mse backfill required as a result of an undercut ordered by the engineer and requiring the mse backfill material to provide stability as determined by the engineer will be paid as additional mse wall backfill .
if no quantities for this item are included in the proposal a price of num per cubic yard num per cubic meter will be paid .
backfill of undercut areas not requiring materials of grades higher than common excavation soils will not be paid for separately .
include the cost in the overall bid price submitted .
any backfill material required by construction procedures to extend outside the mse wall volume is considered incidental .
include this cost in the price bid for contract items .
e. concrete leveling pads concrete leveling pads including steps shown in the plans will not be paid for separately .
f. castinplace coping a castinplace coping b precast coping traffic barrier v traffic barrier h mounted atop the mse wall these units complete in place and accepted will be designated on the plans and paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter for each type unit .
g. dewatering no separate payment will be made for dewatering .
include the cost of dewatering in the price bid for special embankment backfill .
payment will be made under item no .
num mse wall face wall no .
__num num ft num num m per square foot meter item no .
num mse wall face wall no .
__num num ft num num m per square foot meter item no .
num mse wall face wall no .
__num num ft num num m per square foot meter item no .
num mse wall face wall no .
__num ft num num m per square foot meter item no .
num coping a wall no .
___ per linear foot meter item no .
num coping b wall no.___ per linear foot meter section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining wallscontractor design num item no .
num traffic barrier h wall no.___ per linear foot meter item no .
num traffic barrier v wall no.___ per linear foot meter item no .
num additional mse backfill per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numpermanent soil nailed wall num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section nummodular block retaining wall system num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numpermanent changeable message signs num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numportable changeable message signs num general description this work includes furnishing maintaining transporting and using portable changeable message signs according to these specifications at locations shown on the plans in the special provisions or as directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents mutcd nchrp num qpl num section numportable changeable message signs num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment use portable changeable message sign pcms meeting the requirements of mutcd section numf.num portable changeable message signs and the following a .
completed a full evaluation cycle numyear by national transportation product evaluation program ntpep .
b .
passed ntpep durability test .
c. has a control system with a keyboard to allow programming of user defined messages .
d. have primary and backup power sources .
e. capable of adjusting its brightness from daylight to night time conditions .
f. capable of displaying num lines of legend .
g. has a minimum reliability from its primary power supply for a minimum of num days for solar units num days for diesel units .
gasoline powered units not allowed .
h. message displayed on the sign is visible for num feet num m and legible for not less than num ft num m during both daytime and nighttime operation .
i .
is a selfcontained unit including a control system with keyboard primary and backup power source mounting and transporting equipment trailer mounted with all applicable lights and hardware .
j .
bottom of message sign panel is capable of being raised a minumun of num feet above the roadway .
k. listed on qpl num as maintained by the office of materials or have a letter of approval from the office of materials before the sign is used on any portion of the worksite .
l. pcms that remain the property of the contractor may be either new or used provided the pcms meets the requirements of this subsection .
m. in addition to the alphanumeric combinations the signs should include the capability to display directional arrow messages .
a pcms may be used as an arrow board display panel provided the pcms meets the size and display requirement of a type c panel as defined by the mutcd section numf.num portable changeable message signs .
n. the pcms has the following programmed as permanent messages num .
keepright num .
keepleft num .
two way trafficahead num .
one lanebridgeahead num .
mergingtrafficahead num .
heavytrafficahead num .
bumpahead num .
paintcrewahead num .
loosegravelahead section numportable changeable message signs num num .
surveypartyahead num .
icybridgeahead num .
roughroadahead num .
donotpass num .
lowsoftshoulder num .
shoulderdropoff num .
vehiclescrossingroadway num .
detourahead num .
mergerightahead num .
mergeleftahead num .
trafficaccidentahead num .
trafficslowsahead num .
roadnarrowsahead num .
leftlanenarrows num .
rightlanenarrows num .
lanenarrowsahead num .
leftlane num .
rightlane num .
leftshoulder num .
rightshoulder num .
closedahead o .
the pcms is entirely mounted on a trailer that meets all of the requirements of the georgia vehicle code .
additional trailer requirements num .
the trailer and the components of the sign is designed to allow one person to perform all transporting and operating functions without assistance .
num .
the trailer is designed for unlimited onhighway travel at num mph num kph .
num .
the trailer has a minimum of four outrigger type leveling jacks one at each corner of the trailer deck .
num .
the jacks are mounted to allow them to swivel into a locked position for secure storage during travel .
num .
the trailer and all mounted equipment are structurally adequate for unlimited normal operation in wind velocities up to num mph num kph .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
utilization requirements num .
when set up as a pay item in the contract utilize pcms whenever any conditions exists that would require extra emphasis in warning motorists of a situation or at any location as directed by the engineer .
furnish pcms and have them available on a continuous basis .
num .
use pcms on interstate limited access and multilane divided highways when any of these conditions exist a .
workers or equipment operating with in num ft. num mm of a travel lane without appropriate traffic control devices for positive barrier protection .
section numportable changeable message signs num b. excavation or other construction creates dropoffs adjacent to the edge of a travel lane and channelization devices are placed within the travel lane that is adjacent to the dropoff .
c. material hauling in or out of a travel lane by hauling vehicles requires traffic to slow in the temporary traffic control zone .
d. traffic is delayed by pacing all lanes for short periods of time for placing bridge beams overhead sign structures blasting etc .
e. any time that divided highway traffic is required to operate as twoway traffic condition and traffic is not separated by a positive barrier system .
f. one mile in advance of lane closure place pcms on outside shoulder denoting appropriate lane closure one mile ahead .
num .
use pcms on all other types of roadways according to the the traffic control plan or as directed by the engineer .
num .
locate the pcms near the construction activity and display a message that is both concise and meaningful .
obtain the engineers approval for messages used on the pcms .
num .
include the location of the pcms and any message to be displayed on the pcms in the approved traffic control plan required in section numtraffic control .
num .
for emergency situations pcms that are smaller in size and do not have all of the capabilities outlined in this specification may be used until a pcms that meets these requirements can be located and placed in operation at the site .
the engineer will determine when conditions and situations are to be considered emergencies and will regulate the length of time that nonspecification pcms may be used .
provide the engineer written notification when nonspecification pcms signs are in use on the work .
b. pcms phase messages num .
messages are displayed in preferrably one phase but no more than two phases .
num .
the first phase directs the motorist to take a specific action such as mergeright keepright or reduce speed .
num .
the second phase if necessary is used to inform the motorist of road conditions such as leftlaneclosed lanenarrowsahead waterinroad shoulderdrop off trucksin andout .
num .
do not use messages such as usecaution hazardahead or danger which are confusing and give no guidance to the motorist .
also do not use messages such as buckleup or drivesafely which diminish the impact of important and relevant messages .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance keep the units in good repair and neat and clean in appearance .
if the unit fails malfunctions or is damaged immediately repair the unit and furnish flaggers or other approved means to safely control the traffic until the units are back in service .
make repairs or replace the unit within num hours .
maintenance also includes periodically cleaning the units .
num measurement changeable message signs complete with trailer and generating equipment are measured by the unit .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment changeable message signs complete with appurtenances will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment is full compensation for furnishing using and maintaining the signs for the duration of the work .
each pcms will be paid for only one time .
the pcms will remain the property of the contractor .
section numportable changeable message signs num payment will be made under item no .
num changeable message sign portable typenum per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section nummodification of existing signs num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section nummonuments and road markers num general description this work includes furnishing and erecting monuments name plaquesspecial design county line markers and rightofway markers .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that concrete is class a or a mix approved by the engineer that provides a cement factor of at least num cwtyd³ num kgmnum of concrete .
use a test specimen cut from a monument or marker using the proposed concrete design and manufacturing method to prove the concrete meets a compressive strength of at least num psi num mpa at num days .
ensure that concrete is reinforced free of honeycomb has uniform surfaces and meets the applicable requirements of section num .
all other materials used will be those specified on the plans or in the proposal .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section nummonuments and road markers num num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction set the monuments and road markers in the ground to the depth shown on the plans .
use backfilling material of selected earth or gravel .
carefully tamp it in place so that the monument is stable and secure when completed .
use a level to set it plumb in all directions .
attach name plaquesspecial design to bridge end posts as shown on the plans .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the quantity to be paid for under this item is the actual number of monuments name plaquesspecial designs road markers rightofway markers and county line markers placed completed and accepted .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment these items will be paid for at the price bid for each complete in place .
payment will be made under item no .
num monuments per each item no .
num rightofway markers per each item no .
num county line markers per each item no .
num name plaquesspecial design per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numbarricades num general description this work includes furnishing installing and maintaining timber barricade panels of the types called for on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numlumber and timber section numwood posts and bracing section numpreservative treatment of timber products section numpaint section numreflectorizing materials mutcd b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that the materials conform to these specifications material section lumber num posts num preservative treatment of timber products num paint for timber num reflective sheeting num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
ensure that barricades meet the requirements of section numf.num of the mutcd .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
section numbarricades num num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction use timber barricades to warn and alert drivers of the terminus of a road street or highway in a nonconstruction or nonmaintenance area .
install timber barricades where called for on the plans or directed by the engineer .
ensure that the barricade rails are marked with alternate red and white stripes sloping downward at an angle of num degrees in the direction traffic is to pass .
if the traffic may turn right or left have the stripes slope downward in both directions from the center of the barricade .
make the entire redandwhite striped area of retroreflectorized sheeting meeting subsection num .
other barricade components shall be white .
ensure that the barricade has three rails as long as specified on the plans .
promptly clean repair or replace barricades that are damaged defaced or otherwise unfit at the contractors expense .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement barricades are measured for payment by the overall length of the barricade complete in place and accepted .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment barricades as measured above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter of barricade .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials erecting the barricades and maintaining them until final acceptance .
payment will be made under item no .
num barricades per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numhighway signs num general description this work includes fabricating and installing highway signs according to the details on the plans and the manual on uniform traffic control devices .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
section numhighway signs num num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures section numportlandcement section numsteel pile section numpaint section numsign fabrication section numsign posts section numsign blanks and panels section numreflectorizing materials section numsign paint section nummast arm assemblies section numdelineators section numreflective and nonreflective characters b. referenced documents manual on uniform traffic control devices num submittals before fabricating overhead panel type signs submit to the engineer the shop drawings to approve the sign bracing and method of attaching to sign supports .
before driving piles furnish a list of proposed pile lengths to the engineer .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section sign fabrication and accessories num steel sign posts and bolts drive type num galvanized steel structural shape posts num delineator posts galvanized steel num.a.num aluminum u flange num.a.num wood num.a.num flexible num.a.num aluminum sign blanks num extruded aluminum sign panels num reflective sheeting num silk screen lettering paint num steel posts and arms for mast arm assembly num section numhighway signs num material section guy wires for mast arm assembly num center mount reflector num demountable characters with reflective sheeting num fittings bolts nuts washers clips molding etc .
for panel signs shall conform to the requirements shown on the plans .
class a concrete footings for signs num piling num portland cement num sign paint enamel num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
finished signs ensure that the finished signs are clear cut and that the lines of letters and details are true regular and free of waviness unevenness furry edges or lines scaling cracking blistering pitting dents or blemishes .
only one type of demountable characters letters numerals symbols and borders is permitted on special roadside signs on each project .
b. erecting the signs num .
drive type posts drive type posts may be driven in place or placed in prepared holes .
a .
use driven posts only in firm and stable soil .
if the soil is sandy or unstable place each drive type post in a prepared dry hole of at least a num in num mm diameter .
b .
when placing posts in prepared holes num backfill the holes with a mixture of damp clean friable soil and num percent by volume portland cement .
num thoroughly tamp the mixture in place around the posts .
c. erect posts vertically as deep and at an angle to the roadway as shown on the plans or as directed .
d. do not penetrate posts in the coastal plain region less than num ft num m or num ft num m for posts in the piedmont and the valley and ridge regions when no guard rail is present .
section numhighway signs num when erecting signs behind a guard rail penetrate at least num ft num m for posts num ft num m or less long or num ft num m for posts over num ft num m long .
num .
singleplate signs erect singleplate signs num ft² num m² or less on one drivetype post unless otherwise specified on the plans .
erect singleplate signs greater than num ft² num m² on two drivetype posts .
leave enough distance between the two posts to fit the mounting holes in the sign plate .
num .
steel posts for mast arm assemblies a .
erect steel posts for mast arm assemblies in a concrete foundation according to the plans .
erect at the place height and angle to the roadway specified .
b .
after curing the concrete foundation for at least num hours securely fasten the specified signs into place on the mast arm .
num .
groundmounted paneltype signs a .
erect the supporting members of groundmounted paneltype signs where shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer at the specified angle to the roadway .
b. securely fasten the panels into place .
num .
milepost signs erect milepost signs including posts as specified on the plans .
num .
delineator posts use delineator posts made of galvanized steel aluminum or an alloy that conforms to the requirements of subsection num.a.num or num.a.num .
a .
erect the posts where shown on the plans .
b .
mount reflectors for galvanized steel or aluminum posts on the flange side of the post .
c. when signs are attached to supports torque the bolts to at least num ftlbs num nm .
num .
overhead paneltype signs erect overhead panel type signs on sign supports where shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
a .
ensure that the bottom of the sign is num in num mm above the top of the lighting fixture .
b .
ensure that the sign has ample bracing for mounting the sign support so that each sign can withstand num in num mm of ice accumulated on the entire sign and wind pressures shown on the plans .
c. ensure that the top of each sign is three degrees off perpendicular from the bottom of the sign .
use the threedegree slant to lean the sign toward the approaching traffic .
c. foundations for special roadside signs do not disturb the natural ground adjacent to a foundation more than necessary to construct the footing .
num .
excavate for the footings to the lines and elevations shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
do not disturb or loosen the foundation below these elevations .
num .
use forms of the necessary shape and dimensions to construct the footings to the lines and elevations shown on the plans .
num .
cure the concrete foundations constructed in conformance with section num and the plan details at least num days before erecting the sign .
num .
ensure that the minimum lengths of steel h piling used in the foundations of groundmounting signs are accepted and meet the plan penetration requirements .
the plan quantity of steel h piling is shown for estimating purposes only determine and provide the necessary lengths of piles .
num .
before driving the piles furnish a list of proposed pile lengths to the engineer .
a .
use fulllength piles or builtup piles with a maximum of two splices that are made in the presence of the engineer .
section numhighway signs num b. furnish satisfactory identification for all piles or portions thereof .
num .
when rock prevents the penetration required on the plans construct according to the notes and details shown on the plans .
num .
the minimum energy ratings required by section num for pile hammers will be waived for constructing ground mounted sign supports .
jetting is not permitted .
num .
place required backfilling in layers no greater than num in num mm thick and thoroughly compact it to the approximate density of the undisturbed soil in the area .
d. sign panels use extruded paneltype aluminum .
ensure that the sign type used meets the requirements of subsection num .
e. legends and borders place legends and borders according to subsection num demountable characters with type ix reflective sheeting .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. typenum or typenum highway signs type num or type num highway signs with reflective sheeting of type iii iv or ix as specified on the plans to be paid for are measured for payment by the actual number of square feet meters and fraction thereof of sign type and sheeting specified .
the measurement includes providing the message and furnishing and placing signs complete and accepted .
the plan quantity will be the pay quantity .
b. extruded aluminum panels extruded aluminum panels to be paid for are the number of square feet meters or portion of square feet meters furnished including legend components border material fittings nuts washers clamps molding etc .
furnished erected completed and accepted .
c. galvanized steel posts galvanized steel posts types num num num num num num num or num to be paid for are the actual number of linear feet meters and fraction thereof of the type specified furnished erected completed and accepted .
galvanized steel to be paid for is the number of pounds kilograms furnished erected and accepted .
weights are computed from theoretical weights listed in the plans for each post size .
base plates connections anchors stub post etc .
are not measured for payment but are considered incidental to the item .
d. delineators delineators reflectorized guide markers to be paid for are the number of the type specified including posts rivets and spacers that are furnished placed and completed and accepted .
e. mast arm assemblies mast arm assemblies to be paid for are the actual number furnished and erected including concrete footing sign and post completed and accepted .
section numhighway signs num f. special roadside signs class a concrete for special roadside signs to be paid for are measured by the cubic yard meter neat measurement according to section num payment .
no deductions are made for the volume of concrete displaced by steel piling anchor bolts or posts .
g. portland cement portland cement stabilized material used for backfilling holes is not measured for payment .
h. steel hpiling steel hpiling is measured for payment by the linear foot meter of accepted piling in place signs remaining in the completed work .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment highway signs galvanized steel posts ibeam posts delineators mast arm assemblies class a concrete and piling for signs are paid for at the contract unit price for the various items .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and erecting the item complete in place according to this specification .
separate payment will not be made for piling splices the cost of cutting or the cutoff portions .
pile cutoffs remain the contractors property .
piles eliminated due to authorized revisions will be paid for according to subsection num eliminated items .
these piles become departmental property .
except for the above provision no payment will be made for piles delivered to the project that are not used in the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num highway signs type num material reflective sheeting type___ per square foot meter item no .
num highway signs type num material reflective sheeting type___ per square foot meter item no .
num galvanized steel posts type ___ per linear foot meter item no .
num galvanized steel structural shape posts per pound kilogram item no .
num highway signs aluminum extruded panels reflective sheeting type ___ per square foot meter item no .
num plastic flexible delineator type___ per each item no .
num delineator type___ per each item no .
num piling in place signs steel h hp numxnum hp numxnum per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numilluminated sign system num general description this specification describes the complete sign illumination system .
complete a secure installation according to the recommendations of the american association of state highway and transportation officials aashto the illuminating engineering society the standards of the national electrical code and the applicable local ordinances .
for temporary overhead guide sign structures except wiresupported signs light the signs as soon as they are erected .
keep them lit during darkness until the temporary sign is no longer required .
the cost of temporary signs and electrical energy are included in the price bid for section num when shown in the proposal as a pay item .
otherwise payment is as shown in section num .
ensure that illumination complies with subsection num.h externally illuminated signs .
num definitions the terms cable and wire are used synonymously in this specification .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numtraffic control section numconcrete structures section numhighway signs section numstructural supports for overhead signs section numpreservative treatment of timber products section numsign posts section numelectrical conduit b. referenced documents nec section numc in conjunction with nec section num ansi c num eeinema publications num submittals before purchasing materials or equipment submit to the engineer for approval a complete list of the products proposed for use .
on the list show the manufacturers name and catalog number of each item to ensure compliance with the requirements of these specifications .
include in this submittal the calculations or computer printouts for sign illumination and uniformity values .
submit voltage drop calculations for each circuit to verify that proper voltage is furnished to the sign luminaires .
provide alternate equipment or a sample board to be activated for inservice evaluation when the engineer requires .
num materials a .
general requirements have electrical material approved by the underwriters laboratory or other acceptable testing agency .
provide the fittings devices materials and work to install the complete functional system .
use methods that comply with local ordinances rules and regulations .
see section num and section num .
section numilluminated sign system num b .
power supply and wiring use cable and wire of sufficient size to safely carry the capacity intended and to prevent the voltage from dropping more than num percent from the service point to the farthest light .
num .
determine cable and wire sizes if the cable size is not specified on the plans determine the safe size after studying the plans and specifications .
wire and cable sizes as indicated below are for copper .
do not use aluminum wire unless otherwise noted on the plans .
acceptable copper cable and wire sizes commercial are as follows no .
num awg num strand no .
num awg num strand no .
num awg num strand no .
num awg num strand no .
num awg num strand use smaller wire sizes no .
num awg minimum on the sign structure only if it is adequately protected with fuses inside the handhole of the structural support .
ensure that the fuse rating is the same as the ampere rating of the wire such as num a for no .
num awg wire .
do not reduce the wire size to a size that carries more than num percent of its rated amperage .
if the number of luminaires on the sign structure is too many for no .
num awg wire run two separate circuits from the base of the structural support to the luminaires .
fuse each of these separate circuits at the handhole of the sign structure .
num .
insulate wire and cable the neutralground wire shall have white insulation or mark it with strips of white tape at each access point .
on the cable installed underground use num v type rhhrhwuse num c insulation .
on the cable installed on the sign structure and connected to the luminaires use num v type rhh xhhw or thhn num c insulation .
install a waterproof boot furnished by the fuseholder manufacturer over each end of the fuseholder .
c. power control when noted on the plans furnish and install a lighting contactor and a photoelectric control complete with receptacle and accessories .
mount the photoelectric control near the top of the service pole so that it is exposed to the north sky .
the control shall provide on operation as shown in subsection num.i photoelectric controls .
d. grounding rods use ground rods num in num mm in diameter num in num mm and num ft num m long unless otherwise specified on the plans .
use ground rods that are galvanized steel .
ensure that the galvanization coating is at least num ouncesft² num gm² according to the requirements of astm a numa num m. e. conduit use conduit approved by the underwriters laboratories inc. num .
rigid steel conduit use rigid steel conduit including elbows and couplings that conforms to american national standards institute specification c num. a .
protect rigid steel conduit by a uniform metallic zinc coating on the exterior and interior surfaces .
b .
ensure that the conduit and coupling are galvanized at least num ouncesft² num gm² total of both surfaces .
c. determine the weight of the zinc coating according to astm a num .
if the engineer elects determine the thickness of the zinc coating by using a magnetic or electromagnetic thickness gage .
num .
nonmetallic conduit section numilluminated sign system num unless otherwise noted use type ii schedule num heavy wall polyvinyl chloride unplasticized nonmetallic conduit that conforms to subsection num .
num .
flexible conduit ensure that the flexible conduit consists of a galvanized steel core and a polyvinyl chloride cover .
ensure that it contains a continuous copper ground and is liquid tight .
f. circuit breakers use quickmake and quickbreak circuit breakers with a thermal magnetic molded case .
use circuit breakers with the following characteristics overthecenter toggle operating type with the handle positioned between on and off to indicate automatic tripping single handle and common trip multipole breakers multipole breakers with a voltage rating num v or more from line to ground bolton type with industrial rating and a minimum interrupting capacity of num rms symmetrical amperes lugs large enough to accommodate the cable used lockable weatherproof enclosure g. fuses and fuseholders use fuses with the appropriate ampere rating and voltage rating for the operating voltage .
use intheline and waterproof fuseholders .
h. lightning arresters use metal oxide varistor lightning arresters rated num v with the number of required poles unless otherwise specified .
provide a pole for each ungrounded leg of the service voltage .
i. photoelectric controls ensure that the photoelectric controls have a factory setting for turnon at num footcandles num lx ambient light level .
provide controls with a differential between turnon and turnoff levels to prevent cycling at critical levels .
use controls that meet these requirements operates on a supply voltage of num v to num v num hz ac with an in rush rating of num a at num v and a lamp load rating of num w for incandescent and num v amperes for mercury vapor and fluorescent contains builtin surge and lightning protection has a rated life at full load of at least num onoff operations withstands an ambient temperature range of num f to num f num c to num c and is moisture proof provide singlepole singlethrow spst normally closed nc relay contacts .
ensure that the dielectric strength is at least num v between a current carrying part and the metal mounting surface .
the housing shall be approximately num in num mm high with a base diameter of no more than num in .
num mm .
the chassis shall be molded phenolic with three locking type blades and a neoprene gasket that conforms to eeinema publications .
mount the photoelectric control on an approved receptacle .
j .
lighting control use lighting contactors specifically designed for use on tungsten and ballast fluorescent and highintensity discharge lamp loads without derating .
use a contactor with these characteristics the number of poles required to open each ungrounded conductor section numilluminated sign system num lugs large enough to accommodate the cable used lockable weatherproof enclosure k. luminaires and lamps use num w mercury luminaries with h numglnumdx lamps and a boxtype configuration unless otherwise specified .
mount on horizontal luminaire support channels .
ensure that the luminaire contains integral regulator ballast and a prewired terminal board to connect the supply voltage conduit openings on each side for through wiring raintight housing made of aluminum with bakedon enamel finish noncorrosive hardware seals or gaskets at critical points to form a weathertight breathing seal .
porcelain enclosed mogul socket with spring loaded center contact and lamp grips attached to ensure proper lamp positioning lamp support on the end opposite from the socket to prevent the lamp from breaking from vibration highly polished anodicsurfaced aluminum reflector and a removable stippled heat and shock tempered glass refractor integral hinge system for the door that must be in a specified position to remove the door detachable locking brace to hold the door open during maintenance heavyduty spring loaded latch on the front of the luminaire that produces a watertight seal between the door and housing when closed ensure that the luminaire support framework is designed to withstand wind and num in num mm of ice accumulated on the entire framework as shown on the plans .
ensure that lamps are num w deluxe white mercury vapor and have num hours rated life at num hours per start .
l. ballasts use regulatortype ballast that provides rated lamp watts to the lamp through a range in primary voltage of plus or minus num percent .
use highpower ballasts with a power factor of at least num and enough open circuit voltage to start lamps at a temperature as low as num f num c. enclose ballasts for external or cabinet mounting in an epoxyencapsulated covering .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel a .
contractor requirements the person performing this work must be on the department list of approved electrical contractors or electrical subcontractors .
b .
qualified electrician a qualified electrician has a class ii license issued by the georgia state construction industry licensing board has completed an approved fouryear apprenticeship training program and is classified as a journeyman electrician .
the section numilluminated sign system num qualified electrician shall show evidence of this classification to the department engineer in charge of the construction .
for further definition see subsection num .
always have a qualified electrician on the job site when pulling electrical wiring or making electrical connections .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication a .
pull and junction boxes construct pull and junction boxes installed in the ground according to the design and dimensions and at the locations shown on the plans .
use a type approved by the engineer .
num .
construct concrete boxes of class a concrete meeting the requirements of section num including precast concrete boxes .
manufactured units are permitted when the engineer determines that they are equal in design quality and structural strength .
num .
provide cast iron steel or reinforced concrete covers as shown on the plans for each pull or junction box .
num .
provide a drainage system for each groundmounted box to keep water from accumulating inside the box .
num .
ground cast iron or steel covers used on electrical junction boxes or pull boxes as required by nec section num numc in conjunction with nec section num .
num .
ensure that the pull and junction boxes mounted on bridges and the sign structure are waterproof galvanized steel stainless steel or cast aluminum and conform to nec requirements .
num .
seal conduit entrance holes in pull or junction boxes around the conduit to the engineers satisfaction .
num .
blank off unused entrance holes and openings for conduit to be extended by other contractors with suitable plugs of plastic bituminous fiber or other approved material to prevent foreign matter from entering .
num construction a .
fees and permits pay the fees and permits required by power companies or governmental agencies .
notify the power company at least num days before the power source connection is needed .
b .
power supply and wiring use a power supply of num v numwire single phase with a supply point where the department and the serving electric utility determine unless otherwise noted .
the supply point is usually near the rightofway line near the sign location .
the sign lighting pay unit includes setting a wooden service pole that meets the requirements of section num near the edge of the rightofway to receive the service from the utility company unless otherwise indicated .
use at least a num ft num m class num pole or as shown on the plans .
num .
install the metallic service riser with a weatherhead on the service pole and a weatherproof housing containing circuit breakers of the appropriate voltage and ampere rating .
num .
when specified on the plans install a photoelectric control with the mounting hardware near the top of the service pole and a lighting contactor in a weatherproof housing on the service pole .
num .
ensure that the circuit breaker and lighting contactor have the number of poles required to open each ungrounded conductor .
section numilluminated sign system num ensure that the circuit breakers and lighting contactors have proper lugs sized for the cable to be used .
do not cut the cable strands to attach to the circuit breakers or lighting contactors .
num .
install an approved meter base in the service riser when required by the power company or indicated on the plans .
num .
furnish and install an approved num v lightning arrester at the weatherproof enclosure and connect the arrester to the grounding system .
num .
furnish an approved padlock with two keys each for locking the weatherproof housings .
key the padlocks alike if more than one padlock is required on a project .
num .
enclose the wiring on the sign framework in rigid galvanized steel conduit .
use liquidtight flexible conduit in transition areas between rigid members .
do not splice cable or wire except in junction boxes .
num .
splice the conductors according to the national electric code and the splice manufacturers recommendations .
splicing is subject to the engineers approval .
a .
make splices only in junction boxes and pole bases unless otherwise shown on the plans .
b .
make the straight or line splices of conductors the same size with tinplated copper compression tubular splices .
c. splice conductors of different sizes or different terminating directions by using tinplated copper compression ring tongue terminals on each conductor .
bolt the terminals together with stainless steel or highstrength silicone bonze hardware .
num .
use lock nuts pal nuts or lock washers to keep the connection tight .
do not use split bolt connectors .
num .
after splicing the conductor insulate the splice with heat shrinkable tubing coated with adhesive on the inner wall supplied by the manufacturer .
select the shrink tube so that when it is applied over the connector it has an insulation thickness equal to or greater than the insulation thickness of the conductor used .
ensure that the heat shrinkable tubing is ul listed and meets ansi c num latest edition requirements for submersible and direct buried splices .
num .
when bolting connectors together a. wrap the bolted connection with cloth tape before applying the heat shrinkable tubing .
b. pad the sharp points and edges on splices to prevent the heat shrinkable tubing from splitting during shrinking .
c. position the shrink tubing so that at least num in num mm of seal length num in num mm is established on each side of the splice after the tube is fully recovered .
d. ensure that the spliced joints are watertight .
num .
include an approved num v lightning arrester inside the handhole of each structural support for illuminated signs .
num .
install intheline fuses in each ungrounded conductor inside the handhole of each structural support for illuminated signs .
num .
notify the power company at least num days before the connection to the power source is needed .
c. power control the photoelectric control operates the lighting contactor that supplies power to the lighting circuit .
if the supply voltage is other than num v furnish and install a transformer in a weatherproof enclosure to provide num v control voltage .
num .
mount the circuit breaker lighting contactor and transformer if required in nemanumr lockable weatherproof cabinets located on the service pole accessible from the ground .
num .
enclose the wiring to and from the photoelectric control in rigid galvanized conduit .
d. grounding rods install the grounding rods adjacent to each structural support foundation where the supply voltage enters and adjacent to the service pole .
num .
solidly connect to the grounding conductor the sign framework and metallic noncurrent carrying materials in the lighting system .
section numilluminated sign system num num .
ensure that the neutralgrounding conductor is continuous and is connected to the luminaire housing the ground rod at each structural support and the ground rod at the service pole .
num .
drive the single ground rods vertically until the top of the rod is at least num in num mm below the finished ground .
num .
use round rod clamps to attach a length of no .
num awg bare solid soft drawn or medium hard drawn copper ground wire to the ground rod .
connect it to the grounding point on the structural support .
if penetration can not be obtained in the above manner a .
place a ground rod system consisting of num parallel ground rods at least num ft num m center to center in a horizontal pattern and at least num in num mm below the finished ground .
b .
join these rods and connect them to the grounding point on the structural support with no .
num awg bare solid soft drawn or mediumhard drawn copper ground wire and ground rod clamps .
e. conduit boxes fittings circuit breakers fuses wiring and supports furnish and install the conduit boxes fittings circuit breakers fuses wiring supports and accessories to complete the work for each circuit as required by the national electrical code .
f. fuses and fuseholders construct and install the fuseholder to retain the fuse on the load side if disconnected or broken apart .
install a waterproof boot furnished by the fuseholder manufacturer over each end of the fuseholder .
g. lightning arresters house the lightning arrester in a watertight housing .
encapsulate or seal the lead entrance into the housing .
for units that are not factory sealed apply silicone caulk to the lead entrance and install heat shrinkable tubing with precoated sealant on the interior surface over the lead entrance .
h. externally illuminated signs ensure that the lighting system provides on the face of the signs at least num footcandles num lx average maintained at num f num c ambient temperature with a uniformity ratio averageminimum of no more than num .
tilt the sign num degrees off perpendicular toward the pavement .
num .
luminaires and lamps a .
mount luminaires so that the top of the luminaire is at least num in num mm below the bottom edge of the sign and at a horizontal distance to provide uniform illumination .
b .
extend the luminaires within num ft num mm of the outside edge of the sign in each direction .
the luminaire design will direct the longitudinal separation of luminaires .
c. support the luminaires and conduit runs with a framework of aluminum or hot dip galvanized steel channel solidly fastened to the structural support with galvanized steel or aluminum clamps .
do not drive holes into the structure .
d. ensure that luminaires are accessible from the maintenance walkway for maintenance and lamp replacement .
num .
ballasts ensure that the ballasts for high intensity discharge hid or fluorescent lamps are integral with the luminaire housing or are in a separate weatherproof housing attached to the luminaire housing unless otherwise specified .
use ballasts when using multiple circuits unless otherwise specified and when operating at voltages shown on the plans .
num .
light shield provide a light shield plate made of num in num mm thick bnum alloy numtnum aluminum sheet num in num mm wide and the combined length of the signs .
erect the shield below the signs at an elevation that will eliminate glare from the luminaires to motorists traveling in the opposite direction from the face of the sign .
mount the shield to the catwalk supports with uclamps according to section num .
section numilluminated sign system num num quality acceptance the department will accept luminous intensity using a color and cosine corrected lux meter .
the department will measure at random points by placing the meter flat against the surface of the sign with the light cell parallel to the face of the sign .
the maintained luxfootcandle values will be calculated using depreciation factors of num for the luminaire and num for the lamp combined value num to provide a minimum of num footcandles num lx average maintained during the service life of the system .
a .
before testing period complete and energize each lighting circuit as early as possible .
before beginning the testing period have an electrician with a megger voltmeter and ammeter perform the following tests in the presence of the department inspectors for each lighting circuit .
num .
before connecting the phase conductors to the source breaker the sign structure or the lighting standard wiring and lightning arresters megger the circuit conductors to ensure that the phase conductors are free of grounds .
num .
test systems of num v at num v dc .
test systems less than num v at num v dc .
the minimum acceptable reading is one megohm after the test voltage has been applied for num minutes .
test the system as follows a .
before turning the circuit breaker on at the service point measure the service voltage between the phase conductors and between each phase conductor and the neutral or ground .
b .
if the proper voltage is observed turn the circuit breaker on .
wait num minutes for the luminaires to warm up and repeat the above voltage measurements .
c. after energizing the circuit for at least num minutes measure the load current in each phase conductor and the neutral at the service point .
ensure that the current in the phase conductors is balanced and no current is in the neutral .
d. record the test data in the project records .
final acceptance of the lighting system will be withheld for a numday testing period of continuous nightly automatic operation after the lighting work is complete or until other items in the contract except grassing have been accepted whichever occurs later .
if a portion of this testing period occurs after final acceptance other work will not be charged against the contract time .
correct defects in material or workmanship that occur during this numday period of continuous nightly automatic operation and until the project is accepted whichever occurs later .
if defects are found during the numday test continue testing it until achieving num days of continuous nightly automatic operation .
assume the energy cost of each circuit or part of the circuit during this test period .
others will assume the energy costs after the successful numday test period .
b .
after testing period after the testing period and at the time of final acceptance have an electrician with a voltmeter and ammeter perform the following tests in the presence of the department inspector for each lighting circuit .
num .
energize the circuit for at least num minutes and measure the service voltage between the phase conductors and between each phase conductor and the neutral or ground at the service point .
num .
if the proper voltage is observed measure the load current in each phase conductor and the neutral .
ensure that the current in the phase conductors is balanced and there is no current in the neutral .
num .
record this test data in the project records .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement each illuminated sign system completed and accepted at the location specified is measured for payment per lump sum .
section numilluminated sign system num num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment each illuminated sign system measured for payment will be paid for at the lump sum price bid for each system .
price and payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing each complete and functional system including designs when furnished by the contractor drawings electrical apparatus and wiring specified required excavation backfill concrete for conduits and other materials labor equipment and incidentals to complete the item .
structural supports for overhead highway signs will be erected and paid for separately according to section num .
signs will be paid for according to section num .
payment will be made under item no .
num illuminated sign systemsta.___ per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numstructural supports for overhead signs num general description this item includes the materials design requirements fabrication and erection of structural supports for overhead signs including excavation foundations anchor bolt assemblies backfill redressing and regrassing but exclusive of signs .
num definitions structural supports for overhead signs are defined generally as follows type description i a sign bridge type structure that spans the roadway with more than two horizontal chords supported by two columns one at each end .
each column shall have at least two braced vertical members .
ii a cantilever type structure with two or more horizontal chords supported by a single column at one end .
iii a butterfly type structure with two or more horizontal chords extending an equal distance in opposite directions from a single column .
iv a combination bridgecantilever type structure with more than two horizontal chords supported by two columns only one at one end and one at an intermediate point .
each column shall have at least two braced vertical members .
v a cantilever type structure with a maximum of two horizontal chords supported by a single column at one end .
vi a sign bridge type structure that spans the roadway with a maximum of two horizontal chords supported by two columns one at each end .
vii a bridge mounted attached to a highway bridge structural frame .
viii a butterfly type structure with a maximum of two horizontal chords extending an equal distance in opposite directions from a single column .
section numstructural supports for overhead signs num type ii and v structures maximum horizontal dimension shall be num ft num m. the horizontal dimension is measured from the columns centerline to the furthest point of the structure or sign .
type iii and viii structures maximum horizontal dimension shall be num ft num m. the horizontal dimension is measured from the furthest point of the structure or sign on one side to the furthest point of the structure or sign on the other side .
place the signs on the structure to create a slightly unbalanced condition about the columns centerline during wind loads .
types v vi and viii structural supports shall be used with flat sheet aluminum signs .
if the vertical dimension of the largest sign is num in num mm or less one horizontal chord may be used .
a walkway is required only when called for on the signing plans .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures section numconcrete structures section numsteel structures section numreinforcement steel section numrepair of galvanized coatings section numgrassing section numjoint fillers and sealers section nummiscellaneous steel materials b. referenced documents num edition of aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals aashto standard specifications for highway bridges current edition of the manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways mutcd current issue of astm standards of the american society for testing and materials american national standards institute ansi american petroleum institute api section numstructural supports for overhead signs num current issue of aashto standard specification for transportation materials and methods of sampling and testing num submittals submit to the engineer num sets of shop drawings num in x num in num x num mm half size plan sheets and num sets of design calculations num in x num in num x num mm sheets neatly bound and indexed for the structural supports anchor bolt assemblies and foundations for review and approval .
also send a copy of your transmittal letter to the state traffic operations engineer .
detail the shop drawings to permit replacement of all members and include all dimensions construction tolerances elevations at top and bottom of foundations and sizes of members .
the shop drawings shall include the material designations of the structure and of the hardware for attaching the sign the lane delineation of the roadway under the structure and the walkway .
see figure num figure num and figure num .
a .
structural supports design structural supports to use interchangeable components whenever feasible .
design type i iv and vi supports for num of the design sign area shown on the plans and num of the wind pressure as calculated by the aashto specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaries and traffic signals .
design bases for a minimum of four anchor bolts per column .
design type ii iii v and viii supports for num of the design area shown on the plans and num of the wind pressure as calculated by the aashto specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaries and traffic signals .
design bases for a minimum of num anchor bolts per column .
design type vii supports for num of the design sign area shown on the plans and num of the wind pressure as calculated by the aashto specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaries and traffic signals .
type vii bridge mounted structural frames may be attached to concrete barrier parapet or deck or steel beams .
structural supports shall not be attached to prestressed posttensioned or reinforced concrete beams unless inserts were placed in beams during fabrication or construction .
make attachments to the concrete by bolting through the concrete or using chemical anchors .
mechanical anchors will not be allowed .
section numstructural supports for overhead signs num attachments shall be flush on the traffic side of the concrete barrier parapet or deck .
no attachments shall be welded to beams .
when bolting to astm a num grade numw a num m grade num w steel bolts nuts and washers shall be made from a steel that meets mechanical properties of astm a num a numm and has weathering characteristics comparable and compatible to astm a num grade numw a num m grade numw steel .
if the structural support is attached to a bridge beam additional bracing will be required between the exterior beam and the first interior beam .
b. walkways when walkways are required by the signing plans place walkways in front of the signs and extend them at least num ft num mm outside of the edge of all overhead signs and at least num ft num mm outside of the right edge of paving or as directed by the engineer .
provide walkways in front of the lower front chord and do not locate a portion higher than the lowest part of any sign .
make the walkway continuous from end to end with a railing along the front side that can be folded down flush with the walkway when not in use .
c. anchor bolt assemblies anchor bolt assemblies shall be of the proper length area and perimeter to transfer loads from the base plates to the foundations .
the permanent template may be used in developing anchor bolts .
anchor bolts shall be at least num in .
num mm in diameter .
anchor bolt assemblies shall consist of a permanent template at the base anchor bolts leveling nuts washers temporary template securing nuts and num num reinforcing bars .
the distance between the base plate and the top of the stem shall not exceed num in .
num mm .
do not use grout between the base plate and the top of the stem .
the anchor bolt shall project num to num in .
num to num mm above the securing nut .
see figure num figure num and figure num .
d. foundations unless otherwise required on the plans design foundations as spread footings with an allowable soil bearing pressure of num ksf num kpa .
do not allow calculated bearing pressure to exceed the allowable soil bearing pressure .
no overstressing will be permitted .
drilled shaft foundation shall be used when called for on the plans and will require a soil investigation report that shall be included with your submittal .
drilled shafts shall not be used with type ii and v structures .
unless otherwise shown on the plans the top of the footing shall be at least num ft num mm below the finished ground surface .
the bottom of the foundation shall be placed on or below the original ground or on fill compacted to at least num percent of the maximum laboratory dry density according to section num .
the clearance between the anchor bolt assembly and the stem reinforcement shall be num in num mmminimum .
one foundation per structure shall have a minimum of num in num mm rigid galvanized steel conduits stubbed up num in num mm above the stem and capped a minimum of num ft num m outside the footing and a minimum of num in num mm below the finished ground surface for connecting to the underground power source or for future use .
num materials except for the type vii structure all structural members shall be tubular shapes .
all materials shall meet the requirements of the applicable specification .
do not use a material until the office of materials approves it .
furnish one legible reproducible copy of certified mill test reports including chemical analysis and physical test results covering steel and aluminum .
a .
aluminum structures materials for aluminum structures shall comply with aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaries and traffic signals .
section numstructural supports for overhead signs num b .
steel structures all components of steel structures shall be galvanized in accordance with astm a numa num m or astm a numa num m whichever is applicable .
all components galvanized in accordance with astm a numa num m shall be quenched immediately upon removal from the zinc bath .
if the contract plans require painting of the structural supports the structural supports shall be painted with an approved paint system after galvanization .
structural steel including base platesshall meet the requirements of the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaries and traffic signals .
steel pipeshall meet the requirements of astm a num types e or s. grade b astm a num grade b astm a num grade num api numlxnum or api numlxnum .
the hydrostatic requirements are waived .
other alloys of steel may be accepted if minimum yield strength of the material is less than or equal to num psi .
walkway and sign connection bolts including uboltsshall meet the requirements of subsection num .
all other connections shall be made with high strength astm a num a num m bolts with washers and nuts meeting all the requirements of subsection num .
c. anchor bolts anchor bolts nuts and washers shall meet the requirements of subsection num or astm f num f num m a num a num m and f num f num m except that threads shall be rolled and shall be num unnum unr thread profile according to ansi bnum .
bolts shall have class numa threads and nuts shall have class numb threads .
the permanent template shall meet the requirements of astm a num grade num or num a num m grade num or num or shall be an approved equal .
construct temporary templates from a material rigid enough to prevent any movement and misalignment of the anchor bolts .
d. concrete foundations class a concrete shall comply with section num .
reinforcement steel shall comply with section num grade num num .
e. silicone caulking compound silicone caulking sealant shall comply with subsection num.a.num.a.num type a. f. neoprene neoprene or its approved equal shall be approved by the office of materials .
g. ground rods ground rods shall comply with subsection num .
h. ground wire ground wire shall comply with section num .
i. threadlocker adhesive threadlocker adhesive shall be an anaerobic threadlocking and sealing compound approved by the office of materials .
j .
rigid steel conduit rigid steel conduit shall be a num in num mm rigid steel conduit meeting the requirements of subsection num.a.num section numstructural supports for overhead signs num num delivery storage and handling during shipment and handling protect the metal components to prevent bending the components and damaging the galvanized coating .
handle galvanized steel components with rope slings or other methods approved by the office of materials .
do not use metal slings chains or hooks on galvanized surfaces .
repair minor damage to galvanizing as determined by the engineer according to section num .
extensive galvanizing damage is cause for rejection .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a. footings footings may be designed as spread footings with an allowable soil bearing pressure of num ksf num kpa .
include a soil investigation and report for other footings in the submittal .
num .
increase the allowable stress for group loading as given in subsection num .
disregard the gust factor .
num .
the factor of safety in overturning shall be num .
num .
unless shown otherwise on the plans extend the top of each footing at least num in num mm above the ground .
place the footings to miss present and known future underground installations .
num .
stub at least two num in num mm rigid galvanized steel conduits up num in num mm into the riser of one footing and cap at a distance of num ft num m outside the foundation .
place the conduit at least num in num mm below the ground level to connect to the underground power feed or for future use .
num fabrication fabrication of structural supports and anchor bolt assemblies shall be according to the approved shop drawings and the plans .
only use fabricators of structural supports and anchor bolt assemblies that are listed on the departments qualified products list as a qualified fabricator of structural supports and anchor bolt assemblies .
a .
general use aluminum or steel supports for signs .
steel supports shall be galvanized after fabrication .
connections may be welded bolted riveted or fastened by other means if the connecting method ensures adequate strength and does not distract from the aesthetics of the structure .
do not weld splice structural members .
fabricate columns chords and struts from one piece of material by using one longitudinal seam weld .
bolted splicing of truss chords may be allowed if shown on approved shop drawings .
use struts to brace all truss chords .
provide an electrical outlet on the front horizontal chord with a cover for connecting to the power source or for future use .
weld into the column near the base the column with the conduit in the foundation a handhole assembly curved on the front to follow the contour of the column .
ensure that the handhole reinforcing frame has a tapped hole to accommodate the grounding lug and secure a cover to the frame with at least two screws .
the column shall have a jhook wire support welded inside near the top .
provide brackets for mounting signs .
these brackets shall be adjustable to permit mounting the sign faces at any angle between a truly vertical position and three degrees from vertical .
obtain this threedegree angle by rotating the top edge section numstructural supports for overhead signs num of the sign downward toward approaching traffic .
all brackets shall be equal in length to the vertical dimension of the signs being supported .
b. welding all welding shall be done in the shop by current gdot certified welders .
the welders will weld the steel structures according to the latest aws structural welding code as modified by the gdot specifications and will weld aluminum structures according to subsection num .
c. fabrication and testing fabricate components in a jig or fixture to prevent distortion during and after welding and to ensure exact alignment at the time of erection .
carefully check welds by visual and nondestructive inspection by destructive testing of weld samples fabricated during welding or by other methods approved by the engineer .
sufficiently test weld samples to verify the reliability of production welding .
d. galvanizing after fabrication thoroughly clean and galvanize all components of steel structures including clamps and brackets using the hotdip process according to astm a numanum m or astm a numanum m whichever is applicable .
clean and galvanize interior and exterior surfaces of hollow sections .
all components galvanized according to astm a numa num m shall be immediately quenched when removed from the zinc bath .
galvanize type vii bridge mounted structural frames except where the support is attached to weathering steel .
when attached to weathering steel fabricate the support of astm a num grade numw a num m grade numw steel or paint with an approved paint system to match the color of the weathering steel after galvanization .
num construction a .
protection of metal during shipment and handling protect all metal components to prevent damage to galvanized coatings .
handle galvanized steel components with rope slings or alternate methods approved by the office of materials before use .
do not use metal slings chains or hooks on galvanized surfaces .
repair minor damage to galvanizing as determined by the engineer according to sections num .
metal components will be rejected if they have extensive damage to galvanizing .
b .
foundations for construction methods see sections num num and num .
chamfer the edges of the stems num in num mm .
stems shall have a type iii finish to at least num in num mm below the finished ground surface unless otherwise noted on the plans .
the engineer shall inspect the anchor bolt assembly installation before the placement of concrete .
complete the anchor bolt assembly installations so as to prevent movement during the concrete placement .
tolerance for the placement of anchor bolt assemblies shall be num in .
num mm horizontally and num num degrees vertically .
do not remove the temporary template until the footing and stem concrete have been in place at least num hours .
the office of materials shall inspect the type ii and v sign structure footings before the column is erected .
the omr will perform a second inspection after the column is erected and will also perform ultrasonic testing of the anchor bolts at this time .
type ii and v sign structures will not be accepted until the footing inspections have been performed and approved .
section numstructural supports for overhead signs num c. erection erecting the structure shall include placing and leveling a leveling nut on each anchor bolt .
use a washer with each leveling nut .
set the column on the washers without the horizontal structure and place and tighten a washer and securing nut on each anchor bolt .
tightening is turning the nut an eighth of a turn after the nut is snug tight and then applying the threadlocker adhesive .
after tightening inspect the connections to ensure full bearing of the top and the bottom washers on the base plate and to ensure that the distance between the top of the stem and the bottom of the base plate does not exceed num in .
num mm .
no structure will be accepted if this dimension is greater than num in .
num mm .
attach the horizontal structure to the column with astm a num a num m bolts .
install astm a num a num m bolts according to subsection num.f hightensile strength bolt connections .
do not reuse bolts and nuts after tightening them .
d. type vii bridge mounted coat with silicone sealant all surfaces that are in contact with concrete .
separate with neoprene or an approved equal material all surfaces that are in contact with dissimilar metals .
e. grounding install ground rods for each structural support adjacent to the foundation with the conduit as indicated below num .
vertically drive single num ft num m long ground rods until the top of the rod is at least num in .
num mm below the finished ground .
num .
attach a length of num bare copper numstrand wire to the ground with suitable ground rod clamps and connect it to the grounding nut of the column .
num .
if sufficient penetration can not be obtained in the above manner place a ground rod system consisting of num parallel ground rods a minimum of num ft num m centertocenter in a horizontal pattern and at least num in .
num mm below the finished ground .
join these rods and connect them to the grounding nut of the column with num bare copper numstrand wire and suitable ground rod clamps .
f. finished ground surface ensure that the finished ground surface matches the typical section adjacent to the structural support .
do not adjust the ground surface around the stem to obtain num in num mm minimum projection above finished ground surface .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the quantity measured for payment shall be each structure type at the specified location completed and accepted .
this shall include design fabrication and construction of structural supports including anchor bolt assemblies foundations excavation backfill redressing and regrassing but exclusive of signs .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this item measured according to subsection num measurement for each structural support for overhead highway signs is paid for at the lump sum contract unit price bid for the complete structure .
section numstructural supports for overhead signs num payment will be made under item no .
num structural support for overhead highway sign type ista.___ per lump sum item no .
num structural support for overhead highway sign type iista.___ per lump sum item no .
num structural support for overhead highway sign type iiista.___ per lump sum item no .
num structural support for overhead highway sign type ivsta.___ per lump sum item no .
num structural support for overhead highway sign type vsta.___ per lump sum item no .
num structural support for overhead highway sign type vista.___ per lump sum item no .
num structural support for overhead highway sign type viista.___ per lump sum item no .
num structural support for overhead highway sign type viiista.___ per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numstrain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies num general description this work includes furnishing and erecting overhead sign and signal support strain poles and steel wire strand cable according to this specification and the plans .
make concrete or steel strain poles at any one location within the project from the same material unless the plans designate a particular type for that location .
use timber strain poles only where designated on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures section numhighway signs section numtraffic signal installation section nummiscellaneous steel materials section numpiling and round timber section numpreservative treatment of timber products section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members section nummast arm assemblies section numstrain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies num b. referenced documents astm a num a num m atsm a num a num m astm a num a num m astm a num a num m astm a num m astm a num astm a num a num m num submittals for steel and prestressed concrete strain poles prepare drawings and other data that give the pole dimensions and design .
submit them to the bridge engineer for approval before beginning construction .
see section num for additional design requirements for type iv strain poles .
ensure that the total deflection of strain poles resulting from the dead load plus the live load is equal to or less than num percent of the pole height measured from the ground line to the point at which the load is applied .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section class a concrete num class b concrete num class aaa concrete num timber poles num seasoning and preservative treatment num steel wire strand cable num guys and anchors per plans a .
steel strain poles use shafts for steel strain poles fabricated of steel that conforms to one or more of the following astm a numa num m astm a num grade numw a num m grade numw astm a num aisi num aisi num sae num ensure that the steel characteristics or strength do not change significantly from welding .
num .
shaft section numstrain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies num use the appropriate shape of shaft which is a continuous taper and is constructed of corrosion resistant steel unless otherwise specified to the dimensions required for the specified classification type .
form the shaft from one piece with one electrically welded longitudinal joint and no intermediate horizontal joints .
num .
pole use a pole with a mill certified yield strength of at least num psi num mpa .
after forming and welding the pole the shaft may be longitudinally cold rolled under enough pressure to flatten the shaft to conform to the required yield strength .
for type iv steel strain poles ensure that the wall thickness is at least num gauge or num in .
num mm .
num .
traffic signal strain poles see section num for additional design requirements assemble traffic signal strain poles as follows a. weld a handhole assembly curved on the front to follow the contour of the pole into the shaft near the base .
b .
include a tapped hole on the handhole reinforcing frame to accommodate the grounding lug .
c. secure the cover to the frame using at least two stainless steel screws .
d. weld a jhook wire support inside near the top of the shaft for the poles .
e. if an overhead power source is shown use a clamp and clevis device to connect the wire to the pole and provide a weatherproof wire inlet close to the attachment .
conceal the other wiring to and from the controllers within the pole .
for traffic signal strain poles with mounted controller cabinets andor meter provide num num in .
num mm half coupling wire inlet to mount the controller cabinet on the designated pole .
ensure that the location where cable enters the wire inlets at the top of the traffic signal strainpoles has a neat design and appearance .
do not use junction boxes at the top of poles to facilitate cable entrances .
num .
grounding provide a num in num mm approved grounding connector in the shaft .
equip the top of the shaft with a removable cap held securely in place .
hotdip galvanize the shaft according to astm a numa num m unless otherwise specified .
num .
base secure to the lower end of the shaft a onepiece cast steel base or a onepiece flat plate base that meets the requirements of astm a num grade numanum m grade num or a num a num m as required .
a .
ensure that the base after welding develops the full strength of the adjacent shaft section to resist bending .
b .
attach the base to the concrete foundation with four bolts according to this subsection .
c. provide four removable cast or pressed steel ornamental covers with each base and attach it to the base .
num .
anchor bolts furnish each pole with four anchor bolts of the size required in the manufacturers shop drawings .
ensure that the anchor bolts meet the requirements of subsection num .
galvanize the threaded portions according to astm a numa num m and the plan details .
b. prestressed concrete strain poles use shafts for these poles that comply with subsection num.b except give the poles a steel trowel finish on the unformed side and any required pointing to eliminate air and water holes left by the steel forms .
use class aaa concrete .
use a marking tool to identify the pole class and height or cast it with a die in the front face of the pole to produce letters and numbers at least num in num mm high and wide .
c. miscellaneous hardware use hardware for steel and concrete strain poles with these features num .
the steel required to fabricate other structural components is weldable and conforms physically and chemically to applicable astm specifications .
section numstrain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies num num .
nuts bolts and screws conform to these diameter requirements if diameters are less than num in num mm the hardware is passivated stainless steel that meets the requirements of aisi num commercial grade .
if diameters are num in num mm and larger the hardware conforms to astm physical and chemical qualifications that ensure strength commensurate with the parts being connected .
galvanize the hardware according to astm a numa num m. num .
use galvanized steel ground rods num in num mm diameter num in num mm and num ft num m long unless otherwise specified .
ensure that galvanizing has a coating of at least num ozft² num gm² according to astm a numa num m. d. strain poles for atms applications provide poles for supporting cctv vds and microwave radar detection devices that meet the following design specifications designed to num mph aashto wind load requirements limited to a live horizontal deflection at the top equal to or less than num of pole height in a num mph wind with a design load of four static cameras and one movable camera .
torsional deflection limited to a num degree maximum .
install mounting brackets as illustrated on the plans which are galvanized steel and are compatible with the mounting design of the specified cameras and pantilt devices and are affixed to the pole to prohibit rotation .
install all wiring internal up to the camera mounting bracket with no external conduit on the pole .
provide a weatherproof wiring access point or handhole on the pole .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
timber poles construct the following according to the plan num .
excavate the hole to the proper diameter and depth .
num .
erect the pole to an outofplumb position with its base resting on the bottom of the hole .
hold the pole in its outofplumb position until the cavity around the pole is filled and compacted .
b .
steel poles construct the steel poles in accordance with the manufactures specifications .
section numstrain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies num c. prestressed concrete poles drill round holes or dig square holes for prestressed concrete poles .
num .
do not disturb the natural ground adjacent to the foundation more than necessary to construct the foundation .
num .
excavate to the lines and elevations shown on the plans or established by the engineer .
a .
dispose of the excavated materials as directed .
b. regrade and grass the disturbed areas to match the contiguous area .
num .
backfill according to the plans .
furnish and place class a concrete as required according to the applicable portions of section num and plan details .
num .
when leaving lifting eyes or loops on the pole to facilitate handling and erecting burn them off and patch them after erecting .
d. ground rods install ground rods for steel and prestressed concrete strain poles adjacent to the strain pole base as follows num .
vertically drive the single ground rods num ft num m long until the top of the rod is at least num in num mm below the finished ground .
num .
use exothermic weld or ground rod clamps as approved by the engineer to attach a length of no .
num awg solid copper wire to the ground rod .
connect the wire to the grounding nut of the strain pole base .
num .
when penetration can not be obtained in the above steps place three parallel ground rods at least num ft num m center tocenter in a horizontal pattern and at least num in num mm below the finished ground .
join the rods and connect them to the grounding nut of the pole base with no .
num awg solid copper wire and exothermic weld or ground rod clamps as approved by the engineer .
e. rake use the proper rake to erect the pole so that the pole will be plumb after the load is applied .
f. erecting cable follow these steps to erect the cable num .
install the top cable num in num mm from the top of the pole unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
num .
install the bottom cable no more than num ft num m from the top of the pole according to plan details .
num .
secure the cable to each pole as shown on the plans .
use preformed cable grips instead of cable clamps if necessary .
num .
apply enough tension to pull timber poles toward each other past the plumb position by one degree .
minimum sag of num .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement highway signs are measured and paid for under section num .
a .
treated timber poles treated timber poles of the class and length specified are measured by the number of units installed including guys anchors and hardware .
section numstrain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies num b .
steel cable steel cable of the specified size are measured by the linear foot meter complete in place .
c. steel strain poles steel strain poles are classified and measured for payment by each unit and by type according to the following table type span length i less than num ft num m ii num to num ft num m to num m iii greater than num ft num m iv traffic signal strain pole d. prestressed concrete strain poles prestressed concrete strain poles are measured for payment by each unit and pole type as specified in the above table .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a .
treated timber poles treated timber poles of the class and length specified will be paid for at the contract price bid per each .
payment is full compensation for poles concrete encasements excavation for pole and anchor holes temporary pole alignment bracing guys and items to complete the work .
b .
steel strain poles steel strain poles of the type specified complete in place and accepted including backfill erection and necessary regrassing will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for each pole of each type .
c. prestressed concrete strain poles prestressed concrete strain poles of the type specified complete in place and accepted including backfill erection and necessary regrassing will be paid for at the contract unit price bid for each pole of each type .
when neither concrete nor steel strain poles are specified either type is acceptable .
measurement is specified in subsections num.c .
or num.d .
the payment item is strain poles type___ .
d. steel cable steel cable complete in place and accepted will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter of each specified diameter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and erecting the cable and for providing hardware including thimbles but not hardware that is a part of the pole .
payment will be made under item no .
num treated timber pole class___ __ ft m per each item no .
num steel strain pole type____ per each item no .
num prestressed concrete strain pole type___ per each item no .
num strain poles type___ per each item no .
num steel strand wire cable___in .
mm per linear foot meter section numstrain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies num num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numretroreflectorized railroad cross buck sign num general description this work includes furnishing and erecting retroreflectorized railroad cross buck signs including wood or steel posts and concrete bases for steel posts at locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures b. referenced documents specifications of the association of american railroads mutcd num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use class b or better concrete for steel posts that conforms to the dimensions and details shown on the plans and meets the requirements of section num .
ensure that the concrete surface is uniform and free of honeycomb .
ensure that other elements of the sign conform to the requirements of the specifications or to the specifications of the association of american railroads whichever is indicated on the plans .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numretroreflectorized railroad cross buck sign num num construction a .
steel post place a steel post as follows num .
set each steel post for a sign assembly in a concrete foundation according to the plans .
num .
securely hold each post vertically until the concrete is strong enough to hold the post and sign without support .
num .
replace cracked bases .
num .
backfill around the bases with satisfactory materials .
num .
carefully tamp the backfill in place .
after setting the steel post curing the concrete and backfilling fasten the cross buck sign to the post according to the details shown in the plans .
b .
wood post place a wood post as follows num .
place each post in a prepared dry hole at least num in num mm diameter .
num .
backfill the hole with a mixture of portland cement and damp clean friable soil using num percent cement by volume .
num .
thoroughly tamp the resultant mixture in place around the post .
num .
erect the posts vertically to the depth and at an angle to the roadway as shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
the post shall penetrate the ground at least num ft. num m. num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor quality and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement retroreflectorized railroad cross buck signs are measured for payment by the number in place completed and accepted .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment cross buck signs measured for payment will be paid for per each .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and erecting the item complete in place according to the plans and specifications and for providing materials and concrete excavating backfilling and disposing of the surplus materials .
payment will be made under item no .
num retroreflectorized railroad cross buck signs steel post per each item no .
num retroreflectorized railroad cross buck signs wood post per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numguardrail num general description this work includes furnishing and erecting guardrail and appurtenances according to the specifications .
conform with the lines grades and locations shown on the plans or as directed .
place wbeam tbeam or t beam with modified offset block as shown on the plans and in the proposal .
unless designated otherwise references to guardrail shall mean wbeam .
unless provided for in the plans this work also includes grading to provide the t distance shown on the standard behind the guardrail grading to construct shoulder flares for approved guardrail anchorage systems and widened shoulders along guardrail runs according to section num and section num furnishing and setting additional posts all lengths together with the necessary offset blocks and hardware when specified in the plans or in the proposal num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numroadway excavation section numembankments section numrepair of galvanized coatings section numgrassing section numguardrail components section numpaint b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
nchrp num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials a .
steel guardrail use steel guardrail and steel posts unless specified otherwise on the plans or in the proposal .
b. guardrail auxiliary items ensure that the guardrail includes auxiliary materials and work to make connections and other guardrail or structures required to complete the construction indicated on the plans .
c. offset blocks section numguardrail num except at locations approved by the engineer use plastic offset blocks according to subsection num plastic offset blocks for w beam guardrail installation .
offset blocks for t beam guardrail installations shall be plastic or modified steel offset blocks per the standard plans including construction details and section num .
when approved by the engineer use treated wood offset blocks according to subsection num wood guardrail posts and offset blocks.only in isolated areas of w beam or tbeam guardrail installations where standard size blocks would not provide a satisfactory fit .
wood offset blocks andor wood posts may be specified within the limits of an approved anchorage terminal .
use only one type of offset block within continuous runs of guardrail except in transitions or where specified in the plan details .
ensure that materials meet the requirements of these specifications material section guardrail elements and fittings num cable end anchor assembly num steel post and offset blocks num wood post and offset blocks num plastic offset blocks num galvanized repair compound num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication a. guardrail anchorages mounting devices and brackets fabricate and install guardrail anchorages mounting devices brackets and other appurtenances according to the plan details or as approved by the engineer .
num construction a. erection of posts num .
wood guardrail posts shall not be used at any location except as required for guardrail anchorage .
num .
set the posts in post holes or drive them vertically at the positions depth spacing and alignment shown on the plans .
num .
install posts for guardrail on bridges or other structures as detailed on the plans .
num .
backfill post holes to the ground line with approved material tamped in place in layers of not more than num in num mm thick .
section numguardrail num num .
if posts are driven protect the tops of the posts with a suitable driving mat or cap .
remove and replace posts damaged during driving at no additional cost .
num .
backfill the post holes that are drilled in rock as indicated on the plans or directed by the engineer .
num .
remove and reset posts that are out of alignment or too low in grade .
do not cut off posts that are too high drive them to the proper elevation .
do not deviate more than num in num mm vertical and horizontal post alignment .
num .
fit the posts with an offset block according to this specification and plan details .
num .
set additional posts and appurtenances when required according to the requirements of this section and the plan details .
num .
when necessary to place posts in existing pavement slope paving etc .
exercise extreme care in the cutting process protect the adjacent areas and remove all loose material .
cut holes in the existing paved area by drilling or sawing .
replace the pavement material in kind to the full depth of the original pavement as directed after the post is installed .
b. erection of rail erect the rails to attain a smooth continuous rail line that conforms to the line and grade of the highway .
determine the height of the rail from the dimensions shown on the plans .
use bolts long enough to extend at least num in num mm beyond the nuts after they are firmly tightened .
install reflectorized washers on guardrail and anchorages .
where double faced guardrail is located on the inside shoulder of medians install reflectorized washers only on the side which is nearest to traffic .
in stall reflectorized washers according to this specification and plan details .
c. damaged spelter coating repair damaged spelter coating according to the requirements of section num .
d. guardrail anchorages guardrail anchorage type num shall be any guardrail terminal designed for use with w beam guardrail installations which has been approved by the fhwa as meeting the requirements of the national cooperative highway research report num test level num nchrpnum tlnum .
where the anchorage is connected to t beam guardrail installations a transition is required as shown in the standard details .
construct type num anchorages according to the manufacturers requirements except for the grading which will be as shown in the plans and as directed by the engineer .
obtain copies of the manufacturers details and installation instructions and provide copies of the same to the engineer prior to the installation of the unit .
provide a fhwa letter of approval fornchrpnum tlnum compliance of the terminal to be used as type num anchorage .
yellow and black nose striping as shown on the plans will be required on all type num anchorages .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement a. guardrail guardrail of the type specified is measured in linear feet meters including terminal sections when installed .
measurement does not include guardrail anchorage assembly .
when double faced guardrail of the type specified is installed the single guardrail on each side of the posts is not measured separately .
each single rail is a component part of the double faced guardrail installation .
section numguardrail num b. guardrail anchorage assembly this item is measured by the number of each type installed according to the details shown on the plans .
c. guardrail posts all lengths of guardrail posts when shown in the plans or proposal as a separate payment item are measured by the unit .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment guardrail of the type specified complete in place including posts offset blocks and hardware will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter .
guardrail anchorage assembly will be paid for at the contract price per each assembly complete in place .
all lengths of guardrail posts when shown in the contract documents as a separate pay item will be paid for at the contract unit price .
payment is full compensation for furnishing the posts offset block hardware and work to complete the item .
for projects that do not include grading as a pay item payment for guardrail and guardrail anchorage systems on shoulders includes embankment material for shoulders as shown on the standard details or plans compacting embankment material for shoulders to the approximate density of the surrounding soils removing existing vegetation and obstructions before placing the embankment grassing the reconstructed area according to section num payment will not be increased or decreased when wood offset blocks are added to or substituted for steel or plastic offset blocks .
payment will be made under item no .
num guardrail type____ per linear foot meter item no .
num double faced guardrail type____ per linear foot meter item no .
num guardrail for bridges type____ per linear foot meter item no .
num double guardrail for bridges type____ per linear foot meter item no .
num guardrail type t modified offset block per linear foot meter item no .
num guardrail anchorage type___ per each item no .
num guardrail posts all lengths per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numcable barrier num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numfence num general description this work includes constructing fence and gates according to these specifications where shown on the plans or designated by the engineer .
ensure that this work conforms with the lines and grades shown on the plans .
the fence types covered by these specifications are chainlink woven wire barbed wire field fence barrier fence num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures section numrepair of galvanized coatings section numwood posts and bracing section numpreservative treatment of timber products section numfencing b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals furnish the engineer in duplicate a materials certification for temporary barrier fence physical properties according to section num of the specifications .
num materials ensure that materials conform to the following specifications material section concrete class a or b num wood fence posts and bracing num metal caps num.a.num .
preservative treatment num chain link fence fabric posts gates and accessories num woven wire fence fabric gates and posts num barbed wire including posts num ground rods and connections num field fence num section numfence num a. chainlink fence use the fencing material shown in subsection num .
ensure that posts fabric wire appurtenances and gates when required are the same or matching type for each project unless otherwise directed .
b. wovenwire or barbedwire fences use wood or steel post types as shown on the plans .
ensure that each project fence and post is the same type and shape unless otherwise specified .
c. temporary barrier fence num .
use barrier fence fabricated from highdensity polyethylene or polypropylene containing u.v .
stabilizers num .
ensure the barrier fence meets the following a is free of manufacturing flaws b meets the following physical properties maximum mesh opening size num ¾ num mm x num num num mm roll width num ft. num m color international orange maximum porosity num minimum yield strength md num lbft num knm num delivery storage and handling do not store barbedwire wovenwire fence fabric steel posts hardware and other materials on the ground .
place them in floored buildings on platforms or on wooden timbers or poles .
ensure that the floors platforms or props are high enough to prevent the wire and steel posts from touching ground or surface water .
wire or steel posts that are damaged from improper storage between fabrication and final erection will be rejected .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction construct fence except for field fence within the rightofway line .
do not allow the permanent installation to encroach on adjacent property .
a .
general fencing requirements follow these general requirements when placing the fence num .
construct the fence to follow the contour of the ground .
place the bottom of the fence fabric at least num in num mm from the ground surface but no more than num in .
num mm .
section numfence num num .
clear the fence line a maximum of num ft num m wide and grade where necessary to provide a neat appearance .
num .
when the ground profile in low areas changes abruptly use longer posts to maintain the ground clearance .
stretch multiple strands of barbed wire on the posts with num in num mm or less vertical clearances between strands of barbed wire .
num .
connect the existing cross fences to new fencing except for obviously unserviceable fences .
num .
place corner or end posts whichever is appropriate at the junction with existing fences and fasten the wires in the new and existing fences to the posts .
num .
install corner or pull posts for new fencing without placing tension on existing fence posts .
at structures fasten new fencing to end posts to permit livestock to pass through or under the structure freely unless otherwise directed or shown on the plans .
b .
posts and appurtenances follow these steps to install posts and appurtenances num .
place and install the posts as shown on the plans .
if the soil is class i ii iii or v drive c and num in num mm tubetype line posts for all fence types at least num ft num mm deep instead of using concrete encasement .
num .
encase in concrete line posts installed in marshy or swampy areas class iv soils .
install posts in rock according to this subsection .
num .
encase the corner end and pull posts in concrete as shown on the plans .
num .
replace posts damaged by driving .
when posts are set in concrete fill the entire hole around the post with class a or b concrete .
num .
hand mix concrete for batches of num ydnum num mnum or less .
firmly brace the posts and hold them in place until the concrete has set .
num .
ensure that the distance between the end pull and corner or angle post assemblies does not exceed the following for chainlink fence straight line num ft num m for chainlink fence curved line num ft num m for wovenwire fabric num ft num m field fence num ft num m num .
on end pull and corner or angle post assemblies for wovenwire fence add additional approach posts for greater stability when necessary or as directed by the engineer .
num .
set posts placed on concrete walls slabs or solid rock in round holes num in num mm deep or as indicated on the plans .
num .
fill the space around the post with molten lead or a cement filler approved by the laboratory .
num .
repair the posts after cutting or drilling .
repair galvanized steel posts according to section num .
repair other metal posts according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
treat timber posts and braces with a preservative coating of the type specified in subsection num .
c. fence erection install fence fabric or barbed wire when posts are set and braced except when posts are set in concrete footings .
when posts are set in concrete footings delay installing the fabric or wire to allow the concrete to cure at least num days .
when barbed wire fence is required install three strands unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
d. gates ensure that the gate assemblies are the length height and type designated on the plans .
install the gate to provide a num degree swing .
weld the gate frames into units .
properly coat them after welding according to section num .
section numfence num stretch fabric that matches the fence fabric taut over the gate frame .
provide gate assemblies with a positivetype locking device padlock and keys .
e. electrical ground wherever a power line carrying more than num volts passes over the fence install a ground rod .
num .
install the ground rod at the nearest point directly below the point of crossing .
num .
where possible drive the rod into the ground for a full num ft num m of penetration .
a .
in rocky soil drive the rod slanted to provide num in num mm of cover at the tip .
b .
in solid rock install two ground rods at the nearest post on each side of the power line crossing where soil conditions will permit .
num .
use clamps to attach a length of no .
num awg bare copper numstrand wire between the fence and the ground rod .
f. trespassing on private property to trespass on private property outside the rightofway or easements provided on the plans obtain permission from the property owner for the intrusion .
use field fence for replacing fence outside the rightofway or for providing temporary fence at locations shown on the plans or directed by the engineer .
field fence is considered permanent unless it is specified as temporary .
g. maintaining livestock construct the fence to prevent livestock from escaping .
schedule fence removal and new fence installation to provide continuous security of the livestock .
if security is not maintained and animals or property are damaged or lost compensate the owner or make repairs at no cost to the department .
replace or repair damaged existing fences .
h. temporary barrier fence install the barrier fence according to the manufacturers instruction .
use suitable strength metal wood or composite posts .
ensure the posts are long enough to be embedded to a depth that will provide stability to the fence have sufficient rigidity to hold the fence in a vertical position .
the maximum post spacing is num ft num m. attach the fence to the posts with nails staples or wire ties spaced every num in .
num mm along the posts .
do not allow the method of attachment to create a safety hazard .
at the completion of the project or as directed by the engineer remove all barrier fence including posts and incidentals .
num quality acceptance repair rusted wire or posts before final acceptance or remove and replace with new material at the contractors expense .
do not replace the fence if rusting occurs as a result of ponding water after the fence is erected .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement fence will be measured by the linear foot meter along the bottom of the fence from the outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence .
measurement for payment includes posts post assemblies pull corner and gate posts and gates unless gates are a separate pay item .
when gates are paid for separately they will be measured as complete units of the type and size specified and installed .
temporary barrier fence will be measured by the linear foot meter along the bottom of the fence outside of end posts for each continuous run of fence .
num limits general provisions num through num .
section numfence num num payment the accepted quantities of fence measured as indicated above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter of the specified type and height of fence .
payment includes gates unless the gates are paid for separately .
the accepted quantity of gates when listed as a separate pay item will be paid for at the contract unit price for each type and size of gate specified complete in place including posts and hardware locks keys and other incidentals shown on the plans .
payment includes clearing and grubbing grading excavating backfilling disposing of surplus materials and furnishing materials and incidentals such as molten lead or cement filler on concrete walls slabs or solid rock to complete the work .
when field fencing is temporary payment includes removal .
materials salvaged from temporary field fence remain the contractors property .
the accepted quantities of temporary barrier fence measured as indicated above will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter of fence .
payment to complete the item includes all necessary clearing installation of fence including hardware and other incidentals and removal of the fence .
the barrier fence posts and all incidentals become the property of the contractor upon removal .
payment will be made under item no .
num field fence woven wire per linear foot meter item no .
num field fence barbed wire strand per linear foot meter item no .
num field fence special design per linear foot meter item no .
num chainlink fence type___ height___ in mm wire gauge___ per linear foot meter item no .
num chainlink fence type___ height___ in mm wire gauge___ with extension arms and barbed wire per linear foot meter item no .
num wovenwire fence per linear foot meter item no .
num barbedwire fence strand per linear foot meter item no .
num gate fence type___ size___ per each item no .
num barrier fence height____ ft m per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numrepair of galvanized coatings num general description this work includes field repairing damaged galvanized coatings except coatings on wire and chainlink wire fence .
when galvanized materials are welded the work applies to the welded area and to the damaged areas adjacent to the weld .
it does not apply to new materials deficient in coating .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numpaint section numrepair of galvanized coatings num b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use material for repairing galvanized coatings that conforms to the following material section galvanizing repair compound num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation before applying repair compounds num .
clean the area of grease using an approved solvent recommended by the producer of the galvanizing repair compound .
num .
thoroughly brush the area with a stiff wire brush to remove dirt loose galvanizing welding slag or other foreign material .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction apply the repair compound smoothly and evenly with a moderately filled paint brush when the temperature of the steel compound and surrounding air is above num f num c. on smooth surfaces ensure that the minimum dry film thickness is num mils num mm .
on rough and pitted surfaces the engineer may require more than one coat .
when additional coats are required allow a drying time of at least four hours between coats .
do not brush over partly dried applications .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work will not be measured separately for payment .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numrepair of galvanized coatings num num payment this work shall be performed at the contractors expense .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numtraffic signal installation num general description this work consists of furnishing materials and erecting a traffic signal installation including all traffic signal equipment poles bases wires and miscellaneous materials required for completion of the installation .
ramp meters are defined as a form of traffic signalization and all general provisions for traffic signalization are applicable unless otherwise noted in the plans and specifications .
it also includes all test periods warranties and guarantees as designated in subsequent sections and response to maintenance and operational issues as described in subsequent sections .
apply for obtain and pay for all utility services communications services to and pole attachment permits required by all utility owners that are necessary for the signal installation and operation required in the plans .
the contractor will be responsible for establishing utility services and ongoing monthly costs related to utility services until final acceptance of the signal project .
upon completion of a successful burn in or operational testing period for the signal installation the contractor will be responsible for an orderly and uninterrupted transfer of these services and permits to the local government or other jurisdiction that will be responsible for subsequent maintenance and operation .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public section num prosecution and progress section num traffic control section numconcrete structures section numsteel structures section numpainting structures section numjacking or boring pipe section numchangeable message signs section num highway signs section numstrain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies section numrepair of galvanized coatings section numhighway lighting section numtraffic signal installation num section numlighting standards and luminaires section numelectrical wire cable and conduit section numgrassing section numelectrical work section numcoarse aggregate section numfine aggregate section numcuring agents section numjoint fillers and sealers section numaluminum alloy materials section nummiscellaneous steel materials section numreinforcement and tensioning steel section numcastings and forgings section numpiling and round timber section numpaint section numepoxy resin adhesives section numsign fabrication section numsteel sign posts section numsign blanks and panels section numreflectorizing materials section nummast arm assemblies section numelectrical wire and cable section numelectrical conduit section nummiscellaneous electrical materials section numtraffic signal equipment section num wireless communication equipment section num wireless communication installation section numfiber optic system section numcctv system section numvideo detection system section numcommunications electronic equipment section numnavigator integration b. referenced documents national electrical manufacturers association nema traffic control systems standards no .
ts num nema traffic control systems standards no .
ts num aashto roadside design guide the manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd current edition section numtraffic signal installation num national electrical code national electrical safety code nesc gdt num determining maximum density of soils gdt numa determining the theoretical minimum dry density of soils or soil aggregates containing num retained on the no .
num sieve gdt numb determining the theoretical minimum dry density of soils or soil aggregates containing num retained on numinch sieve using a num pound rammer and a num inch drop gdt num family of curves method for determining maximum density of soils num submittals use only equipment and materials that are on the departments qualified products list qpl .
these products have been evaluated by the office of traffic operations and have proven their capability of meeting the appropriate georgia department of transportation specification .
any of these products may be used without sampling or pretesting .
the contractor shall submit a letter to the field engineer stating which qpl items they will use .
submittal letter shall include qpl number and product description .
the field engineer andor department designee must ascertain that the construction item is the same material identified on the appropriate qpl and will acknowledge receipt of these items in the project diary or as required by the construction manual .
written approval is required from the state traffic engineer or district engineer prior to beginning any work on the traffic signal installation and or installing the proposed on the work site .
a .
review for all traffic signal material submittals the engineers review of the material should be completed within forty five num days from the date of receipt of the submission unless otherwise specified .
the state traffic engineer or district engineer will advise in writing as to the acceptability of the material submitted .
the state traffic engineer or district engineer may determine that submitted equipment is approved in which no further action is required .
in the event materials submitted for use are rejected the contractor is required to resubmit materials within fifteen num days of notification of material failure or rejection .
resubmittal of subsequent materials for review will be considered the start point of a new approval cycle as described .
the department reserves the right to be reimbursed by the contractor for reviewing any equipment andor component submittals after a second submittal of equipment proposed for use on the project .
b. submittal costs no separate measurement or payment will be made for submittal costs .
all costs associated with reproduction of submittal material documents samples and mailing expensed will be the responsibility of the contractor and are not subject to reimbursement by the department .
all submittal material becomes the property of the department and will not be returned to the contractor .
c. steel strain pole concrete strain pole or steel pole certification instruct the supplier or manufacturer of the strain poles or steel poles with traffic signal mast arms to submit a certification including mill certificates to department of transportation office of materials num kennedy drive forest park georgia num include the following in the certification section numtraffic signal installation num a statement that the items were manufactured according to the specifications including the specification subsection number project number and p.i .
number instruct the supplier or manufacturer to send copies of the transmittal letter to the engineer .
prepare shop drawings and related signal strain pole design calculations with the following criteria num sag and num foot signal head height .
provide bending moment at yield to determine the foundation size according to the signal strain pole foundation drawings .
submit all shop drawings and related signal strain pole design calculations to the traffic engineer .
the traffic engineer will forward to the state bridge and structural design engineer for review and approval .
obtain written approval prior to pole fabrication and installation .
upon acceptance of the pole certification provide one copy of the design calculations and shop drawings to the agency responsible for maintaining the traffic signal installation .
all pole drawings shall include roadway and pole elevations .
show all dimensions and material designations of the designs on the drawings .
see subsection num for the certification procedure for poles and anchor bolts .
d. signal item certification only equipment andor material on qpl shall be submitted for certification .
all others will be rejected .
submit four num copies of material catalog product numbers and descriptions to the engineer .
one copy of all submittals is to be provided to the maintaining agency .
reference the project number p.i .
number and qpl number for the following traffic signal items signal heads led signal modules mounting hardware controllers cabinet assemblies battery backup system bbs detectors monitors conflictivds cable load switches blankout signs lane use signals preformed cabinet bases other related signal equipment including but not limited to conduit pull boxes ground rods enforcement indications etc .
e. test results submittal submit the results of the testing of the following items to the engineer .
a copy of the test result submittals shall be provided to the maintaining agency .
loop detector testing signal cable testing interconnect cable testing preemption testing controller and cabinet testing from manufacturer including conflict monitor traffic signal monitor section numtraffic signal installation num any other operational testing required by the engineer f. mast arm pole chart for locations with mast arm pole installations submit a mast arm pole chart for review and approval by the state bridge and structural design engineer .
the mast arm pole chart shall also include a sketch on an num ½ inch x num inch num mm x num mm sheet of paper showing the following curb lines location of mast arm pole based on utility information and field location verified by contractor .
final location of mast arm pole must meet the criteria for setback from the road as specified in the roadside design guide by aashto and in the standard detail drawings .
distance from both adjacent curbs to mast arm pole distance along mast arm from pole to curb and from curb to each proposed signal head directional arrow street names position of luminaries label the sketched distances .
once this pole chart is approved the contractor shall use the distances measured to the proposed signal head locations when ordering the mast arm to ensure that the mast arm is fabricated with holes for signal head wiring in the correct locations .
num materials num delivery storage and handling a. statesupplied equipment for projects where traffic signal equipment is to be supplied by the georgia department of transportation obtain state supplied traffic signal equipment from the traffic signal electrical facility tsef num .
contact the engineer by phone or correspondence within one week after receiving the notice to proceed and arrange for a date time and location to pick up the signal equipment and materials from the traffic signal and electrical facilities tsef .
num .
sign gdots warehouse issue request form num to accept delivery of the statesupplied equipment from gdots traffic signal equipment warehouse .
initial form num if equipment is received from a gdot district field office .
num .
inspect the equipment to ensure that it is operating properly and perform any operational tests within ten num calendar days after receiving the equipment .
num .
before installation and within ten num calendar days certify to the engineer in writing that the statesupplied equipment was received in good condition .
num .
notify the engineer in writing if the statesupplied equipment is defective .
the state signal engineer will replace the defective statesupplied equipment .
num .
if no written dissent is received after ten num calendar days or if equipment is installed in the field the engineer will consider this equipment to be satisfactory and accepted .
num .
the contractor shall supply new in like and kind state approved equipment to replace statesupplied equipment that is damaged or lost .
b .
signal equipment see section num for signal equipment specifications .
the signal equipment components supplies or materials used in traffic signal installation may be sampled and tested if not previously approved by the department .
test according to the specifications and the sampling testing and inspection manual using one or more of the following methods section numtraffic signal installation num have the department use their own facilities .
have the supplier or manufacturer use their facilities with an authorized department representative to witness the testing .
provide independent laboratory test results indicating compliance with department specifications referenced in subsection num related references of this document .
when testing by the department is required supply the item to the department .
acceptance of materials tested does not exclude further testing or waive warranties and guarantees required by the specifications .
c. cable use cable conforming to section num section num and section num and the appropriate imsa nema or ul specifications for the wire or cable .
obtain pole attachment permits required by local utility companies or pole owners to allow joint use for signal cable hardware or other auxiliary devices .
d. interconnect communications cable num .
use fiber optics interconnect cable or spread spectrum radio for all new interconnected signal systems .
see section num for fiber optic cable or spread spectrum information specifications marking and installation and testing techniques .
num .
use copper cable only as directed by the engineer or where specifically shown in the plans .
refer to subsection num construction of this document for installation .
e. conduit on structures use galvanized rigid steel materials for all exposed conduit for cabling .
use galvanized rigid steel grs conduit on the exterior of signal poles and other structures and to house signal conductors for the entire length from the weather head on the pole to the interior of the cabinet or to the pull box and ground conduit using an approved grounding bushing.see subsection numv .
num construction requirements refer to subsection num of the specifications regarding proper conduct of the work .
num personnel for the definition of a qualified electrician see subsection num .
num equipment use machinery such as trucks derricks bucket vehicles saws trenchers and other equipment necessary for the work and approved by the engineer prior to installation operations .
num preparation utility permits a .
application apply for obtain and pay for utility services and pole attachment permits for signal operation traffic signal communications including standard telephone service and signal communications as required in the plans .
b .
maintenance the contractor will be responsible for establishing utility services and ongoing monthly costs related to utility services until final acceptance of the signals installation or in the event of multiple installations the contractor will be responsible for utility costs until overall project acceptance .
after final acceptance the contractor will provide an orderly transfer these services and permits to the local government or jurisdiction responsible for maintenance and operation .
ensure that the transfer does not interrupt service .
section numtraffic signal installation num c. utility location num .
adjustment prior to ordering signal poles locate utilities and adjust the location of poles where necessary to minimize utility conflicts .
obtain approval from the district traffic engineer for any deviation from the plans .
determine the final length of mast arms based on any field adjusted pole locations .
final location shall be approved by the district traffic engineer .
num .
clearance when installing aerial cable of any type it is the contractors responsibility to ensure that overhead clearance and separation requirements conform to local utility company standards the nec and the nesc .
refer to the standard details drawings for further information on utility clearances .
num .
preemption when traffic signal preemption is used coordinate with the railroad fire department or any other agency that uses preemption to obtain preemption output and route output cable to the signal controller operating the intersection to be preempted .
it is the contractors responsibility to obtain all permits and approval for crossing at grade or grade separated railroad facilities .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
acquiring and disposing of equipment do not modify the signal equipment design and operation without the district traffic operations engineers written approval .
all traffic signal equipment removed or replaced shall be returned to district traffic signal shops unless otherwise noted in the plans or as directed by the engineer or district signal engineer .
provide an inventory list and arrange a mutually agreeable delivery time with the district signal engineer twentyfour num hours in advance .
all materials not returned to the district signal shop shall be the responsibility of the contractor to remove and dispose .
b .
traffic signal equipment modification and removal upon the department issuance of notice to proceed any existing traffic signal equipment responsibilities for maintenance operations and response to traffic signal malfunction become the responsibility of the contractor and provisions of subsection num contractor warranty and maintenance apply .
num .
remove existing signal equipment that is not used in the final installation when the new signal equipment is operational .
carefully remove equipment to minimize damage and retain it in its original form .
this equipment may include strain poles including the foundation down to num feet num mm below ground level finished grade timber poles traffic signal cabinets including contents cabinet base and work pads original signal heads including span wire support other equipment not retained in the final installation ensure that unused equipment is secured and disposed of in accordance with all environmental protection agency regulations and department instructions .
num .
replace traffic signal equipment that the district signal engineer determines has been damaged or destroyed during installation modification or removal of the traffic signal at no expense to the department .
replace with new material .
num .
if the engineer finds that the existing material shown in the plans to be relocated is unsatisfactory replace with new material .
the costs will be paid for as extra work .
section numtraffic signal installation num num .
remove old signal heads by the end of the day that the new signal equipment is placed in operation .
remove all other signal equipment within seven num days after operations of the newly installed equipment .
c. auxiliary cabinet equipment provide auxiliary cabinet equipment or special purpose equipment with connecting harnesses if necessary or as shown in the plans or standard detail drawings .
num .
install the equipment in its associated cabinet .
extraneous wiring may be necessary to install the equipment .
additional cabling shall be enclosed in nema enclosure and neatly secured .
num .
connect the auxiliary equipment to its cable harness or insert it in premounted racks or sockets .
d. signal controllers furnish and install approved microprocessor controllers at the locations shown in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
all equipment furnished shall comply with section numtraffic signal equipment .
num .
identify the controller and other auxiliary equipment by model and revision numbers .
these numbers shall agree with previously approved catalog submittals .
num .
assemble the controller cabinet and auxiliary equipment to provide the operational sequence shown in the plans and future operations specified .
ensure the controller functions as a unit with the cabinet assembly .
num .
ensure controller and auxiliary equipment are provided ac power from receptacles marked for controller power .
num .
the department will provide controller firmware .
the contractor shall provide the controller to the department .
the department will load the firmware into the controller and notify the contractor that the controller is ready to be picked up .
if the controller is purchased with applications firmware ensure that the firmware provided is the current department licensed version of firmware including boot code .
current firmware version shall be at the date of application turn on .
num .
unless otherwise specified in the plans or directed by the engineer thirty days prior to installation of equipment the contractor shall deliver the controllers to and pick up the controller from the traffic signal electrical facility tsef atlanta office .
the department shall have num work days to load the controller firmware starting from the date the contractor delivered the controllers to the department .
num .
for num signal controllers used for ramp metering ensure the watchdog timer muzzle jumper is selected on the field inputoutput module .
this is required for operating with a num monitor .
e. cabinet assembly num .
location the cabinet should be located in accordance with the plan location however if the cabinet location needs to be moved choose a location that a. protects maintenance personnel from vehicles when servicing the equipment b .
allows the front panel door of the controller to open away from the intersection for view of signal indications while servicing or performing cabinet work .
c. does not block a sidewalk or passageway and complies with federal regulations for americans with disabilities act ada clearance requirements .
d. is located away from the roadway or curb line to prevent vehicular damage to the cabinet .
e. is not located within drainage areas or installed in areas likely to collect and hold surface water .
f. relocate the cabinet to avoid conflicts from proposed reconstruction projects commercial driveways etc .
within the rightofway at the engineers discretion .
num .
erection install and level traffic signal controller cabinets at locations shown in the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
a .
install cabinets to conform to the standard detail drawings .
install pole or basemounted as indicated in the plans .
cabinet base shall not extend more than num inches above final grade .
section numtraffic signal installation num b. seal basemounted cabinets to their base using silicone based sealer .
pliable sealant used shall not melt or run at temperatures as high as num ºf num ºc .
c. use prefabricated bases and work pads d. install technician pad in front and rear of the controller cabinet door and if applicable in front of battery backup cabinet door .
see standard details for pad information .
e. close all unused conduit in the controller base with a pvc cap sized appropriately .
do not permanently affix the conduit cap to the conduit .
seal those conduits used for signal cable with a pliable sealant to prevent moisture and insects from entering the cabinet via the conduit .
num .
field cabinet wiring all wiring shall be neat and secured and comply with nec nema and table num table num table num table num table num and table num of this specification .
a .
cut field cabinet wiring to the proper length and organize it in the cabinet .
wire lengths should be slack minimum num feet allowing for future modifications .
use at least no .
num awg wire for the conductors between service drop and ac and the ac terminals .
b .
do not mount electrical meter to the cabinet .
submit power pedestal or other method of providing location for mounting to the engineer .
c. label all field terminals and conductors so as to identify the specific field input .
d. crimp terminal connections to conductors with a ratchettype crimping tool that will not release until the crimping operation is completed .
e. do not use splices inside the controller cabinet base or conduit .
f. do not use solid wire except grounding wire .
g. supply the cabinets with cabinet wiring diagrams schematic drawings pin assignment charts and manuals for circuits and components .
store these documents in the cabinet in a resealable weatherproof container .
f. signal monitors furnish signal monitor equipment as follows num .
mount signal monitors in a rack with appropriate connectors to attach to the wiring harness .
num .
program the monitor according to the signal operation indicated in the signal plans before placing the installation in flash or stopandgo operation .
provide any signal monitoring programming tools required to program the monitor to the maintaining agency .
num .
configure and equip the signal monitor to monitor all red signal indications .
ensure that the red output for unused or vacant load bays or output slots is jumpered to num v ac .
num .
for its cabinets configure the cmu and amu .
num .
for ramp metering cabinets mount model num monitor in rack and provide the necessary programming required for the ramp meter operation as shown in the plans .
g. power disconnect install a power disconnect box at each intersection as shown in the standard detail sheets .
ensure the power disconnect is installed at the top of the cabinet pole or as indicated on plans .
install service cables from disconnect box and terminate as specified on the controller cabinetwiring or battery backup diagram .
h. flashing beacon furnish and install the flashing beacon controller at the locations shown in the plans andor as directed by the engineer .
install it as a complete unit solid state flasher and cabinet with time clock if applicable and ensure that it conforms to this specification .
section numtraffic signal installation num i. loop detector systems install and test loop detector systems according to nema standards publication ts num section num inductive loop detectors subsequent revisions except as shown in the plans details notes and this specification .
ensure that loop detectors are complete and fully operational before placing the signal in stopandgo operation .
num .
general installation requirements each loop must consist of at least two turns of conductor unless otherwise shown in the plans or this specification .
do not place a portion of the loop within num feet num m of a conductive material in the pavement such as manhole covers water valves grates etc .
a .
install pull boxes condulets and conduits before beginning loop installation .
b .
ensure that the ambient pavement surface temperature in the shade is at least num ºf num ºc before cutting roadway and placing sealant into saw cuts .
num .
loop saw cuts a .
outline the loop on the pavement to conform to the specified configuration .
b .
ensure each loop has a separate saw cut with a minimum distance between saw cuts of num inches .
c. install the detector loop in a sawed slot in the roadway surface deep enough to provide at least num inches num mm of sealant cover .
d. ensure that the slot is at least num inches num mm wide for stranded no .
num awg loop wire thwn xhhw or xlpe and at least num inches num mm wide for polyethylene or pvc encased no .
num awg loop wire .
num .
at the intersection of the slots drill a num inch num mm diameter hole or make miter saw cuts in the pavement .
overlap miter saw cuts at the intersection of saw cuts so that the slots have a fulldepth and smooth bottom .
num .
prevent the wire from bending sharply .
num .
do not install detector loop wire unless sawed slots are completely dry and free of debris .
pressure wash the slot to guarantee adhesion of the loop sealant .
use compressed air to thoroughly dry the sawed slot .
num .
install the loop wire starting at the nearest pull box or condulet around the loop for the specified number of turns and back to the pull box or condulet .
note loop wire from the street is to bespliced in condulets or pull boxes only .
num .
refer to table num for the number of turns for quadrupole loops .
refer to table num for the number of turns for bipole loops .
bipole loops require at least three num turns .
e. press the wire in the slot without using sharp objects that may damage the jacket .
f. hold the loop in place every num feet num m with num inch num mm strips of rubber neoprene flexible tubing or foam backer rod as approved by the engineer .
g. leave the hold down strips in place when filling the slot with loop sealant .
h. where encased loop wire is used apply a waterproof seal to the ends of the polyethylene tubing that encase the wire to prevent moisture from entering the tube .
i .
where the loop wires cross pavement joints and cracks protect the loop wires using the method specified in traffic signal details in the plans .
when crossing expansion joints drill a num inch diameter hole minimum num inches deep or to bottom of saw cut .
do not install loop wires in an expansion joint .
j .
twist loop leadin num turns per foot .
num .
loop sealing after successfully testing each loop fill the slots with sealant to fully encase the conductors .
a. seal the slot within one hour of cutting slot .
b .
ensure that the sealant is at least num inches num mm thick above the top conductor in the saw cut .
c. apply the sealant so that subsequent expansion does not extend the sealant material above the pavement surface .
d. in case of accidental spill before the sealant sets remove surplus sealant from the adjacent road surfaces without using solvents or epoxy sealants .
section numtraffic signal installation num e. when the engineer determines that the loop sealant can accommodate traffic but the surface is tacky dust the sealer on the pavement surface with cement dust before opening the roadway to traffic .
f. dispose of the solvents used to clean loop installation equipment according to the manufacturers specifications and local state and federal regulations .
num .
loop connections connect loop conductors to a shielded leadin cable that runs from the pull box adjacent the pavement edge or condulet to the detector hookup panel in the controller cabinet unless otherwise specified in the plans .
a .
use continuous no splices shielded leadin cable from the pull box or condulet to the cabinet input file terminal .
do not ground the shield in the loop leadin cable at the cabinet .
b. connect each loop to an individual detector channel as specified in the plans .
c. if the plans specify that two or more loops will be operated on the same detector channel or detector amplifier unit wire them in series to their loop leadin at the pull box or condulet .
d. use seriesparallel connections when series connections do not meet the manufacturers specified operating range for the detector amplifier unit .
e. make weathertight and waterproof splices as detailed on the plan standard detail sheets .
make loop splices to loop leadin cable only after the detector system has been tested and demonstrated under traffic conditions to the engineers satisfaction .
num .
loop maintenance locate all existing loops determine the operational status of all loop assemblies and notify the engineer prior to commencing loop construction activities at the intersection .
maintain all existing operational loops unless otherwise notified by the engineer .
repair of an existing loop that is nonoperational prior to beginning work will be considered as extra work .
locate points of conflict between new loops and existing loops and install all new loops and saw cuts so as not to cut existing loop leadins and loop wires that are to be retained .
if an existing operational loop that is not scheduled for replacement fails during the construction time frame notify the engineer and complete the replacement of the damaged loops immediately .
the engineer may grant a twentyfour num hour period to repair the loops if their operation is not critical .
all costs associated with the replacement of the loops damaged during construction shall be charged and paid for by the contractor .
j. pedestrian push button install the push button with a pedestrian instruction sign as illustrated on the departments standard detail sheets and according to the plans .
num .
place the pedestrian buttons as shown on the signal plan sheet and within num inches num mm of sidewalk or concrete landing pad .
position the pedestrian button to correspond to the appropriate signal phase .
locate pedestrian buttons perpendicular to the appropriate signal indication and signal phase and as field conditions require .
num .
place the center of the buttons between num inches num m and num inches num m above the sidewalk or ground level .
num .
seal all openings to prevent moisture from entering the pushbutton .
k. cable install and connect electrical cable to the proper equipment to produce an operating traffic signal system .
use stranded copper cable conforming to section num .
install wiring in accordance with imsa nema ul and the departments traffic signal wiring standards shown in tables num num num num num and num of this specification .
in addition to the information provided below see section num section num and section num for cable equipment and installation specifications .
section numtraffic signal installation num table num vehicular signals georgia dot wiring standards signal indications numsection signal heads seven conductor cable numsection signal heads seven conductor cable phases num num num and num phases num num num and num phases num num num num red red wire red wire yellow orange wire orange wire green green wire green wire red arrow white wire with black tracker yellow arrow black wire black wire green arrow blue wire blue wire neutral white wire white wire white wire table num vehicular loop detectors georgia dot wiring standards detectors phases num num num and num presence loops phases num and num setback pulse loops and phases num and num presence loops loop wires shielded loop leadin cable num pair loop wires shielded loop leadin cable num pair right curb lane red wire redblack pair num red wire redblack pair num second lane green wire green black pair num green wire green black pair num third lane white wire whiteblack pair num white wire whiteblack pair num fourth lane red wire redblack pair num red wire redblack pair num fifth lane green wire greenblack pair num green wire greenblack pair num sixth lane white wire whiteblack pair num first leftturn lane red wire redblack pair num second leftturn lane green wire greenblack pair num table num pedestrian signals georgia dot wiring standards signal indications numsection signal heads seven conductor cable phases num and num phases num and num dont walk red wire white wire with black tracker walk green wire blue wire neutral white wire white wire section numtraffic signal installation num table num pedestrian detectors georgia dot wiring standards push buttons num pair shielded cable phase num and num phase num and num call green and black pair red and black pair note do not use aluminum cable .
table num ramp meter signals georgia dot wiring standards signal indications numsection signal heads seven conductor cable lnumlnumlnum red red wire yellow orange wire green blue wire neutral white wire table num ramp meter loop detectors georgia dot wiring standards demand detector loops queue detector loops loop wires shielded loop leadin cable num pair loop wires shielded loop leadin cable num pair lane num red wire redblack pair num red wire redblack pair num lane num greenwire green black pair num green wire greenblack pair num lane num white wire whiteblack pair num white wire whiteblack pair num passage detector loops mainline detector loops if used loop wires shielded loop leadin cable num pair loop wires shielded loop leadin cable num pair lane num red wire redblack pair num red wire redblack pair num lane num green wire greenblack pair num green wire greenblack pair num lane num white wire whiteblack pair num white wire whiteblack pair num l. signal cable for vehicular signal heads and pedestrian heads install cable for signal heads and pedestrian heads as follows section numtraffic signal installation num num .
for vehicle signal heads install one numconductor signal cable for each intersection approach from the controller cabinet to the throughsignal head on each approach as directed by the engineer .
from this leftmost signal head install a numconductor signal cable to each of the other signal heads on the same approach in sequence .
num .
for pedestrian signal heads install one numconductor signal cable from the controller cabinet to each pedestrian head installation location to operate either one or two pedestrian heads .
num .
make a minimum num foot num mm diameter num turn weather drip loop as shown in the standard detail drawings in the plans at the entrance to each signal head .
num .
neatly tie signal cables leaving a structure or weatherhead to enter a signal fixture .
tie the cables to the messenger cable as illustrated in the standard detail drawings .
num .
for ramp meter signal heads install one numconductor signal cable for each lane of the ramp meter operation from the controller cabinet .
m. interconnect communications cable use fiber optic interconnect cable as specified in the plans for all new interconnected signal systems .
see section num for fiber optic cable information specifications and installation and testing techniques and all other signal interconnect methods .
install interconnect communications cable as follows num .
provide support for the interconnect cable on new or existing utility poles or signal poles install underground in conduit .
num .
use fiber optic standoff brackets as needed to prevent damage from poles trees and other structures .
num .
pull cables with a cable grip that firmly holds the exterior covering of the cable .
num .
pull the cables without dragging them on the ground pavement or over or around obstructions .
the engineer will inspect and approve the cable prior to installation .
use powdered soapstone talc or other approved inert lubricants to pull the cable through the conduit .
num .
when using a separate messenger cable spirally wrap the communications cable with a lashing machine according to the imsanum specifications .
num .
do not splice outside the signal cabinet except at the end of full reels of num feet num m. num .
ensure that splice points are near support poles and accessible without closing traffic lanes .
num .
unless drop cable assemblies for communications are used loop the cable in and out of the control cabinets .
coil and tie num feet num m of cable in the controller cabinet foundation .
tape the cable ends to keep moisture out until the terminals are attached .
num .
prevent damage to the cable during storage and installation .
n. loop detector leadin cable use numpair shielded leadin cable in compliance with section num and manufacturers recommendations for detector loop leadin installed for loop detectors .
ensure the three pair has num separate distinguishing colors .
use a shielded leadin cable connecting the loop to the detector hookup panel in the controller cabinet unless otherwise specified in the plans .
provide a separate num pair for each phase or future phase .
num .
splice the loop detector wire to a shielded loop detector leadin cable in a pull box adjacent to the loop detector installation .
num .
use continuous no splices shielded leadin cable from the pull box or condulet to the cabinet input file terminal .
if induced voltage is present the shield in the loop leadin cable shall be grounded to cabinet per nec .
otherwise do not ground the shield in the loop leadin cable at the cabinet .
num .
connect each loop to an individual detector channel as specified in the plans .
num .
each detection loop shall be connected to the control cabinet via separate leadin pair .
num .
set back loops with aerial loop leads to the control cabinet shall be supported by ¼ inch messenger cable with no splices between the control cabinet and the initial point of aerial attachment .
note do not allow anyone to step on or run over any cablewith vehicles or equipment .
section numtraffic signal installation num num .
make weather tight and waterproof splices between leadin and loop wire .
loop installation may be approved only after the detector system has been tested and demonstrated under traffic conditions to the engineers satisfaction during the operational test period .
o. pedestrian push button leadin use numpair shielded leadin cable compliant with section num for pedestrian push buttons .
install one numpair shielded lead in cable to each pedestrian push button stations location to operate either one or two push buttons .
do not ground the shield for the push button leadin cable at the controller cabinet .
do not use the same num pair cable for loop and pedestrian detectors .
p. messenger cable strandedsteel the messenger is used to support signal cable indicated in the plans as overhead cable .
use devices such as aluminum wrap aluminum wire ties or lashings to attach the cable .
before erecting the messenger strand determine the suspension strand length to span the distance between the poles .
run the messenger strand from structure to structure without splicing .
the minimum allowable sag is two and onehalf percent num for timber poles five num for strain poles of the longest diagonal distance between the signal poles unless pole manufacturers specifications exceed num .
calculate attachment points for the messenger strand at the signal pole according to the plan detail sheet .
set messenger strands so that the height conforms to the clearances on the standard detail drawings .
attach cables to messenger cable using lashing wire aluminum ties or lashing rods subsection num .
if lashing rods are used use lashing rods sized for the cables and messenger strand .
only use lashing rods that are of the same material as the messenger strand .
lashing wire shall only be used to support aerial loop leadin and fiber optic .
num .
drill wood poles to receive the eye bolts so that the span wire and eyebolt at each connection form a straight angle .
num .
never pull or strain the messenger on the eye bolt to an angle of variance greater than ten degrees numº .
num .
attach down guy wires to guy hooks .
use a minimum num inch messenger cable for down guys .
never attach them directly to the eye of an eyebolt .
num .
ensure that messenger strand clearances conform with local utility company standards .
num .
make stranded messenger cable attachment points with the appropriate size strand vises or num bolt clamps .
stranded steel messenger cable is not paid for separately under this specification .
num .
use minimum ¼ inch messenger cable .
num .
use standoff brackets as needed to prevent damage from poles trees or other structures .
note never splice messenger cable between structures or stand off brackets .
q .
underground cable for signal circuits underground cable for signal circuits includes cable with conduit as shown in the plans .
install cable under existing pavement or surfaced shoulder according to subsection num .
num .
cable in conduit pull cable into conduits as follows a .
pull cables into conduits without electrical or mechanical damage .
pull cables by hand only .
the use of trucks or other equipment is not permitted unless approved by the engineer .
if mechanical pulling is approved do not exceed the manufacturers tension rating for the cable .
b .
pull cables with a cable grip that firmly holds the exterior covering of the cable .
c. use powdered soapstone talc or other inert lubricants to place conductors in conduit according to manufacturers recommendations .
d. handle and install the conductors to prevent kinks bends or other distortion that may damage the conductor or outer covering .
section numtraffic signal installation num e. pull all cables in a single conduit at the same time .
when pulling cables through hand holes pole shafts etc .
use a pad of firm rubber or other material between the cable and the opening edges to prevent cable damage .
f. when installing cable in conduit with existing signal cable circuits remove all existing cables and pull them back into the conduit with the new cables .
g. the distance between pull boxes in a run of conduit shall not be greater than num feet num m unless otherwise shown in the plans or approved by the engineer or district signal engineer with the exception of fiber optic cable .
h. the distance between pull boxes in a run of conduit for fiber optic cable shall not exceed num feet num m unless otherwise shown in the plans or approved by the engineer .
identification tape and tone detection wire shall be used for fiber optic cable in conduit .
all unused conduit shall have a continuous pull cable installed between pull boxes .
num .
splices required splicing shall be performed according to the national electric code use materials compatible with the sheath and insulation of the cable .
insulate required splices with electrical insulation putty tape plastic pressure sensitive allweather num mil num mm electrical tape in accordance to standard details .
a .
make the spliced joints watertight .
note splice detector wires to shielded loop detector leadin at pull boxes located immediately after loop wire leaves the roadway .
no splices will be permitted in shielded loop detector leadin cable from this point tothe controller cabinet .
r. conduit and fittings install conduit by type grs hdpe pvc as shown in the plans and the standard detail drawings .
refer to the nec for conduit full percentages .
separate the power cable to the controller cabinet from all other cables in its own numin num mm galvanized rigid steel conduit except inside poles .
ensure that conduit conforms to section num section num and section num with the following addition use flexible conduit only where shown in the details or as directed to do so in writing by the district signal engineer .
use the conduit size specified in the plans unless otherwise directed by the engineer .
obtain written approval from the engineer prior to installing conduit other than the size specified in the plans .
all num inch num mm conduit elbows shall be sweep type .
the minimum radius for the elbow is num inches num mm unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
note do not use multicell conduit .
install conduit and fittings as follows num .
ensure that exposed conduit on poles are galvanized rigid steel grs conduit .
num .
ream the ends of metallic conduit after cutting the threads .
ream other conduit as necessary .
num .
cut the ends square and butt them solidly in the joints to form a smooth raceway for cables .
num .
make conduit joints to form a watertight seal .
num .
coat metallic conduit threads with red or whitelead pipe compound thermoplastic or teflon seal .
ensure that they are securely connected .
num .
make plastic conduit joints with materials recommended by the conduit manufacturer .
num .
install bushings in the conduit to protect the conductors .
when conduit is installed for future use properly thread and cap the ends of the metallic conduit runs .
a. plug the ends of nonmetallic conduit runs to prevent water or other foreign matter from entering the conduit system .
section numtraffic signal installation num b. seal the exposed conduit ends with a permanently malleable material .
c. ensure that empty conduit installed for future wire or cable has a nylon pull string or cord inside that is impervious to moisture and rot and can withstand a load of num pounds num kg without breaking .
secure this pull cord at each open end and at each pull box .
num .
ensure that conduit on pole exteriors are mounted with galvanized twohole straps or clamps .
place the clamps not more than num feet num m from junction boxes condulets or weatherheads .
place it at num foot num m intervals elsewhere .
a. fasten the clamps to wood poles with galvanized screws or lag bolts .
b .
do not install conduit risers on concrete steel or mast arm poles unless approved by the engineer .
num .
install a weatherhead at the end of exterior conduit runs on a pole or other structure to prevent moisture or other matter from entering the conduit .
num .
after installation ensure that the conduit or fitting placement has not warped or distorted any condulet terminal control or junction box .
num .
ensure conduit that is terminated at poles is grounded at the pull box .
s. underground conduit underground conduit includes encased or direct burial conduit .
num .
install the conduit in a trench excavated to the dimensions and lines specified in the plans .
a .
provide at least num inches num mm finished cover unless otherwise specified .
b .
under pavement excavate at least num inches num mm below the bottom of the pavement .
num .
before excavation the contractor is responsible for determining the location of electrical lines drainage or utility facilities in the area to prevent damage .
a .
place the conduit where it will not conflict with proposed guardrail sign posts etc .
b .
change locations of conduit runs pull boxes etc .
if obstructions are encountered during excavation .
changes are subject to the engineers approval .
c. where possible provide at least num inches num mm between the finished lines of the conduit runs and utility facilities such as gas lines water mains and other underground facilities not associated with the electrical system .
num .
when the conduit run is adjacent to concrete walls piers footings etc .
maintain at least num inches num mm of undisturbed earth or firmly compacted soil between the conduit and adjacent concrete or when the conduit is encased between the encasement and the adjacent concrete .
unless specified in the plans do not excavate trenches in existing pavement or surfaced shoulders to install conduit .
num .
when placing conduit under an existing pavement install the conduit by directional boring or other approved means .
see section num for directional boring pipe specifications .
obtain the engineers approval prior to installing conduit by means of boringmethod .
num .
when the plans allow trench excavation through an existing pavement or surfaced shoulder restore the pavement shoulder surface base and subgrade according to the specification .
num .
cut trenches for conduit on a slight grade num percent minimum for drainage unless otherwise specified .
when the grade can not be maintained all one way grade the duct lines from the center both directions down to the ends .
num .
avoid moisture pockets or traps .
excavate vertical trench walls .
num .
tamp the bottom of the trench to produce a firm foundation for the conduit .
num .
when necessary to prevent damage sheet and brace the trenches and support pipe and other structures exposed in the trenches .
num .
conduit installed for fiber optic cable installation shall have identification tape and detectable tone wire installed for detection as specified and detailed in the project standard detail sheets .
num .
install direct burial conduit as shown in the plans .
use rigid galvanized steel or polyethylene conduit .
excavate at least num inches num mm below the top of the finished ground or num inches num mm below the bottom of the pavement .
section numtraffic signal installation num num .
when rock is in the bottom of the trench install the conduit on a bed of compacted finegrain soil at least num inches num mm thick .
num .
conduit installed for fiber optic cable installation shall have detectable tone wire installed for detection as specified in section num and detailed in standard detail sheets .
t. encased conduit place encased conduit in the locations shown in the plans unless otherwise specified .
construct as follows num .
construct the encasement using class a concrete that meets requirements in section num .
num .
extend the encasement or conduit under roadway pavements or surfaces num inches num mm past the outer edge of paved shoulders or sidewalks or past curbs if no shoulder or sidewalk is present .
num .
extend the conduit at least num inches num mm beyond the encasement .
num .
place num inches num mm of concrete in the bottom of the trench and place the conduit on top of it .
num .
temporarily plug the ends of the conduit to prevent concrete or foreign materials from entering .
num .
cover the conduit with at least num inches num mm of concrete .
wait to encase the conduit with concrete until the engineer inspects and approves the conduit .
num .
cure the concrete encasement according to subsection num.z except curing may be reduced to twentyfour num hours .
use a precast encasement if approved by the engineer .
u. backfilling immediately backfill the conduit after the engineers inspection and approval except for encased conduit which must complete a twentyfour num hour cure period .
num .
backfill with approved material free of rocks or other foreign matter .
num .
backfill in layers no greater than num inches num mm loose depth up to the original ground level .
num .
compact each layer to one hundred percent num of the maximum laboratory dry density as determined by gdt num gdt numa gdt numb or gdt num whichever applies .. v. conduit on structures install conduits condulets hangers expansion fittings and accessories on structures according to the plans and unless otherwise specified the following num .
run the conduit parallel to beams trusses supports pier caps etc .
num .
install horizontal runs on a slight grade without forming low spots so they may drain properly .
num .
run conduits with smooth easy bends .
hold the conduit ends in boxes with locknuts and bushings to protect the conductors .
num .
when not specified in the plans or special provisions submit the type and method for attachment to structures to the engineer for submission to the district signal engineer for approval .
num .
ground galvanized rigid steel conduit in pull boxes .
all exposed conduit shall be galvanized rigid conduit unless otherwise specified .
w. testing conduit after installing the conduit test it in the presence of the engineer .
num .
test conduit using a mandrel num inches num mm long and num inches num mm smaller in diameter than the conduit .
num .
repair conduit to the engineers satisfaction if the mandrel can not pass through .
if repairs are ineffective remove and replace the conduit at no additional cost to the department .
num .
thoroughly clean the conduits .
when installing conduit but wiring at a later date a .
perform the mandrel test .
b. ream the duct opening to remove burrs or foreign matter .
section numtraffic signal installation num c. thoroughly clean the duct .
d. provide and install a weatherproof cap at each open end .
e. all installed conduit not used or containing cable shall have a continuous nylon pull string installed between junction boxes .
x. grounding ground the cabinets controller poles pull boxes and conduit to reduce extraneous voltage to protect personnel or equipment .
note grounding shall meet the minimum requirements of nec .
provide permanent and continuous grounding circuits with a currentcarrying capacity high enough and an impedance low enough to limit the potential above the ground to a safe level .
perform grounding as follows num .
bond the grounding circuits to nonferrous metal driven electrodes .
use electrodes that are at least num inches num mm in diameter num feet num m long and are driven straight into the ground .
num .
use the shortest possible ground lead that leads directly to a grounding source .
num .
ensure that the maximum resistance between the ground electrode and the earth ground is no greater than twenty five num ohms .
num .
connect the ground electrodes and the ground wire with an exothermic weld or ground rod clamp as approved by signal engineer .
num .
connect neutral conductors to the cabinet bussbar and ground them at each terminal point .
num .
ground the cabinet with a no .
num awg solid copper wire between the bussbar to the ground electrode .
bends shall not exceed num inch num mm radius bends .
num .
permanently ground the poles by bonding the no .
num awg solid copper wire to a separate ground rod .
num .
ground polemounted accessories to the pole .
num .
underground metallic conduit or down guys are not acceptable ground electrodes .
do not use snapon connections .
num .
for extended distances between ramp meter and ivds additional grounding may be required by the manufacturer .
y .
ground rod install copper clad ground rods adjacent to the traffic signal pole bases controller cabinet bases and in pull boxes to shield and protect the grounding system .
when ground rods are not protected bury them at least num inches num mm below the finished ground level .
num .
use num inch num mm diameter ground rods at least num feet num m long .
use copper clad ground rods .
num .
drive single ground rods vertically until the top of the rod is no more than num inches num mm above the finished ground .
num .
attach a length of no .
num awg solid copper wire to the top of the ground rod using an exothermic weld .
num .
when controller cabinets are mounted on timber poles ground them with no .
num awg solid copper wire attached to the ground rod .
run the wire inside a minimum num inch num mm rigid conduit attached to the timber pole and to the chassis ground in the controller cabinet .
num .
when ground penetration is not obtained a .
place a horizontal ground rod system of three num or more parallel ground rods at least num feet num m centerto center and num inches num mm below the finished ground .
b .
ensure that this grounding system produces a resistance of num ohms or less .
c. join the ground rods and connect them to the grounding buss of the traffic signal cabinet with no .
num awg solid copper wire .
num .
install a ground wire on wood poles .
section numtraffic signal installation num a .
use at least no .
num awg solid copper wire bonded to the grounding electrode and extending upward to a point perpendicular to the uppermost span .
b .
place wire staples no greater than num feet num m apart to secure the ground wire to the pole .
c. connect the span wire to the pole ground using copper split bolt connectors .
provide a separate ground rod for pole mount cabinets .
do not use the pole ground .
bond the pole ground to the pole cabinet ground rod .
num .
ensure that grounding for signal strain poles conforms to the grounding assembly typical erection detail sheet in the plans .
num .
permanently ground cabinet and cabinet conduits to a multiterminal main ground buss .
a .
use a no .
num awg solid copper wire bonded between the buss and grounding electrode .
b. connect the power company neutral conduit ground and grounds of equipment housed in the cabinet to the bussbar .
c. do not ground to a permanent water system instead of the driven ground rod .
ensure that grounding devices conform to the requirements of the nec and nema .
num .
when testing for resistance ensure the ground is dry .
the contractor is responsible for submitting the ground test results .
z .
signal poles see section num for signal pole materials certification and subsection num subsection num subsection num subsection num and subsection num for traffic signal equipment .
refer to the plans for pole locations .
where necessary adjust pole location to avoid utility conflicts .
provide minimum clearance distances between the signal pole and the roadway as specified in the plans and on the standard detail drawings .
num .
strain poles provide signal strain poles that conform to section num .
provide caissons or foundations that conform to the construction detail for strain pole and mast arm pole foundations in the plans .
determine the required foundation size based on the manufacturers specified bending moment at yield for each pole .
provide strain poles with manufacturerinstalled holes for pedestrian heads and push buttons .
seal unused holes with water tight plugs that match the pole finish provided by the manufacturer of the pole .
all steel strain pole holes that are used shall have a rubber grommet or weather head .
rake the poles during installation to provide a pole that is plumb once the load is applied .
num .
metal poles install metal poles as follows a .
ensure that anchor bolts reinforcing bars and ground rods conform to section num and section num and are placed in the excavation .
b .
support the anchor bolts with a template to provide the proper bolt circle for the pedestal or pole to be installed .
anchor bolts shall be installed without any modifications .
refer to signal details for proper installation .
c. wire the reinforcing bars together or to the anchor bolts .
d. wire the conduits in the base to the reinforcing bars for support .
ensure that they are accessible above and beyond the foundation .
e. before pouring the foundation concrete determine that the anchor bolt orientation is correct so that the tensile load is divided between at least two anchor bolts .
pour and vibrate the concrete with the engineer present .
f. ensure that the pole foundations and pedestals with the anchortype base conform to section num and section num .
do not install or locate poles without the engineers approval .
ensure the foundation meets aashto guidelines .
num the engineer may take a concrete test cylinder as it is being poured .
num cure the cylinder and submit it for testing to the office of materials .
section numtraffic signal installation num g. if the concrete foundation fails to meet the requirements of the specifications and is not accepted replace the foundation upon notification of failure .
h. after installing poles and applying the load of the signal span inspect them for plumb and for the proper horizontal position of the mast arm when applicable .
make sure all threads of the nut are threaded onto the anchor bolt .
i .
correct deficiencies by using the leveling nuts on the anchor bolts or by adjusting the mast arm .
j .
the engineer will examine the pedestals and poles for damaged paint or galvanizing .
restore the finish coating where necessary .
k. after the engineer approves the pole installation provide an acceptable method of protecting the area between the pole base and the top of the foundation to prevent the accumulation of debris .
if the finish or galvanized steel materials is scratched chipped or damaged the material will be rejected .
the finish may be replaced as specified under section num with the engineers approval .
l. for poles or arms that need galvanization thoroughly clean the steel poles and arms and touch up non galvanized parts with id red or originaltype primer .
m. apply the remaining coats according to the system v heavy exposure section num unless otherwise indicated in the plans .
the entire pole shall be the same color .
n. install a service bracket and insulator on one pole at each intersection to attach power service wire as specified in the plan details .
install a disconnect box on the cabinet pole at each intersection to attach power service where the power service is provided overhead .
o .
install poles to which controller cabinets are attached with mounting plates bolts nipples and at least two num inch num mm threaded openings at the top and at least two num num inch num mm at the bottom of the pole .
p. attach the fittings to the poles as specified by the manufacturer in the plans or as the engineer directs .
the fittings may include cast aluminum cap pole clamp hardware for span wire attachment weatherhead with chase nipples and couplings galvanized elbow with bushing installed by cutting the pole and welding in place around the entire circumference q .
the office of materials will inspect the anchor bolts .
if approved the office of materials will display the inspectors hammer stamp mark on the top of the bolt .
num .
concrete strain poles a .
ensure that concrete strain poles meet the requirements of section num and detailed construction drawings .
b .
install concrete strain poles so that the angle of variance between the eye bolt on the pole and the span wire is less than ten degrees numº .
c. verify pole hole orientations for pedestrian heads pedestrian push button stations luminaries arms etc .
with the engineer prior to proceeding with traffic signal installation .
for poles at cabinet location provide at least two num inch num mm openings at the top of pole and at least two num inch num mm threaded openings at the bottom .
d. plug all unused holes .
use grout or threaded fittings .
match the finish of the pole .
num .
mast arms install mast arms that can accommodate traffic signal mounting hardware and that adhere to the manufacturers recommended procedures and section num and section num .
do not add holes .
a. seal the openings in the mast arms to prevent pests from entering .
b. align the mast arm to allow the signal heads to hang plumb at the correct height without using extensions .
c. all mast arms are to be galvanized unless indicated otherwise in the plans .
note never add holes or openings to the metal pole or mast arm without approval from the office of bridge and structural design .
section numtraffic signal installation num note the contractor shall submit a mast arm pole chart to the engineer and the office of bridge design for review and approval as described in subsection num.f of this specification .
verify pole hole orientations for pedestrian heads pedestrian push button stations luminaries arms etc .
with the engineer prior to proceeding with traffic signal installation .
num .
aluminum pedestrian pedestals poles install aluminum pedestal poles which adhere to section num on breakaway aluminum bases that meet the requirements for breakaway construction .
see section num for breakaway base requirements .
see the standard detail drawings for pole and foundation details .
a .
secure at least four anchor bolts in a concrete foundation as shown in the construction detail .
b .
as an alternate to a concrete foundation install a pedestal foundation anchor assembly subsection num .
install the foundation until the top of the base plate is level with the ground .
slide bolt heads through the keyhole and under the base plate against the bolt head keepers with threads up .
bolt the pole base to the foundation .
adhere to the manufacturers instructions for installation .
num use a universal driving tool with the correct kelly bar adaptor and bolts supplied with the tool .
num attach driving tool assembly to the foundation base plate using the bolts provided with each foundation .
be sure to align the tool soothe holes in the tool line up with the proper bolt circle on the foundation .
num stand the foundation with the attached drive tool assembly upright and attach the drivetoolfoundation to the kelly bar .
num raise the kelly bar until the foundation swings free of the ground .
maneuver the kelly bar until the point of the foundation is over the marked installation location .
num lower the kelly bar until the point of the foundation is forced into the ground and the helix is flush with the ground surface .
num ensure the shaft of the foundation is plumb by checking the shaft with a level on two sides that are at least num degrees from each other .
recheck the shaft to be sure it is plumb when the foundation has penetrated num foot into the ground .
num when the base plate of the foundation is num num mm to num num mm inches above the ground line remove driving tool .
c. contain the wiring inside the pole or in approved hardware .
do not allow conduit outside the pole .
d. position the pedestal pole plumb and high enough to clear the pedestrians head as shown in the plans .
ensure that the bottom of the pedestrian signal housing including brackets is not less than num feet num m from the ground line .
if using a vehicle signal housing ensure pole is adequate to give signal head a height of num feet num m e. instruct the supplier to furnish a mill certificate that shows the alloy and physical properties of the steel used in fabricating the anchor bolts .
the bolts may be subjected to a tensile and shear strength test .
num .
timber poles timber poles do not require the use of concrete for filling the cavity around the pole base .
use timber poles that meet the requirements of section num and section num .
use class ii for all signal support poles .
use class iv for aerial loop leadin or communication cable if approved by the engineer .
poles shall be inspected and include aww stamp .
drill wood poles to receive the eye bolt so that the angle of variance between the eye bolt and span wire at each connection is less than ten degrees numº .
see the standard detail drawings for additional information .
guy timber poles use single or double guy wires as shown in the plans and as directed by the engineer .
guy helper cables with separate guy wires when helper signal span cables are indicated in the plans .
note never attach down guy wires to eye bolts .
attach down guy wires to angle guy attachment only and install insulating rods on all down guy installations as detailed on standard detail sheets .
aa .
pull boxes ensure that pull boxes conform to the standard detail drawings or plan detail sheet .
install pull boxes as required by the specifications and plans .
section numtraffic signal installation num num .
include provisions for drains in pull box excavations as specified .
num .
do not place the aggregate for the drain until the engineer approves the excavation .
num .
do not set the pull box until the aggregate is in place .
num .
set the pull boxes in place level and install conduits as required .
conduit entrance shall be through the open bottom in types num num num nums and nums .
conduit entrance shall be directly through cored holes in the side walls in types num and num .
conduit entrance shall be through the conduit terminators in types num and num .
adjust the location of the pull box if necessary to avoid obstacles .
where conduit entrance will be through the side wall in types num and num or for conduit other than the terminator size provided in types num and num use field cored conduit entrance holes in the side wall of the box .
all field coring shall be made with a diamondtipped masonry hole saw and according to the pull box manufacturers recommendations .
use an approved hdpe to epvc coupling or an undergroundtype conduit adhesive where joining conduit or conduit bodies of dissimilar materials such as hdpetoepvc sweeps into pull boxes or installing into pull box conduit terminators .
do not locate pull boxes on the curb side of the signal pole in the intersection radius return install pull boxes so that the long dimension is parallel to the adjacent roadway install the pull box at a location that is level with the surrounding ground or pavement .
do not place a pull box in a ditch or depression .
unless otherwise shown in the plans when installed either in a sidewalk or in the ground the top of the pull box shall be level with the sidewalk or ground surface .
num .
obtain the engineers approval and begin backfilling and installing the frame and cover .
ground metal lids or covers .
bb .
span wire and span wire assemblies use span wire to support signal heads cable and other hardware only .
use messenger cable to support the aerial cable plant .
install span wire and messenger wire where specified in the plans and in accordance with the standard detail drawings .
see section num for information on span wire and messenger cable .
num .
install signal span wire not to exceed the sag specified by the pole manufacturer .
span wire used with timber pole installation shall have a minimum num sag .
span wire used with strain pole installation shall have a minimum num sag .
num .
use helper cables where specified in the plans and on the standard detail drawings .
num .
for construction of a box or modified box span use bullrings .
be consistent throughout the intersection in use of bull rings or strandvises .
if bull rings are not used standvises shall be interlocked .
num .
install num inch num mm diameter drip loop wrapped three times at the cable entrance to signal heads .
arrange cable so that it enters the structure from the bottom of the drip loop .
use a num inch num mm diameter drip loop where cables enter a weatherhead and use num inch num mm sag at corners of a span .
num .
use aluminum ties lashing rods or aluminum wrap to attach cables to span wire .
when using aluminum wrap or aluminum ties spaced at num inch num mm increments .
aluminum wrap shall have at least three turns of wrap .
do not use lashing wire on span wire .
num .
ground all span wire and down guy assemblies as shown on standard detail sheets .
bond all span wire together and bond to ground at every pole .
cc .
traffic signal heads place traffic signal heads according to the signal design and plan detail drawings .
deviation from the plans must be according to the mutcd current edition and at the engineers approval .
ensure all traffic signal heads at an installation have the same appearance for the signal heads and the led modules .
the ramp metering enforcement device shall be mounted on the back of one signal per lane and wired to the red display .
the enforcement device shall be able to be viewed from downstream on the ramp .
num .
install traffic signal heads at least num feet num m but no greater than num feet num m over the roadway .
all vertically attached signal head assemblies shall have a metal support plate installed within the top section red indication of section numtraffic signal installation num the signal head for additional support and stability .
install ramp metering traffic signal heads as shown on the plans detail drawings .
num .
adjust signal heads on the same approach to have the same vertical clearance .
a .
measure the clearance from the pavement to the lowest part of the assembly including brackets and back plates .
b .
mount traffic signals on poles with a clearance of at least num feet num m but no more than num feet numm above the sidewalk or pavement grade of the center of the highway whichever grade is higher .
c. mount and adjust ramp metering traffic signals as per the plan detail drawings .
d. mount and adjust ramp meter enforcement device head as per the plan detail drawings .
num .
connect the signal cable to the wire in each signal head to provide the correct signal indication when the cables are connected to the controller cabinet back panels .
do not splice cables .
use wire nuts to make the connections to the led signal modules leadin .
make all connections in the top section .
ensure that the black jacket is pulled into the signal head num inches num mm .
num .
install optically programmable op signal heads as shown in the plans and standard detail sheet and as directed by the manufacturer .
num .
mount op heads securely or tether them to limit movement .
num .
mask the op lamp for directing visibility under the engineers supervision .
num .
tether signal heads that have tunnel visors longer than num inches num mm at the discretion of the engineer .
num .
attach signal heads to mast arms using rigid mounting brackets .
see section num for equipment information .
adjust signal heads on mast arms so that all red indications on the same mast arm are at the same elevation .
num .
install lane control heads for reversible lane systems and ramp metering heads as shown in the plans and the standard detail drawings .
center each signal over the lane or lanes under signal control .
num .
leave a vertical clearance for blankout signs as shown on the standard detail drawings .
use a spirit level to ensure that the bottom edge of each sign is horizontal .
dd .
pedestrian signal heads install pedestrian signal heads on wood concrete steel strain poles wood or steel auxiliary poles or metal pedestal poles .
do not mix pole mount methods at the same intersection installation .
install the pedestrian signal heads as shown on the standard detail drawings and the intersection plan sheets and drawings .
leave a vertical clearance from the bottom of the head to the ground level of least num feet num m unless specified by the engineer .
num .
pedestal mounts make pedestal mounts with a lower supporting assembly consisting of a .
a num inch num mm slipfitter bracket b .
hollow aluminum arms with a minimum inside crosssectional area equal to a num inch num mm pipe use serrated locking devices that firmly hold the signal heads in the required alignment .
c. for pedestal mounts using side hinge clamshell .
secure clamshell to pedestal using num inch num mm wide and num inch num mm thick stainless steel bands .
num .
pole mounts side of pole for metal poles use side hinge clamshell mounting hardware or hardware as described in wood pole metal pole alternate or pedestrian pole .
a .
side hinge clamshell secure the hubs to metal or concrete poles using num inch num mm wide and num inch num mm thick stainless steel bands .
secure the hubs to wood poles using lag bolts .
b .
wood pole or metal pole alternate make pole mounts with the upper and lower assembly consisting of section numtraffic signal installation num a post arm with a minimum crosssectional area equal to a num inch num mm pipe a post hub plate that matches the outside pole contour secure the hubs to metal or concrete poles using num inch num mm wide and num inch nummm thick stainless steel bands .
secure the hubs to wood poles using lag bolts or banding .
space the junctions so that each pedestrian signal head can be directed toward approaching traffic as needed .
use serrated locking devices that hold the pedestrian signal heads in alignment .
ee .
blankout signs install blankout signs as shown on plans or as follows num .
securely fasten the signs to a stationary structure or to a messenger strand support system .
num .
center each sign over the lane or lanes under sign control where applicable .
num .
leave a vertical clearance for blankout signs as shown in the plans or in subsection num.ee traffic signal heads .
use a spirit level to ensure that the bottom edge of each sign is horizontal .
num .
use terminal strips to connect each sign electrically to the external control box or cabinet .
ff .
battery backup system bbs install battery backup system bbs if indicated on the plans .
install in accordance with the option as indicated on the plans and as directed by the engineer .
with the battery backup submittal provide calculations for determining the size of the inverter and batteries based on the actual power requirements for the intersection installation .
ensure that all auxiliary items are included in the calculations .
ensure the submittal specifies the model number and the firmware revision that is being supplied .
ensure that the external cabinet supplied meets the section num specifications and is base mounted next to the numa cabinet as specified .
do not attach the battery external cabinet to the numa cabinet unless otherwise specified .
the external cabinet option allows for num separate configurations .
ensure that the correct configuration is installed in accordance with the plans .
make all connections to the numa cabinet through the base of the cabinets .
provide date of manufacture of all batteries provided .
ensure the bbs functions as required by the specifications .
ensure the on battery relay provides an input into the controller alarm num .
install the two hour run time circuitry from the normally open contacts in the bbs controller to the ac and the mercury coil terminal in the traffic signal cabinet .
provide copy of all documentation operation and maintenance manual for items supplied .
include with documentation any communications firmware and cable required to interrogate the unit for status setup or logs .
num quality acceptance a .
testing loop detector installation test each loop after installing the conductors in the slots cut in the pavement and before sealing .
perform a test where the loop wire is spliced to the shielded leadin wire and where the shielded leadin wire enters the controller cabinet if there are no splice points such as in direct entry to the controller cabinet only perform the tests at the controller record the test results on the loop installation data sheet in table num as shown in this section .
make copies of the data sheet as needed .
include the data sheets in the records and place a copy in the controller cabinet .
conduct the following five num tests to evaluate each loop installation for acceptance before sealing the loop in the pavement num .
induced ac voltage test section numtraffic signal installation num read num v ac or less on a digital voltmeter or no deflection on the pointer of an analog meter .
num .
inductance inductance i is measured in microhenries mh and the total inductance is equal to the inductance of loop plus inductance of the loop leadin .
acceptable inductance is within num percent num of the calculated value for a single loop with the design criteria listed in table num and table num table num standard bipole loops num ft x num ft num turns num m x num m num turns i num mh num mh per num feet of loop leadin cable i num mh num mh per num m of loop leadin cable num ft x num ft num turns num m x num m num turns i num mh num mh per num feet of loop leadin cable i num mh num mh per num m of loop leadin cable num ft x num ft num turns num m x num m num turns i num mh num mh per num feet of loop leadin cable i num mh num mh per num m of loop leadin cable num ft x num ft num turns num m x num m num turns i num mh num mh per num feet of loop leadin cable i num mh num mh per num m of loop leadin cable num ft x num ft num turns num m x num m num turns i num mh num mh per num feet of loop leadin cable i num mh num mh per num m of loop leadin cable table num quadrupole qp loops num ft x num ft num num num turns num m x num m num num num turns i num mh num mh per num feet of loop leadin cable i num mh num mh per num m of loop leadin cable num ft x num ft num num num turns num m x num m num num num turns i num mh num mh per num feet of loop leadin cable i num mh num mh per num m of loop leadin cable num ft x num ft num num num turns num m x num m num num num turns i num mh num mh per num feet of loop leadin cable i num mh num mh per num m of loop leadin cable num ft x num ft num num num turns num m x num m num num num turns i num mh num mh per num feet of loop leadin cable i num mh num mh per num m of loop leadin cable num ft x num ft num num num turns num m x num m num num num turns i num mh num mh per num feet of loop leadin cable i num mh num mh per num m of loop leadin cable num .
leakage resistance to ground the resistance to ground shall be num mohm or more .
num .
loop resistance the resistance reading on an ohmmeter is approximately within ten percent num of the calculated value acceptable resistance dc num ºf num ºcohmsµ no .
num awg wire r numµmile or r num x numµft .
approximately num ohms per num feet of no .
num awg wirer numµkm or rnum x numµm no .
num awg wire r numµmile or r num x numµft .
approximately num ohms per num feet of no .
num awg wirer numµkm or rnum x numµm no .
num awg wire r numµmile or r num x numµft .
approximately num ohms per num feet of no .
num awg wire r numµkm or r num x numµm num .
loop q section numtraffic signal installation num q at num khz is greater than num .
report to the engineer an outofrange reading on any of the above tests .
if a test is found unacceptable remove the loop install new wire and repeat the test procedure .
include in the test results type and model number of the equipment used must be ohmmeter having a high resistance scale of r x num kw or greater the last calibration date of the equipment and the scale used check the loop using an impedance tester to determine the natural operating frequency and impedance .
ensure that the completed units detect all motor vehicles .
if the loop detection system does not meet the above test requirements payment will not be made for work on the signal installation until corrections are completed .
section numtraffic signal installation num table num loop installation data sheet conditions project number date contractor weather temperature pavement condition wet or dry location city or county phase intersection name or number function route numbers or name s lane location installation or plan sheet number no .
of turns size and type of loop downstreamupstream down up distance from stop bar distance e.o.pcurb to leadin distance leadin cable material loop wire colorinsulation typegauge loop leadin wire colorinsulation typegauge splice point conduit length from curbe.o.p .
to splice point conduit length from splice point to cabinet sealant type and part number sealant manufacturer and lot no .
interconnect wire type and length loop tests num .
induced voltage _____num .
inductance _____ microhenries num .
leakage resistance to ground _____ megohoms num .
loop resistance _____ ohms num .
loop q quality _____ q comments inspectors name and title b .
field tests in addition to performing tests during installation and before turning on the equipment perform the following tests on traffic signal circuits in the presence of the engineer test each circuit for continuity test each circuit for grounds .
if a test fails repair the circuit immediately .
new signals shall operate in the flash mode for three num days prior to beginning stopandgo operation unless otherwise directed by the traffic engineer .
section numtraffic signal installation num for ramp metering the contractor shall submit to and obtain approval from the engineer for ramp metering testing procedures for each specific ramp meter location .
the testing procedure shall demonstrate that all components hardware cable and connections furnished and installed by the contractor operates correctly and that all functions are in conformance with the specifications .
at a minimum the contractor shall demonstrate to the engineer the ivds and loop detectors at each location are functioning properly with expected accuracy as specified .
ivds burnin period shall only be in conjunction with the ramp meter signal burnin periodof num days .
the ramp meter signals function properly at all stages including nonmetering startup metering and shutdown .
in multilane configurations the ramp meter can operate a simultaneous release of vehicles from all lanes and as well as an alternating or staggered release of vehicles from the two or three lanes .. queue detectors are functioning as specified including both queue detection and queue override .
the ramp meter functions properly for both local traffic responsive and time of day operations .
the advance warning sign can be clearly seen and can be activated and deactivated properly .
the ramp meter can communicate properly with the hubtmc .
the traffic enforcement heads are operating as per the plans and can be seen by enforcement personnel .
the contractor shall coordinate closely with engineer for conducting ramp meter field operational tests .
note pretest should be performed prior to calling the engineer for formal field tests inspection .
pretest shall be defined as conducting all field tests in accordance with the ramp metering field testing procedures submitted and approved .
results of pretests shall be recorded and submitted to the engineer .
the engineer may require the contractor to address particular items noted in the pretest before beginning the actual field tests .
operational test shall not begin until the field tests are accepted by the engineer that will be performed during the engineers inspection .
begin operational tests after the engineer is satisfied that all work has been completed .
after the ramp meter has been placed in operation the contractor in coordination with the system integrator shall demonstrate that all equipment furnished and installed by the contractor operates with all software and firmware as specified .
after successful completion of the test procedure each ramp meter assembly shall go through a burnin period for num consecutive days of normal ramp metering operations .
during the burnin period the contractor shall ensure that all contractorsupplied equipment operates without failures of any type .
if any equipment component malfunctions or fails to provide the specified functionality during the numday burnin period the contractor shall replace or repair the defective equipment within num hours of notification by the engineer .
after the malfunctioning components have been repaired or replaced to the satisfaction of the engineer the contractor shall begin a new numday burnin period .
the new numday burnin period shall apply only to equipment components supplied by the contractor .
in the event of a failure or malfunctioning of equipment furnished by others which prevents the numday burnin test from continuing the engineer will suspend the burnin test and resume when the other equipment failures are corrected .
c. operational tests and equipment activation after the equipment is installed and the field tests are completed successfully the contractor shall request an initial equipment inspection .
the engineer shall notify in writing the district signal engineer a minimum of num working days prior to the inspection .
the district signal engineer shall provide an in depth inspection and provide a written punch list of items for the contractor to correct .
within fourteen days of the notification the contractor shall correct the items noted .
prior to activating new equipment and before removal of any existing intersection control or equipment test and ensure any communications equipment is functional .
section numtraffic signal installation num in the event that programming of the controller application is not a pay item for the contract the engineer will notify the district signal engineer a minimum of num working days prior to activating the equipment .
prior to activating equipment all inductance loop video detection equipment and detection zones shall be functional and operational .
when defects are resolved the district signal engineer will begin the contractors operational test period to demonstrate that every part of the system functions as specified .
the operational test shall be concurrent for the entire project .
num .
the operational test for the traffic signal and ramp metering projects shall be at least thirty num days of continuous satisfactory operation .
num .
if a component or system fails or shows unsatisfactory performance the condition must be corrected and the test repeated until thirty num days of continuous satisfactory operation is obtained .
num .
the district traffic engineer will send the engineer and construction office a letter showing the start termination suspension or successful completion of the operational test period .
num .
the district engineer may recommend payment only after the successful completion of the test period .
num .
the contractor shall obtain written acceptance of the signal installation from the district traffic operations engineer before final acceptance .
costs incurred during operational tests including power consumption shall be at the contractors expense and included in the price bid for contract items .
num contractor warranty and maintenance a .
traffic signal equipment maintenance see section num .
if a signal that is the responsibility of the contractor is not functioning properly num .
nonemergency commence work on this signal within three num days of the written notice from the engineer .
failure to respond shall result in a per calendar day charged against monies due or that may become due until the maintenance work is started .
see section num .
the contractor shall be responsible for all materials equipment and expertise necessary to correct signal malfunction or repair .
the department or local municipality will not be held responsible or liable for any alleged damage to the signal or as a result of the signal malfunction due to problems that may occur after the department or local municipality forces make repairs .
upon notice to proceed the contractor shall check and make any needed adjustments to time clocks on a monthly basis .
no additional payment shall be made for this requirement .
num .
emergency if the engineer determines that the signal malfunction or failure is an operational hazard the contractor is to take corrective action within three num hours of the first attempt of notification .
response shall be considered only when qualified personnel and equipment are provided .
failure to respond within three num hours will result in a nonrefundable deduction of money of num with an additional charge of num per hour after the first three num hours until qualified personnel and equipment arrives on site and begins corrective action .
in addition the cost of labor and material will be charged by the department if the department takes corrective action using its own forces or local municipality forces .
total charges will not exceed num per emergency call in addition to the material cost and labor incurred to make repairs by the department or local municipality forces responding to the malfunction .
the department will not be held responsible or liable for any alleged damage to the signal or as a result of the signal malfunction due to problems that may occur after department or local municipality forces make emergency repairs .
section numtraffic signal installation num the contractor shall be responsible for all materials and equipment necessary to correct signal malfunction or repair .
final acceptance will not be given until payment for such work is received .
b .
warranties provide manufacturers warranties or guarantees on electrical electronic or mechanical equipment furnished except statesupplied equipment .
ensure that warranties andor guarantees are consistent with those provided as customary trade and industry standard practices or as otherwise specified in the plans standard specifications or special provisions .
upon final acceptance transfer the manufacturer and contractor warranties or guarantees to the engineer .
ensure that warranties are continuous and state that they are subject to transfer .
acceptance or approval of the work does not waiver warranties or guarantees where required by the specifications .
final acceptance will not be granted until all warranties and guarantees are received .
c. guarantees repair andor replace all equipment and material supplied under these contract documents which has been determined by the engineer to not meet specifications .
the engineer reserves the sole right to determine suitability or unsuitability of the supplied equipment and material .
the contractor shall bear the total cost of delivery and transportation related to the repair and replacement of equipment and material throughout the duration of the contract unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
transfer to the engineer any warranties and guarantees remaining on all items after final acceptance .
perform transfer at num am of the day following final acceptance .
num measurement num general traffic signal items complete in place and accepted of the kind size and type specified are measured as follows a .
traffic signal installation signal installation will be paid for by lump sum including furnishing labor materials tools equipment and incidentals required to complete the work unless otherwise specified in this subsection .
b .
communications wire fiber optic cable the number of feet meters of communications cable wire or fiber optic cable is the actual number of linear feet meters of the size installed and accepted .
communications cable shall be paid for under section num .
c. strain poles traffic signs highway signs are measured and paid for under section num .
strain poles are measured and paid for under section num .
d. type num nums num nums num and num pull boxes the number of pull boxes will be the actual number of pull boxes installed and accepted .
e. loop detector maintenance milling and resurfacing projects the number of loop detectors will be the actual number of loop detectors installed as specified in the plans or as directed by the engineer and accepted .
loop detector leadin cable will not be measured separately for payment but will be included in the price submitted for loop detectors .
num limits general provisions num through num .
section numtraffic signal installation num num payment num general the lump price bid for traffic signal andor ramp meter installation covers all items of work in this specification including furnishing labor materials tools equipment and incidentals required to complete the work .
costs for installation operation maintenance and removal of the traffic signal equipment are included under this item .
include payment for removal disposal of existing pavement shoulder surface base and subgrade and restoration to original condition in the contract price for the items to which they pertain .
they will not be paid for separately .
furnishing installing and removing sheeting bracing and supports will not be paid for separately but is included in the contract prices for other items .
no additional payment will be made for testing and storing statesupplied or contractorfurnished traffic signal equipment .
no payment will be made for individual items unless a pay item is included in the plans for the specific item .
type num nums num nums num and num pull boxes will be paid for per each .
loop detector will be paid for per each .
payment will be made under item no .
num traffic signal installation no per lump sum item no .
num pull box pbnum per each item no .
num pull box pbnums per each item no .
num pull box pbnum per each item no .
num pull box pbnums per each item no .
num pull box pbnum per each item no .
num pull box pbnum per each item no .
num loop detector per each payment for various elements of traffic signals will be as shown on the plans .
a .
partial payment the contractor may initiate a partial payment process for the lump sum traffic signal items by submitting a written request to the engineer .
if the engineer approves this request payment will be made as follows underground loops pull boxes and conduits num overhead span heads poles push buttons num cabinet contents and base num successful completion of operational test num b .
additional items payment items related to section num are described in the following sections section numtraffic signal installation num strain poles section num highway lighting section num lighting standards and luminaries section num electrical wire cable and conduit section num grassing section num timber poles section num and subsection num sign blanks section num reflectorization materials section num traffic signal equipmentramp metering equip .
section num payment for conduit installation shall be as described in section num unless conduit installation is performed as part of a traffic signal installation in which case measurement and payment is a part of the complete traffic signal installation .
payment is lump sum unless listed as a separate pay item .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numtraffic impact attenuator num general description this work includes furnishing and installing impact attenuator unitsarrays to conform with plan locations and details andor as directed by the engineer .
all impact attenuator unitsarrays shall be tested and approved at the specified nchrp num test level .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
gatinga gating end treatment allows a vehicle impacting the nose or the side of the unit at an angle near the nose to pass through the device non gatinga nongating end treatment is capable of redirecting a vehicle impacting the nose or the side of the unit along the units entire length .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num b. referenced documents national cooperative highway research program nchrp report num .
astm a numa numm qpl num roadside design guide section numtraffic impact attenuator num num submittals a .
installation drawings submit all required certifications test reports and drawings of details for completing the installation .
obtain engineers approval of these documents before beginning work on attenuator installation .
portable impact attenuator arrays shall meet the requirements of ga. std .
num and manufacturer specifications .
b .
manufacturers information submit certification from the manufacturer that the attenuator unitarray and its interconnecting hardware replicates an nchrpnum approved attenuator in an accepted letter from the fhwa .
furnish items such as manufacturers brochures or specifications that completely outline the manufacturers recommendations for materials and installation methods .
all workmanship and materials are subject to the engineers approval .
num materials a. attenuator num .
ensure that materials are in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations specifications and details .
num .
use attenuators that have been classified as accepted by the departments office of materials and approved by the federal highway administration fhwa as meeting nchrpnum for the test level specified .
num .
where restoration andor repair can not be accomplished without the necessity of removing the unitarray from the original location ensure replacement unitarray installation upon removal of the damaged unitarray .
furnishing installing and maintaining the replacement will be at no additional cost .
num .
where required ensure the approach end of the attenuator is equipped with a reflectorized object marker in accordance with plan details .
the object marker may be furnished by the manufacturer of the attenuator or by others .
ensure that the front most section of the unit the nose is yellow in color unless specified otherwise .
num .
where required use an approved backup system as specified in the plans .
num .
for nongating attenuators anchor the attenuator to the pavement according to a system recommended by the manufacturer for the type pavement encountered .
num .
use class a concrete for reinforced concrete pads concrete back up if used and concrete transition where required .
num .
use metal components and hardware galvanized according to astm a numa numm unless otherwise specified .
ensure all metal components and hardware of permanent attenuators are free of corrosion when shipped .
num .
in freezing conditions water filled attenuators shall be treated according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num delivery storage and handling a .
general general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num section numtraffic impact attenuator num num fabrication a .
design criteria and type selection the impact attenuator unitarray type will be shown on the plans and designated by four characters .
first character indicates the type of permanent installation .
the letter p designates a permanent nongating installation .
the letter s designates a permanent self restoring nongating installation which is capable of withstanding multiple hits without requiring repair or adjustment .
second character designates the required nchrp test level .
third character indicates the traffic flow directions .
the letter b indicates bidirectional traffic typical for median applications or when the unit is installed on the shoulder of a twolane twoway traffic facility .
bidirectional means traffic flows in opposite directions at the site of the attenuator installation .
the letter u indicates unidirectional traffic flow typical for gore areas .
unidirectional means traffic on both sides traveling the same direction from the nose to the rear of the unit .
the letter s indicates traffic flow in one direction on a single side only typical for a unit located on the outside shoulder of a roadway with oneway traffic and the other side of the attenuator not being exposed to traffic .
fourth character indicates the numerical value of the width in inches millimeters of the base of the rigid object that the attenuator will be shielding .
at bridge columns this character is typically the width of the column plus the barrier base widths on the column sides at the pavement surface .
b .
example a type pnumunum attenuator designates a permanent installation tested and approved at nchrp test level num unidirectional traffic flow a num num mm wide base for the rigid object being shielded .
temporary portable unitsarrays may be either gating or nongating based on construction sequencing andor field conditions see specification section num .
unless otherwise specified all permanent attenuators shall be nongating .
num construction field locate the position of the attenuator nose as shown on the plans prior to beginning the installation .
have any variations approved by the engineer .
if the length of the attenuator unitarray is less than that indicated in the plan details for the specified conditions the length of the concrete transition section or the length of the longitudinal barrier shall be increased as needed to provide a proper beginning point for the attenuator nose as shown in the plans .
the length of the system will be the combined length of the attenuator unitarray the backup system and any required transition .
the length of the system shall not be excessive to the extent that it intrudes appreciably within the clear offset distance as shown on the plans .
the increased length of transition or barrier is considered as an incidental part of the system and will not be itemized separately .
temporary portable unitsarrays shall be installed moved reinstalled and maintained as required .
section numtraffic impact attenuator num num quality assurance obtain certification from the manufacturer that the impact attenuator unitarray installed meets all required approvals and specifications and furnish these to the engineer .
furnish any mill testgalvanizing test reports and heat numbers for all metal components of the unit per current requirements of the departments office of materials .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement each traffic impact attenuator of the type specified complete in place and accepted at its location will be measured by the unitarray including components hardware anchors incidentals freeze treated water or sand and labor for each installation shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
site preparation work as described under num preparation is measured and paid for separately under the respective items involved unless otherwise specified .
temporary unitsarrays will be measured for payment only once regardless of how often they are moved .
see specification section num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment impact attenuator unitsarrays will be paid for per each type specified .
payment is full compensation for all materials labor and incidentals necessary to complete the item including installing moving reinstalling and maintaining unitsarrays as required .
payment will also include the backup system and transitions where required .
payment will be made under item no .
num impact attenuator unit type p per each item no .
num impact attenuator unit type s per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numconcrete glare screen num general description this work includes erecting a portland cement concrete glare screen according to plan dimensions on top of a concrete median barrier .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete barrier section numconcrete glare screen num b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use materials that comply with section num and the plan details .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction construct the glare screen using one of the following alternatives a .
alternative one cast the median barrier and while the concrete is still plastic insert d bars into the fresh concrete as indicated on the plans .
wait until the median barrier concrete has reached a compressive strength of num psi num mpa or an age of seven days .
then place a second course of barrier of the dimensions shown on the plans on top of the first course and finish and cure according to subsections num.c and num.d .
b .
alternative two as an alternative to inserting d bars into the plastic concrete wait until the median barrier concrete has reached a compressive strength of num psi num mpa then drill holes for the d bars and epoxy them in place .
construct the second course of barrier on top of the first course according to plan dimensions .
finish and cure according to subsections num.c and num.d .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement concrete glare screen is measured for payment in linear feet meters of accepted work of each specified height .
the surface is measured along the top of the glare screen .
section numconcrete glare screen num num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter for each specified height .
payment will be full compensation for furnishing materials and performing the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num concrete glare screen height per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numraised traffic bars num general description this work includes furnishing and placing raised traffic bars according to the type locations and specifications in the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures section numadhesive epoxy resin b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section adhesive epoxy resin section num concrete class a air entrained section num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
section numraised traffic bars num num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. precasting num .
concrete use concrete materials and mix and place concrete to comply with section num for class a air entrained .
num .
forms use forms that meet the requirements of section num .
make the insides of forms accessible for tamping and vibrating the concrete .
num .
finish unless otherwise specified on the plans finish bars according to subsection num.ab .
for unformed areas use type ivfloated surface finish unbroomed .
for formed areas use type iordinary surface finish .
num .
curing cure bars according to subsection num.z except do not use curing compound on the bottom surfaces .
b .
installation follow these steps to cement bars to the pavement num .
sandblast clean the highway surface of dirt curing compound grease oil moisture loose or unsound layers and other material that would prevent the bar adhesive from bonding .
num .
use epoxy resin type ir or is adhesive as follows a .
use type ir when pavement temperature is between num to num f num to num c or when traffic conditions require a rapid set .
b .
use type is when pavement temperatures are above num f num c and when traffic conditions permit .
c. do not place bars when pavement temperatures drop below num f num c. num .
place enough adhesive on the cleaned pavement or on the bottom of the bar to completely cover the area of contact with no voids .
allow a slight amount of adhesive to extrude from all sides of the bar after it has been pressed into place .
num .
position the bar and press it firmly into the pavement .
immediately and completely remove excess adhesive around the edge of the bar with a clean absorbent cloth .
do not use thinners or solvents to remove the adhesive .
protect the bar from impact until the adhesive hardens to the degree designated by the engineer .
c. adhesive qualities do not use a viscous or partially set batch of adhesive that does not extrude from under the bar edges when pressed to the pavement .
do not heat any adhesive above num f num ºc .
prepare adhesive as follows num .
before combining package a and b thoroughly stir each package .
reject material that can not be readily redispersed .
section numraised traffic bars num num .
after stirring mix one volume from package a with one volume from package b until obtaining a uniform color with no visible streaks of either component .
num .
cement bars in place within num minutes of starting to mix the adhesive .
num .
to prolong the pot life of the adhesive either let it cool after mixing the components or spread out a thin layer on a board before applying it .
num .
when an approved fast setting adhesive is used mix the components using a numcomponent type automatic mixing and extrusion apparatus .
place the bars immediately after the adhesive has been mixed and extruded .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement complete and inplace raised traffic bars of the type specified are measured by the linear foot meter along the bottom front face of the bar .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment raised traffic bars will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing the bar .
payment will be made under item no .
num .
raised traffic bars type_____ per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numpainting traffic stripe num general description this work includes furnishing and applying reflectorized high build standard and high build wet weather traffic line paint according to the plans and these specifications .
this item also includes applying words and symbols according to plan details specifications and the current manual on uniform traffic control devices .
num definitions painted stripes solid or broken skip lines .
the location and color are designated on the plans .
skip traffic stripes painted segments with unpainted gaps as specified on the plans .
the location and color are designated on the plans .
section numpainting traffic stripe num num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
section numremoval of pavement markings section num paint epa method num epa method num b. referenced documents astm astm other dnum dnum dnum dnum enum enum enum aashto m num qpl num qpl num sop num ttpnume num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials for painting traffic stripe words and symbols meet the following requirements a .
traffic line paint material section traffic line paint numa and numb num.a.num and num.a.num glass spheres and reflective composite optics use glass spheres andor reflective composite optics for the reflective media system that ensures the high build paint pavement markings meet the reflectance performance requirements in subsection num .
do not use glass spheres andor reflective composite optics containing greater then num ppm total arsenic num ppm total antimony or num ppm total lead when tested according to the most recent us epa methods num and num or other approved methods .
ensure glass spheres meet the requirements of aahto m num .
use glass spheres produced from an approved source listed on qpl num .
glass beads conforming to an alternative gradation may be used provided all other requirements of aashto m num and this specification are met .
obtain approval from the office of materials to use alternate gradations .
num delivery storage and handling a .
storage ensure the paint does not cake liver thicken curdle gel or show any other objectionable properties after storage for six months above num f num c. b .
handling mix thoroughly before use .
section numpainting traffic stripe num num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment a .
traveling traffic stripe painter use a traffic stripe painter that can travel at a predetermined speed both uphill and downhill applying paint uniformly .
ensure that the painter feeds paint under pressure through nozzles spraying directly onto the pavement .
use a paint machine equipped with the following num .
three adjacent spray nozzles capable of simultaneously applying separate stripes either solid or skip in any pattern .
num .
nozzles equipped with the following cutoff valves for automatically applying broken or skip lines a mechanical bead dispenser that operates simultaneously with the spray nozzle to uniformly distribute glass spheres andor reflective composite optics at an application rate to meet the reflectance performance requirements in subsection num .
lineguides consisting of metallic shrouds or air blasts num .
tanks with mechanical agitators num .
small portable applicators or other special equipment as needed b .
hand painting equipment use brushes templates and guides when hand painting .
c. cleaning equipment use brushes brooms scrapers grinders highpressure water jets or air blasters to remove dirt dust grease oil and other foreign matter from painting surfaces without damaging the underlying pavement .
num preparation locate approved paint manufacturers on qpl num .
before starting each days work thoroughly clean paint machine tanks connections and spray nozzles using the appropriate solvent .
thoroughly mix traffic stripe paint in the shipping container before putting it into machine tanks .
before painting thoroughly clean pavement surfaces of dust dirt grease oil and all other foreign matter .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. alignment ensure that the traffic stripe is the specified length width and placement .
on sections where no previously applied markings are present ensure accurate stripe location by establishing control points at spaced intervals .
the engineer will approve control points .
b .
application apply traffic stripe paint by machine .
if areas or markings are not adaptable to machine application use hand equipment .
num .
application rate section numpainting traffic stripe num paint will be subject to application rate checks .
apply num in num mm wide traffic stripe at the following minimum rates a .
solid traffic stripe paint at least num galmile num lkm b .
skip traffic stripe paint at least num galmile num lkm note change minimum rate proportionately for varying stripe widths .
num .
thickness maintain a num mils nummm minimum wet average thickness above the surface of the pavement .
num .
do not apply paint to areas of pavement when the surface is moist or covered with foreign matter .
air temperature in the shade is below num f num c wind causes dust to land on prepared areas or blows paint and glass spheres andor reflective composite optics around during application num .
apply a layer of glass spheres andor reflective composite optics immediately after laying the paint .
apply glass spheres andor reflective composite optics at a rate to meet the reflectance performance requirements in subsection num .
c. protective measures protect newly applied paint as follows num .
traffic control and protect traffic with warning and directional signs during painting .
set up warning signs before beginning each operation and place signs well ahead of the painting equipment .
when necessary use a pilot car to protect both the traffic and the painting operation .
num .
fresh paint protect the freshly painted stripe using cones or drums .
repair stripe damage or pavement smudges caused by traffic according to subsection num .
d. appearance and tolerance of variance continually deviating from stated dimensions is cause for stopping the work and removing the nonconforming stripe .
see section numremoval of pavement markings .
adhere to the following measurements num .
width do not lay stripe less than the specified width .
do not lay stripe more than num in num mm over the specified width .
num .
length ensure that the num ft num m painted skip stripe and the num ft num m gap between painted segments vary no more than num ft num mm each .
num .
alignment a .
ensure that the stripe does not deviate from the intended alignment by more than num in num m on straight lines or curves of num degree or less .
b .
ensure that the stripe does not deviate by more than num in num mm on curves exceeding num degree .
num quality acceptance a .
general for a minimum of num days from the time of placement ensure the high build traffic paint pavement marking material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking shipping bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials smearing or spreading under heat deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings spilling poor adhesion to the pavement material vehicular damage and normal wear .
in the event that failures mentioned above occur ensure corrective work is completed at no additional cost to the department .
section numpainting traffic stripe num obtain pavement marking retroreflectivity values with a num meter geometry retroreflectometer .
b .
initial retroreflectivity num .
longitudinal lines within num days of installation ensure the inplace markings meet the following minimum reflectance values a .
high build wet weather traffic paint white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum wet recovery astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum b .
high build standard traffic paint white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum for each center line edge line and skip line measure retroreflectivity num times for each mile num times within the first num feet num times in the middle and num times within the last num feet .
for projects less than one mile in length measure retroreflectivity num times as above .
record all retro reflectivity measurements on the form omr cvp num in sop num .
num .
messages symbols and transverse lines within num days of installation ensure the inplace markings when tested according to astm e num meet the following minimum reflectance value of num mcdluxmnum .
perform at a minimum one retroreflectivity measurement at one message one symbol and one transverse line per intersection .
take one measurement per mile for locations other than intersections i.e .
school messages railroad messages bike symbols etc .
c. six month retroreflectivity longitudinal lines maintain the following minimum reflectance values for num days after installation num .
high build wet weather traffic paint white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum wet recovery astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum num .
high build standard traffic paint white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum retest the inplace markings according to subsection num.b.num num days after installation to ensure these minimum retroreflectance values are maintained .
note the contractor is responsible for retroreflectivity testing .
furnish initial test results to the engineer within num days of application .
furnish num month test results to the engineer within num days of application or prior to final acceptance whichever comes first .
d. thickness at the time of installation check the thicknesses on all skip lines edge lines and center lines according to astm d num .
section numpainting traffic stripe num for each center line edge line and skip line measure thickness above the pavement num times for each mile once within the first num feet once in the middle and once within the last num feet .
for projects less than one mile in length measure the thickness above the pavement num times .
record thickness measurements on the form omr cvp num in sop num .
submit results to the engineer .
e. corrective work for each mile section if paint stripe fails to meet plan details or specifications or deviates from stated dimensions correct it at no additional cost to the department .
if removal of pavement markings is necessary perform it according to section num and place it according to this specification .
no additional payment will be made for removal and replacement of unsatisfactory striping .
ensure corrective work is completed at no additional cost to the department .
perform testing according to this specification .
any retest due to failures will be performed at no additional cost to the department .
furnish all test reports to the department .
retroreflectivity and thickness longitudinal line deficiency a deficiency will ensure when two or more location average results as recorded on form omr cvp num within a onemile section do not meet the performance criteria herein .
the entire line within this one mile section will be determined to be deficient .
if the evaluated section is less than num mile a single location average result not meeting the performance criteria herein will result in the entire line to be determined to be deficient .
retroreflectivity transverse markings and symbol deficiency a single location average result on the marking or symbol not meeting the performance criteria herein will result in the marking or symbol to be determined to be deficient .
f. acceptance criteria ensure that stripes and segments of stripes are cleancut and uniform .
markings that do not appear uniform or satisfactory either during the day or night or do not meet specifications will be corrected at the contractors expense .
paint will be subject to application rate checks .
num .
when correcting a deviation that exceeds the permissible tolerance in alignment do the following a .
remove the affected portion of stripe plus an additional num ft num m in each direction according to section numremoval of pavement markings .
b .
paint a new stripe according to these specifications .
num .
removal of excess paint remove misted dripped or spattered paint to the engineers satisfaction .
do not damage the underlying pavement during removal .
refer to the applicable portions of section numremoval of pavement markings .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement when traffic stripe is paid for by the square yard meter the number of square yards meters painted is measured and the space between stripes is included in the overall measurement .
linear measurements are made on the painted surface by an electronic measuring device attached to a vehicle .
on curves chord measurements not exceeding num linear feet num linear meters are used .
traffic stripe and markings complete in place are measured and accepted for payment as follows a .
solid traffic stripe solid traffic stripe is measured by the linear foot meter linear mile kilometer or square yard meter .
breaks or omissions in solid lines or stripes at street or road intersections are not measured .
section numpainting traffic stripe num b .
skip traffic stripe skip traffic stripe is measured by the gross linear foot meter or gross linear mile kilometer .
unpainted spaces between the stripes are included in the overall measurements if the plan ratio of num to num remains uninterrupted .
measurement begins and ends on a stripe .
c. pavement markings markings are words and symbols completed according to plan dimensions .
markings are measured by the unit .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment will be full compensation for the work under this section including the following cleaning and preparing surfaces furnishing materials including paints beads and thinners applying curing and protecting paints protecting traffic including providing and placing necessary warning signs furnishing tools machines and other equipment necessary to complete the item payment will be made under item no .
num solid traffic stripe _____ in mm color per linear mile kilometer item no .
num skip traffic stripe _____in mm color per gross linear mile kilometer item no .
num solid traffic stripe _____in mm color per linear foot meter item no .
num skip traffic stripe _____in mm color per gross linear foot meter item no .
num pavement markings words and symbols color per each item no .
num traffic stripe _____in mm color per square yard meter item no .
num solid traffic stripe high build wet weather _____ in mm color per linear mile kilometer item no .
num skip traffic stripe high build wet weather _____ in mm color per gross linear mile kilometer item no .
num solid traffic stripe high build wet weather _____in mm color per linear foot meter item no .
num skip traffic stripe high build wet weather _____in mm color per gross linear foot meter item no .
num pavement markings high build wet weather words and symbols color per each item no .
num traffic stripe high build wet weather _____in mm color per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numthermoplastic traffic stripe num general description this work includes furnishing and applying standard and wet weather thermoplastic reflectorized pavement marking compound .
ensure markings conform to plan details and locations these specifications and the manual on uniform traffic control devices .
thermoplastic traffic stripe consists of solid or broken skip lines words and symbols according to plan color type and location .
num definitions thermoplastic marking compound a heated compound extruded or mechanically sprayed on the pavement that cools to pavement temperature .
when combined with glass spheres andor reflective composite optics it produces a reflectorized pavement marking .
short lines crosswalks stop bars arrows symbols and crosshatching .
extrude short lines rather than spraying them on .
num related references a .
specifications section numremoval of pavement markings b. referenced documents qpl num qpl num sop num sop num sop num federal test standard number numb federal test standard number numb aashto m num aashto m num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm e num astm e num num cfr num epa method num epa method num epa method num epa method numa section numthermoplastic traffic stripe num num submittals ensure the producers of the thermoplastic compound and the producers of both the intermix and dropon glass spheres furnish to the department copies of certified test reports showing results of all tests specified in this section .
also ensure that producers certify that the materials meet the other requirements of this section by submitting copies of certification at the time of sampling .
num materials a .
general characteristics of thermoplastic use thermoplastic material produced from an approved source listed on qpl num .
use thermoplastic material that meets the requirements of aashto m num with the following exceptions num .
material composition ensure the resin of the thermoplastic material is an alkyd binder .
ensure the alkyd binder consists of a mixture of synthetic resins and a high boiling point plasticizer .
ensure at least one synthetic resin is a solid at room temperature .
ensure at least num of the binder composition is num maleicmodified glycerol ester resin .
ensure at least num by weight of the entire material formulation consists of binder .
do not use alkyd binder that contains petroleum based hydrocarbon resins .
ensure the finished thermoplastic material is not adversely affected by contact with pavement materials or by petroleum droppings from traffic .
use thermoplastic material that has been evaluated num year field evaluation by the national transportation product evaluation panel ntpep test facility or other approved test facility .
num .
suitability for markings use thermoplastic material that is especially compounded for traffic markings and has the following characteristics prevents markings from smearing or spreading under normal traffic conditions at temperatures below num of num oc gives a uniform cross section with pigment evenly dispersed throughout the material has a uniform material density and character throughout its thickness allows the stripe to maintain its original dimensions and placement ensures that the exposed surface is free from tack and is not slippery when wet does not lift from the pavement in freezing weather has cold ductility properties that permit normal movement with the road surface without chipping or cracking num .
color confirm the color of thermoplastic as follows a .
white use titanium dioxide that meets the requirements of astm d num type ii rutile as the pigment for white thermoplastic material .
do not use anatase titanium dioxide pigment .
ensure thermoplastic material is free from dirt or tint .
ensure white thermoplastic material heated for num num minutes at num num ºf num num ºc and cooled to num num ºf num num ºc matches federal test standard number numbcolor num .
ensure the material when compared to the magnesium oxide standard using a standard color spectrophotometer according to astm d num meets the following scale definition magnesium oxide standard sample rd reflectance num num min .
a rednessgreenness num num to num b yellownessblueness num num to num b. yellow use only nonhazardous pigments as defined by the resource conservation and recovery act rcra subarticle c rules table num of num cfr num toxicity characteristic .
do not use yellow thermoplastic containing more than num ppm lead by weight when tested in accordance with the most recent epa methods num and num or num .
ensure yellow thermoplastic material heated for num num minutes at num num ºf section numthermoplastic traffic stripe num num num ºc and cooled to num num ºf num num ºc matches federal test standard number numbcolor num .
ensure the material when compared to prnum chart using a standard color spectrophotometer according to astm d num plots within the following chromaticity coordinates num num num num x num num num num y num num num num c. initial reflectance cie y num minimum d. ensure the inservice daytime chromaticity for yellow material plots within the following coordinates after a period of num days num num num num x num num num num y num num num num num .
indentation resistance measure the hardness by a shore durometer type anum as described in astm d num .
maintain the temperature of the durometer num lb .
num kg load and the specimen for num hours at num f num oc .
apply the durometer and num lb .
num kg load to the specimen .
the reading must fall between num to num units after num seconds .
num .
reheating ensure that the compound does not break down deteriorate scorch or discolor if held at application temperature of num f num c for num hours and if reheated up to num times to the application temperature .
ensure that the color of white and yellow thermoplastic comply with subsection num.a.num.a and subsection num.a.num.b after prolonged heating or reheating .
num .
intermixed glass spheres and reflective composite optics ensure glass spheres meet the requirements of aashto m num .
do not use glass spheres and or reflective composite optics containing greater than num ppm total arsenic num ppm total antimony or num ppm total lead when tested according to us epa methods num and numc or other approved methods .
num .
flashpoint ensure the thermoplastic flashpoint is not less than num ºf num ºc as determined by astm d num .
b. dropon glass spheres and reflective composite optics ensure glass spheres meet the requirements of aashto m num .
use spheres produced from an approved source listed on qpl num .
glass spheres conforming to an alternative gradation may be used provided all other requirements of aashto m num and this specification are met .
do not use glass spheres and or reflective composite optics containing greater than num ppm total arsenic num ppm total antimony or num ppm total lead when tested according to us epa methods num and numc or other approved methods .
c. sealing primer place the particular type of bindersealer at the application rate as recommended in writing by the thermoplastic material manufacturer .
num delivery storage and handling use material delivered in num lb num kg unit cardboard containers or bags strong enough for normal handling during shipment and onthejob transportation without loss of material .
ensure that each unit container is clearly marked to indicate the following color of the material process batch number or similar manufacturers identification section numthermoplastic traffic stripe num manufacturers name address of the plant date of manufacture num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment depending on the marking required use hand equipment or truckmounted application units on roadway installations .
a .
application machine ensure that each application machine is equipped with the following features parts continuously mix and agitate the material .
truckmounted units for lane edge and center lines operate at a uniform predetermined rate of speed both uphill and downhill in order to produce a uniform application of striping material and capable of following straight lines and making normal curves in a true arc .
conveying parts between the main material reservoir and the shaping die or gun prevent accumulation and clogging .
parts that contact the material are easily accessible and exposable for cleaning and maintenance .
mixing and conveying parts including the shaping die or gun maintain the material at the plastic temperature with heat transfer oil or electrical element controlled heat .
do not use an external source of direct heat .
parts provide continuously uniform stripe dimensions .
applicator cleanly and squarely cuts off stripe ends and applies skip lines .
do not use pans aprons or similar appliances that the die overruns .
parts produce varying widths of traffic markings .
applicator is mobile and maneuverable enough to follow straight lines and make normal curves in a true arc .
b .
automatic bead dispenser apply glass spheres andor reflective composite optics to the surface of the completed stripe using a dispenser attached to the striping machine to automatically dispense the beadsoptics instantaneously upon the installed line .
synchronize the glass sphereoptics dispenser cutoff with the automatic cutoff of the thermoplastic material .
c. special kettles use special kettles for melting and heating the thermoplastic material .
use kettles equipped with automatic thermostatic control devices that provides positive temperature control and prevents overheating .
ensure that the applicator and kettles are equipped and arranged according to the requirements of the national fire underwriters .
d. hand equipment use hand equipment for projects with small quantities of lane lines edge lines and center lines or for conditions requiring the equipment .
use hand equipment approved by the engineer .
ensure hand equipment can hold num lbs num kg of molten material and is maneuverable to install crosswalks arrows legends lane edge and center lines .
e. auxiliary vehicles supply the necessary auxiliary vehicles for the operation .
section numthermoplastic traffic stripe num num preparation for asphaltic concrete pavement do not begin placement of thermoplastic striping until num calendar days after completion of the final surface course .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
general application notify the engineer prior to the placement of the thermoplastic materials .
furnish the engineer with the manufacturers name and batch numbers of the thermoplastic materials and glass spheres to be used .
ensure that the approved batch numbers appear on the thermoplastic materials and glass spheres packages .
thoroughly clean pavement areas to be striped .
use hand brooms rotary brooms air blasts scrapers or other approved methods that leave the pavement surface clean and undamaged .
take care to remove all vegetation and road film from the striping area .
ensure all new portland cement concrete pavement surfaces are mechanically wire brushed or abrasive cleaned to remove all laitance and curing compound before being striped .
lay stripe with continuous uniform dimensions .
apply the type of stripe at each location according to the plans using one of the following methods spray techniques extrusion methods wherein one side of the shaping die is the pavement and the other three sides are contained by or are part of the suitable equipment to heat and control the flow of material .
extrusion methods using a pressurized ribbon gun to control the application of material .
num .
temperature apply thermoplastic traffic stripe only when the pavement temperature in the shade is above num f num c. to ensure optimum adhesion install the thermoplastic material in a melted state at the manufacturers recommended temperature but not at less than num f num c. num .
moisture do not apply when the surface is moist .
when directed by the engineer perform a moisture test on the portland cement concrete pavement surface .
perform the test as follows a .
place approximately num ydnum nummnum of roofing felt on the pavement surface .
b. pour approximately num gallon num l of molten thermoplastic onto the roofing felt .
c. after num minutes lift the roofing felt and inspect to see if moisture is present on the pavement surface or underside of the roofing felt .
d. if moisture is present do not proceed with the striping operation until the surface has dried sufficiently to be moisture free .
num .
sealing primer to ensure optimum adhesion apply a bindersealer material before installing the thermoplastic in each of the following cases where directed by the engineer for sprayed thermoplastic old asphaltic concrete pavements with exposed aggregates portland cement concrete pavements ensure that the bindersealer material forms a continuous film that mechanically adheres to the pavement and dries rapidly .
use a bindersealer currently in use and recommended by the thermoplastic material manufacturer according to qpl num .
section numthermoplastic traffic stripe num apply the bindersealer immediately in advance of but concurrent with the application of the thermoplastic material .
apply in a continuous film over the pavement surface .
num .
bonding to old stripe if the old stripe is to be renewed by overlaying with new material ensure the new material bonds to the old line without splitting or cracking .
num .
offset from construction joints offset longitudinal lines at least num in num mm from construction joints of portland cement concrete pavements .
num .
crosswalks stop bars and symbols make crosswalks stop bars and symbols at least num in num mm thick at the edges and no more than num in num mm thick at the center .
num .
thickness maintain the following minimum average dry thicknesses above the surface on all types of pavement num in num mm for lane lines num in num mm for edge lines num in num mm for gore area lines see below for reference .
compute the minimums by the amount of material used each day as follows for num in wide stripe average thickness in lbs used total linear feet x num for num mm wide stripe average thickness mm kg used total linear meters x num for num in wide stripe average thickness in lbs used total linear feet x num for num mm wide stripe average thickness mm kg used total linear meters x num num .
glass spheres and reflective composite optics a .
apply glass spheres andor reflective composite optics to installed stripe surface above the minimum rate recommended by the thermoplastic material manufacturer to produce the required retroreflectivity value in accordance with subsection num. b .
apply the glass sphere andor reflective composite optics topcoating with a pressuretype gun specifically designed for applying glass spheres andor reflective composite optics that will embed at least onehalf of the spheres and optics diameter into the thermoplastic immediately after the material has been applied to the pavement .
b .
removing existing stripe remove existing stripe according to section num .
remove num percent of existing traffic stripe from portland cement concrete pavement where the new stripe will be placed at the same location as the existing marking pavement where the new stripe will be placed at a different location from the existing markings section numthermoplastic traffic stripe num c. tolerance and appearance no traffic stripe shall be less than the specified width and shall not exceed the specified width by more than num in nummm .
the length of the num ft num m segment for skip stripe and the num ft num m gap between segments may vary plus or minus num ft num mm .
the alignment of the stripe shall not deviate from the intended alignment by more than num in num mm on straight lines .
on curves up to and including num degree radius of num m or greater the alignment of the stripe shall not deviate from the intended alignment by more than num in num mm .
on curves exceeding num degree radius less than num m the alignment of the stripe shall not deviate from the intended alignment by more than num in num mm .
stop work when deviation exceeds the above dimensions and remove the nonconforming stripe .
d. traffic marking protection do not allow traffic onto or permit vehicles to cross newly applied pavement markings until they are sufficiently dry .
remove and replace any portion of the pavement markings damaged by passing traffic or from any other cause at no additional cost to the department .
num quality acceptance a .
general for a minimum of num days from the time of placement ensure the thermoplastic pavement marking material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking chipping bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials smearing or spreading under heat deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings spilling poor adhesion to the pavement material vehicular damage and normal wear .
in the event that failures mentioned above occur ensure corrective work is completed at no additional cost to the department .
obtain pavement marking retroreflectivity values with a num meter geometry retroreflectometer .
b .
initial retroreflectivity num .
longitudinal lines within num days of installation ensure the inplace markings meet the following minimum reflectance values a .
standard white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum nummcdluxmnum b .
wet weather white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum wet recovery astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum for each center line edge line and skip line measure retroreflectivity num times for each mile num times within the first num ft num m num times in the middle and num times within the last num ft num m. for projects less than one mile in length measure retroreflectivity num times as above .
record all retroreflectivity measurements on the form omr cvp num in sop num .
num .
messages symbols and transverse lines at the time of installation ensure the inplace markings when tested according to astm e num meet the following minimum reflectance value of num mcdluxmnum .
perform at a minimum one retroreflectivity measurement at one message one symbol and one transverse line per intersection .
take one measurement per mile for locations other than intersections i.e .
school messages railroad messages bike symbols etc .
c. six month retroreflectivity longitudinal lines maintain the following minimum reflectance values for num days after installation section numthermoplastic traffic stripe num num .
standard white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum num .
wet weather white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum wet recovery astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum retest the inplace markings according to subsection num.b.num num days after installation to ensure these minimum retroreflectance values are maintained .
note the contractor is responsible for retroreflectivity testing .
furnish initial test results to the engineer within num days of application .
furnish num month test results to the engineer within num days of application or prior to final acceptance whichever comes first .
d. thickness num .
new striping check the thicknesses on all skip lines edge lines and center lines with an approved traffic marking thickness gage consisting of num dials as follows for each center line edge line and skip line measure thickness above the pavement num times for each mile once within the first num ft num m once in the middle and once within the last num ft num m. for projects less than one mile in length measure the thickness above the pavement num times .
record all thickness measurements on the form omr cvp num in sop num .
num .
recapping refurbishment thermoplastic place durable tape film or metal plate of known and uniform thickness on an area to be striped .
after the striper has passed over remove the sample and measure the thickness with calipers or a micrometer .
for each center line edge line and skip line measure thickness above the pavement num times for each mile once within the first num ft num m once in the middle and once within the last num ft num m. for projects less than one mile in length measure the thickness above the pavement num times .
submit results to the engineer .
e. corrective work for each mile section if the thermoplastic traffic stripe fails to meet plan details or specifications or deviates from stated dimensions correct it at no additional cost to the department .
if removal of pavement markings is necessary perform it according to section num and place it according to this specification .
no additional payment will be made for removal and replacement of unsatisfactory striping .
ensure corrective work is completed at no additional cost to the department .
perform testing according to this specification .
any retest due to failures will be performed at no additional cost to the department .
furnish all test reports to the department .
retroreflectivity and thickness longitudinal line deficiency a deficiency will ensue when two or more location average results as recorded on form omr cvp num within a onemile section do not meet the performance criteria herein .
the entire line within this one mile section will be determined to be deficient .
if the evaluated section is less than num mile a single location average result not meeting the performance criteria herein will result in the entire line to be determined to be deficient .
retroreflectivity transverse markings and symbol deficiency a single location average result on the marking or symbol not meeting the performance criteria herein will result in the marking or symbol to be determined to be deficient .
num verification see sop num section numthermoplastic traffic stripe num num measurement when stripe will be paid for by the square yard meter the actual number of square yards meters painted will be measured .
the space between the stripes will be included in the overall measurement .
linear measurements may be made by electronic measuring devices attached to a vehicle .
thermoplastic traffic stripe complete in place and accepted is measured as follows a .
solid traffic stripe stripe is measured by the linear foot meter linear mile kilometer or square yard meter .
breaks or omissions in solid lines or stripes at street or road intersections are not measured for payment .
b .
skip traffic stripe skip stripe is measured by the gross linear mile kilometer as specified .
the unpainted space between the painted stripes is included in the overall measurement if the plan ratio of one to three num ft num m segment and num ft num m gap or other patterns as designated on the plans remains uninterrupted .
measurement begins and ends on a stripe .
c. words and symbols each word or symbol complete according to plan dimensions is measured by the unit .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment is full compensation for the work under this section including cleaning and preparing surfaces furnishing all materials applying curing and protecting stripe protecting traffic including providing necessary warning signs furnishing tools machines and other equipment necessary to complete the item measurement and payment for removing pavement markings will be according to section num when shown in the proposal as a payment item .
otherwise removal will not be paid for separately but will be included in the payment for other work under this section .
payment will be made under item no .
num thermoplastic solid traffic stripe __ in mm color per linear foot meter item no .
num thermoplastic solid traffic stripe __ in mm color per linear mile kilometer item no .
num thermoplastic skip traffic stripe __ in mm color per gross linear foot meter item no .
num thermoplastic skip traffic stripe __ in mm color per gross linear mile kilometer item no .
num thermoplastic pavement markings words and symbols color type _____ per each item no .
num thermoplastic traffic stripe per square yard meter item no .
num wet weather thermoplastic solid traffic stripe __ in mm color per linear foot meter item no .
num wet weather thermoplastic solid traffic stripe __ in mm color per linear mile kilometer item no .
num wet weather thermoplastic skip traffic stripe __ in mm color per gross linear foot meter item no .
num wet weather thermoplastic skip traffic stripe __ in mm color per gross linear mile kilometer section numthermoplastic traffic stripe num item no .
num wet weather thermoplastic pavement markings words and symbols color type _____ per each item no .
num wet weather thermoplastic traffic stripe per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numraised pavement markers num general description this work includes furnishing and placing raised pavement markers according to the plans or as directed by the engineer .
use markers that conform to plan shapes dimensions and tolerances .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numbituminous adhesive for raised pavement markers section numepoxy resin adhesives section numraised pavement marker materials b. referenced documents qpl num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section bituminous adhesive num epoxy resin adhesives num pavement markers num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment before beginning construction clean marker replacement equipment and ensure that it is mechanically sound .
section numraised pavement markers num a .
containers and stirring devices clean containers and stirring devices paddles propellers for drills etc .
before handmixing epoxy .
b .
automatic mixing device num .
cleaning clean the mixing head to the automatic epoxy mixing equipment after stopping work for any extended period of time .
the length of downtime allowed depends on the pot life of the adhesive system being used .
num .
mixing ratio use an automatic mixing device that delivers separate components to the mixing head in a onetoone ratio by volume .
num .
sample valves equip the lines feeding the mixing head with suitable valves to allow samples to be taken for checking the ratio of each component .
c. bituminous adhesive equipment clean and maintain equipment for melting stirring and dispensing bituminous adhesive according to the bituminous adhesive manufacturers requirements .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. adhesive types cement markers to pavement surfaces with a type ir epoxy or type is epoxy see section num or with a bituminous adhesive see section num .
space markers according to the plans .
num .
type ir epoxy .
use type ir epoxy when the pavement temperature is above num f num c or when traffic conditions require a rapid setting system .
num .
type is epoxy .
use type is epoxy when the pavement temperature is above num f num c and traffic conditions permit a slower setting system .
num .
bituminous adhesive .
use bituminous adhesive when the pavement temperature is above num f num c or when traffic conditions require a rapid setting material .
b .
handling and applying adhesives obtain an epoxy adhesive furnished as two separate components .
combine and use the components as follows num .
immediately before use thoroughly stir the individual components with separate paddles .
reject material permanently increasing in viscosity or showing settling of pigments filler or thixotropic additives that can not be readily redispersed .
num .
after stirring or agitating the two separate components mix them in a onetoone ratio and blend thoroughly until obtaining a uniform color without streaks .
num .
at time of mixing ensure that the temperature of both components is num to num f num to num c. if necessary heat components using indirect heat to avoid locally overheating and decomposing the material .
do not heat adhesive above num f num c. num .
place markers between the start of mixing the epoxy system and the termination of the pot life .
the engineer will designate the allowable pot life based on environmental factors .
never use a partially set mixed system that does not readily extrude around the perimeter of the marker when pressed to the roadway .
section numraised pavement markers num num .
when using an approved fastsetting epoxy system mix the separate components with a twocomponent type automatic mixing and extrusion apparatus and place markers immediately .
num .
use bituminous adhesive furnished in approximately num lb num kg cubes .
a .
heat the cubes in an oiljacketed melting pot .
b .
maintain the bituminous adhesive at the manufacturerrecommended temperature during placement of the markers .
c. discard bituminous adhesive heated above num f num c. c. placement of markers num .
surface cleaning clean pavement of dirt curing compound grease oil paint moisture loose or unsound layers or other material that would impair the bond between the adhesive and the roadway .
a .
use either sandblasting or grinding equipment to clean .
remove the dust before placing the marker .
b .
provide cleaning equipment air lines with suitable traps to prevent oil or moisture from being redeposited on the road surface .
num .
placement limits place markers as follows a .
do not place markers over joints in rigid pavement .
b .
do not place markers when pavement temperature is below num f num c. c. when possible wait num to num days before placing markers using epoxy adhesive on newly constructed asphaltic concrete pavements .
num .
marker placement using epoxy adhesives place markers using epoxy adhesives as follows a .
place enough adhesive on the cleaned pavement or the bottom of the marker to completely cover the contact area of the marker .
b .
press the marker firmly to the pavement .
c. allow a slight bead of epoxy adhesive to extrude from under the marker edges .
d. remove adhesive on the face of the marker or adhesive that obscures the marker .
do not use thinners or solvents to clean epoxy adhesives from the markers .
num .
marker placement using bituminous adhesives place markers using bituminous adhesives as follows a .
place enough bituminous adhesive on the cleaned pavement or the bottom of the marker to completely cover the contact area of the marker .
b .
press the marker firmly to the pavement .
c. allow a slight bead of adhesive to extrude from under the marker edges .
d. remove adhesive on the face of the marker or adhesive that obscures the marker .
e. place the marker before the bituminous adhesive cools and does not extrude around the perimeter of the marker when pressed to the roadway .
num quality acceptance refer to qpl num for raised pavement markers that have met these requirements .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement the number of each type of installed and accepted pavement marker is counted separately for payment .
section numraised pavement markers num num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment raised pavement markers will be paid for at the unit price for each unit of each type .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing each marker .
when designated payment will also include recessing the marker .
payment will be made under item no .
num raised pavement markers type_____ per each item no .
num raised pavement markers type_____recessed per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numpavement arrow with raised reflectors num general description this work includes installing pavement arrows with raised reflectors .
mark arrows with traffic paint thermoplastic or preformed plastic pavement markings according to the proposal and plan details .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numpainting traffic stripe section numthermoplastic traffic stripe section numraised pavement markers section numpreformed plastic pavement markings section numbituminous adhesive for raised pavement markers section numpaint section numepoxy resin adhesives section numreflectorizing materials section numraised pavement marker materials b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
section numpavement arrow with raised reflectors num num materials ensure that materials conform to the following specifications material section glass beads paint num thermoplastic traffic markings num glass spheres thermoplastic num.d preformed plastic pavement markings num bituminous adhesive num traffic line paint num epoxy adhesives type i num.a raised pavement marker num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction install the raised markers for pavement arrows according to subsection num .
a .
painted arrows apply painted arrows according to section num .
b. thermoplastic arrows except as noted below place thermoplastic according to section num .
do not sand blast arrows to be coated with thermoplastic .
num .
apply thermoplastic num mils num mm thick .
num .
screed or level the thermoplastic .
num .
immediately embed the raised reflector in the molten thermoplastic .
c. preformed plastic pavement markings apply preformed plastic pavement markings according to section num .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
section numpavement arrow with raised reflectors num num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement each type of arrow is measured by the unit .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment each arrow will be paid for per unit placed .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials cleaning and installing the completed arrow with raised reflectors .
payment will be made under item no .
num pavement arrow painted with raised reflectors per each item no .
num pavement arrow thermoplastic with raised reflectors per each item no .
num pavement arrow preformed plastic with raised reflectors per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numremoval of pavement markings num general description this work includes removing existing traffic stripes or markings according to plans or as designated by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public section numtraffic control section numabrasives for blast cleaning b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
section numremoval of pavement markings num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction remove pavement markings before changing the traffic pattern .
this specification does not relieve the contractor of the responsibilities in section num or subsection num .
utilize blasting such as sand blasting or water blasting grinding or other approved methods to completely remove pavement markings without materially damaging the pavement surface or texture .
repair at the contractors expense damage to the pavement or other surface from removing the markings .
use repair methods acceptable to the engineer .
a .
blast cleaning do not allow sand and other debris to accumulate and interfere with drainage or create a traffic hazard .
num .
when blast cleaning within num ft num m of a lane occupied by public traffic immediately remove residue and dust when the sand hits the pavement surface .
num .
use a vacuum attachment operating simultaneously with blast cleaning or use other methods approved by the engineer .
num .
ensure that sand for blast cleaning conforms to section num .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement removal of existing pavement markings is measured by the linear foot meter linear mile kilometer gross linear foot meter gross linear mile kilometer or square yard meter of the designated width and the type of stripe .
where removal of traffic markings will be paid for by the square yard meter the actual number of square yards meters removed will be paid for .
the space between the stripes or letters will be included in the overall measurement .
removal of words in existing traffic markings is measured per each word removed .
num limits general provisions num through num .
section numremoval of pavement markings num num payment when shown as a pay item on the plans payment for removing pavement markings will be at the contract unit price for the unit .
payment is full compensation for furnishing materials labor equipment and traffic control necessary to perform the work .
payment will be made under item no .
num removing existing solid traffic stripe __ in mm wide type per linear foot meter item no .
num removing existing skip traffic stripe __ in mm wide type per gross linear foot meter item no .
num removing existing solid traffic stripe __ in mm wide type per linear mile kilometer item no .
num removing existing skip traffic stripe __ in mm wide type per gross linear foot meter item no .
num removing existing traffic markings type per square yard meter item no .
num removing existing traffic markingswords per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section num preformed plastic pavement markings num general description this work includes placing plastic pavement markings or legends according to the plans and specifications or as otherwise directed .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm e num astm e num astm e num astm e num us epa method num us epa method numc manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways section numpreformed plastic pavement markings num federal test standard num method num qpl num sop num num submittals transfer to the department manufacturer warranties or guarantees for heatapplied and wet reflective preformed plastic marking materials .
ensure that warranties or guarantees state that they are subject to transfer .
num materials select one of the following types of preformed marking material according to the plans and proposal type tr temporary removable plastic marking type tn temporary nonremovable plastic marking type pa permanent plastic marking type pb permanent patterned plastic marking type pbwr permanent patterned wet reflective plastic markings for a list of sources see qplnum .
a .
general requirements for preformed pavement markings num .
shapes and sizes use markings that conform to the shapes and sizes outlined in the manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways .
num .
pigmentation use white or yellow pigmented plastic according to each marking type .
num .
adhesion use markings that can be affixed to bituminous or portland cement concrete pavements by pressuresensitive precoated adhesive or a liquid contact cement .
ensure that marking adhesive adheres to the roadway under normal climactic and traffic conditions .
num .
conformability use markings that will mold to pavement contours breaks faults and the like by normal action of traffic at normal pavement temperatures .
num .
ntpep evaluation use markings evaluated by the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep .
num .
glass spheres andor reflective composite optics use markings with a layer of glass spheres andor reflective composite optics bonded to the surface according to the marking type .
type pb and pbwr contain glass beads andor reflective composite optics .
types tr tn and pa contain only glass beads .
do not use glass spheres and or reflective composite optics containing greater than num ppm total arsenic num ppm total antimony or num ppm total lead when tested according to us epa methods num and numc or other approved methods .
use glass spheres with less than num by weight showing any milkiness scoring or scratching .
use clear transparent spheres that are free from air inclusions and conform to the following glass spheres refractive index tested by oil immersion num minimum uniform distribution of spheres num minimum section numpreformed plastic pavement markings num num .
reflective intensity types tr tn and pa determine reflective intensity in accordance with astm dnum or enum .
ensure that marking types tr tn and pa use white or yellow film with the initial reflective intensity indicated in the table below when measured at the angles shown .
white yellow observation angle numo numo entrance angle numo numo reflective intensity millicandelas per square meter per lux num num num .
composition use markings made of highquality polymeric materials and pigments .
ensure types tr and pa contain the following composition of materials material min by weight resins and plasticizers num pigments num graded glass spheres num b .
requirements for temporary markings types tr and tn num .
temporary removable markings type tr use temporary removable markings that meet the following requirements a. removability ensure the marking material can be removed from asphaltic and portland cement as follows lifted intact or in large pieces .
lifted either manually or with a rollup device .
lifted at temperatures above num f num c without using heat solvents sand blasting or grinding .
ensure the pavement shows no objectionable staining or damage after removing the marking .
b. elongation and tensile strength provide temporary markings with the following elongation and tensile strength when tested according to astm d num elongation num maximum tensile strength num lbsin² num kpa minimum test as follows num cut a num in by num in num mm by num mm specimen .
num test at a temperature between num f and num f num c and num c. num test at a jaw speed of num inmin num mmin .
c. adhesion ensure that temporary marking material meets the adhesion requirements of astm dnum .
d. glass sphere retention confirm the glass sphere retention quality of marking material in both of the following ways num laboratory test take a num in by num in num mm by num mm sample .
section numpreformed plastic pavement markings num bend the sample over a ½ in num mm diameter mandrel leaving the num in num m side perpendicular to the mandrel axis .
ensure that the area on the mandrel shows no more than num percent of the beads entrapped by the binder less than num percent .
num field test ensure the spheres can not be easily removed by scratching the material firmly with the thumbnail .
e. skid resistance ensure that the material surface provides a num bpn minimum skid resistance value when tested according to astm e num. f. thickness ensure that the removable marking material is at least num mils num mm thick not including the backing adhesive .
num .
temporary nonremovable markings type tn this type of pavement marking may use a conformable metallic foil backing with a precoated pressuresensitive adhesive .
skid resistance a .
ensure the retroreflective pliant polymer surface provides a skid resistance value of at least num bpn .
test according to astm e num. b. elongation and tensile strength no test for elongation and tensile strength is required for type tn marking .
c. glass sphere retention refer to subsection num.b.num.d glass sphere retention .
d. thickness ensure the nonremovable marking material is at least num mils num mm not including the adhesive backing .
c. requirements for permanent markings types pa pb and pbwr num .
permanent plastic marking type pa provide permanent plastic markings with these features a. adhesive and backing use markings supplied with the following a precoated adhesive an easily removable backing to protect the adhesive an adhesive backing that allows repositioning of the marking on the surface before permanently sticking with greater pressure in addition supply rolls of lane lines with a precoated adhesive but without the protective backing material .
b. pigments num white use white marking material meeting the initial color requirements of astm dnum .
num yellow use yellow marking material meeting the initial color requirements of astm dnum .
num appearance ensure that each marking meets the following appearance standards markings are extruded to a uniform thickness .
edges are smoothly cut and true .
glass spheres are retained on all sides by the plastic base material .
section numpreformed plastic pavement markings num the wearing surface is free of indentations displaced spheres or other irregularities that retain dirt dust or other foreign materials .
c. thickness ensure the permanent material is at least num mils num mm thick without the precoated adhesive .
d. glass sphere retention confirm that the surface glass spheres are strongly bonded and are not easily removed by traffic .
test them as follows num use a taber abraser with an hnum wheel and num gram load .
num inspect the sample at num cycles under the microscope to observe the extent and type of bead failure .
num ensure that no more than num percent of the spheres have poppedout .
num verify that the predominant mode of failure is weardown of the spheres .
e. tensile strength and elongation ensure that the permanent markings have the following elongation and tensile strength when tested according to astm d num elongation num maximum tensile strength num psi num kpa minimum test as follows note run this test num times and base the result on an average of the num tests .
num cut num specimens num in by num in num mm by num mm each .
num place num in² num mm² of carborundum extracoarse emery cloth or its equivalent at each end of the test specimens to prevent the adhesive from sticking to test equipment .
num test at a temperature between num and num f num and num c. num test at a jaw speed of num to num inmin num mm to num mmmin .
f. skid resistance test the plastic surface to verify that it provides a skid resistance value of at least num bpn .
test according to astm e num. g. adhesive ensure permanent markings meet the adhesion requirements of astm dnum .
num .
permanent patterned plastic marking type pb use patterned plastic markings with these features a .
patterned surface ensure that the patterned surface has the following characteristics a reflective layer of glass spheres andor reflective composite optics bonded to a durable polyurethane topcoat .
the raised area comprises approximately num num of the total marking face .
the surface presents a near vertical face β angle of numo to numo to traffic from any direction .
the office of materials approves the pattern configuration .
the channels between raised areas are free of exposed beads or particles .
b. adhesive and backing refer to subsection num.c.num.a adhesive and backing .
c. pigments refer to subsection num.c.num.b pigments .
section numpreformed plastic pavement markings num d. glass spheres and reflective composite optics ensure that the top layer of glass spheres andor reflective composite optics are bonded to a durable polyurethane surface .
e. thickness ensure the permanent material is at least num mils num mm thick at the thickest portion of the patterned cross section and at least num mils num mm at the thinnest portion of the crosssection .
f. tensile strength and elongation refer to subsection num.c.num.e tensile strength and elongation .
g. skid resistance refer to subsection num.c.num.f skid resistance .
h. dry reflective intensity determine reflective intensity in accordance with astm d num or enum .
initial minimum dry reflective values are as follows white yellow observation angle numo numo white yellow entrance angle numo numo reflective intensity millicandelas per square meter per lux num num num .
permanent patterned wet reflective plastic marking type pbwr use patterned plastic markings with these features a .
patterned surface ensure that the patterned surface has the following characteristics a reflective layer of glass spheres andor reflective composite optics bonded to a durable polyurethane topcoat .
the raised area comprises approximately num num of the total marking face .
the surface presents a near vertical face β angle of numo to numo to traffic from any direction .
the office of materials approves the pattern configuration .
the channels between raised areas are free of exposed beads or particles .
b. adhesive and backing refer to subsection num.c.num.a adhesive and backing .
c. pigments refer to subsection num.c.num.b pigments .
d. glass spheres beads and reflective composite optics ensure that the top layer of glass spheres andor reflective composite optics are bonded to a durable polyurethane surface .
e. thickness ensure the permanent material is at least num mils num mm thick at the thickest portion of the patterned cross section and at least num mils num mm at the thinnest portion of the crosssection .
f. tensile strength and elongation refer to subsection num.c.num.e tensile strength and elongation .
g. skid resistance refer to subsection num.c.num.f skid resistance .
h. dry reflective intensity section numpreformed plastic pavement markings num determine reflective intensity in accordance with astm d num or enum .
initial minimum dry reflective values are as follows white yellow observation angle numo numo entrance angle numo numo reflective intensity millicandelas per square meter per lux num num i .
wet reflective intensity determine wet reflective intensity in accordance with astm enum .
ensure that markings meet the following initial minimum wet retroreflective intensity .
white yellow divergence angle num num incidence angle num num reflective intensity millicandelas per square meter per lux num num num construction requirements general provisions num through num .
num personnel send a factorytrained representative from the material manufacturer to the jobsite at the start of each project .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction remove existing pavement markings according to subsection num.b removing existing stripe .
a. preconditions for applying markings types pb and pbwr num .
meet the following conditions before applying markings onto new asphaltic pavements the ambient temperature is num f num c and rising .
new asphaltic pavement temperature is at least num f num c. the plastic can be applied to new asphaltic pavement immediately before the new surface is rolled for the final time .
conventional steel rollers and water used with them do not impede the plastics application .
num .
meet the following conditions before applying markings onto all pavements the ambient temperature is num f num c and rising .
the pavement temperature is at least num f num c and rising .
the previous night temperature did not fall below num f num c. no significant rainfall occurred num hours prior to the plastics application .
section numpreformed plastic pavement markings num b. preconditions for applying markings types tr tn and pa num .
meet the following conditions before applying markings onto new asphaltic pavements the ambient temperature is num f num c and rising .
new asphaltic pavement temperature is at least num f num c. the plastic can be applied to new asphaltic pavement immediately before the new surface is rolled for the final time .
conventional steel rollers and water used with them do not impede the plastics application .
num .
meet the following conditions before applying markings onto all pavements the ambient temperature is num f num c and rising .
the pavement temperature is at least num f num c and rising .
the previous night temperature did not fall below num f num c. no significant rainfall occurred num hours prior to the plastics application .
c. remove existing stripe remove at least num of existing traffic stripe under either of the following conditions on portland cement concrete pavement where the new stripe is to be placed at the same location as the existing marking on all pavements where the new stripe is to be placed at a location different from the existing marking d. applying markings apply markings as follows num .
thoroughly clean the pavement .
clean with compressed air hand brooms rotary brooms scrapers or other approved methods which leave the pavement thoroughly clean and undamaged .
remove all vegetation and road film from the area to be striped .
mechanically wire brush or abrasive blast clean all new portland cement concrete pavement surfaces to remove all laitance and curing compound from the area to be striped .
num .
apply an adhesive activator according to the manufacturers recommendations when required .
num .
position markings according to the plans .
num .
press positioned markings firmly onto the pavement .
num .
offset longitudinal lines at least num in num mm from construction joints of portland cement concrete pavements .
e. tolerances and appearance num .
cut off all stripe ends squarely and cleanly .
num .
the length of the num ft num m segment for skip stripe and the num ft num m gap between segments may vary plus or minus numin num mm .
do not allow the alignment of skip stripe to deviate from the intended alignment by more than num in num mm .
do not allow the alignment of edge stripe to deviate from the intended alignment by more than num in num mm on tangents and on curves with a radius up to and including one degree .
do not allow the alignment of edge stripe to deviate from the intended alignment by more than num in num mm on curves exceeding one degree .
num .
stop work when deviation exceeds the above dimensions and remove the nonconforming stripe .
num quality acceptance a .
general segments of preformed plastic traffic stripe that have been placed according to the plans and specifications may be accepted num days after the required work is complete in that segment .
if preformed plastic traffic stripe fails to meet plan details or specifications or deviates from stated dimensions correct it at no additional cost to the department .
if removal of pavement markings is necessary perform it according to section num and replace it according to this specification .
no additional payment will be made for removal and replacement of unsatisfactory striping .
obtain pavement marking retroreflectivity values with a num meter geometry retroreflectometer .
section numpreformed plastic pavement markings num b .
initial retroreflectivity num .
longitudinal lines within num days of installation ensure the in place markings meet the following minimum reflectance values a .
type pb white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum b .
type pbwr white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum wet recovery astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum for each center line edge line and skip line measure retroreflectivity num times for each mile num times within the first num ft num m num times in the middle and num times within the last num ft num m. for projects less than one mile in length measure retroreflectivity num times as above .
record all retroreflectivity measurements on the form omr cvp num in sop num .
num .
messages symbols and transverse lines within num days of installation ensure both type pb and type pbwr inplace markings when tested according to astm e num meet the following minimum reflectance value of num mcdluxmnum .
perform at a minimum one retroreflectivety measurement at one message one symbol and one transverse line per intersection .
take one measurement per mile for locations other than intersections i.e .
school messages railroad messages bike symbols etc .
c. six month retroreflectivity longitudinal lines maintain the following minimum reflectance values for num days after installation num .
type pb white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum num .
type pbwr white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum wet recovery astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum retest the inplace markings according to subsection num.b.num num days after installation to ensure these minimum retroreflectance values are maintained .
note the contractor is responsible for retroreflectivity testing .
furnish initial test results to the engineer within num days of application .
furnish num month test results to the engineer within num days of application or prior to final acceptance whichever comes first .
d. corrective work for each mile section if preformed plastic pavement marking traffic stripe fails to meet plan details or specifications or deviates from stated dimensions correct it at no additional cost to the department .
if removal of pavement markings is necessary perform it according to section num and place it according to this specification .
no additional payment will be section numpreformed plastic pavement markings num made for removal and replacement of unsatisfactory striping .
ensure corrective work is completed at no additional cost to the department .
perform testing according to this specification .
any retest due to failures will be performed at no additional cost to the department .
furnish all test reports to the department .
retroreflectivity longitudinal line deficiency a deficiency will ensure when two or more location average results as recorded on form omr cvp num within a onemile section do not meet the performance criteria herein .
the entire line within this one mile section will be determined to be deficient .
if the evaluated section is less than num mile a single location average result not meeting the performance criteria herein will result in the entire line to be determined to be deficient .
retroreflectivity transverse markings and symbol deficiency a single location average result on the marking or symbol not meeting the performance criteria herein will result in the marking or symbol to be determined to be deficient .
num contractor warranty and maintenance a .
warranties transfer all warranties or guarantees normally furnished by the manufacturer to the department .
include a provision that warranties are subject to transfer .
warrant type pb and type pbwr plastic markings to adhere to the pavement and to provide a minimum astm e num dry coefficient of retroreflection of num mcdluxmnum when measured using a num meter geometry retroreflectometer for a period of at least num years for longitudinal markings and at least num years for intersection markings and symbols under normal traffic conditions .
b .
maintenance use the following according to manufacturers instructions to ensure effective marking performance solvents or adhesives appropriate equipment recommendations for application num measurement preformed plastic pavement markings complete in place and accepted are measured as follows a .
solid traffic stripe solid stripe is measured by the linear foot meter or linear mile kilometer as specified .
breaks or omissions in solid lines and stripes at street or road intersections are not measured for payment .
b .
skip traffic stripe skip stripe is measured by the gross linear foot meter or gross linear mile kilometer as specified .
the unpainted spaces between the stripes are included in the overall measurement if the plan ratio is not interrupted .
measurement begins and ends on a stripe .
c. payment by square yard meter when preformed pavement markings are paid for by the square yard meter the number of square yards meters covered is measured .
the space between the markings is included in the overall measurement .
the color width and type are according to the plans .
d. preformed plastic word or symbol each preformed plastic word or symbol complete according to plan dimensions is measured by the unit .
the code for each word or symbol is stated in the plans .
section numpreformed plastic pavement markings num e. removing existing pavement markings measurement and payment for removing pavement markings will be according to section num when shown in the proposal as a payment item .
otherwise removal will not be paid for separately but will be included in the payment for other work under this section .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment in each case is full compensation for applying markings including adhesives cleaning application and traffic control necessary to complete the item .
payment will be made under item no .
num .
preformed plastic solid pavement markings_____ in mm color type per linear foot meter item no .
num .
preformed plastic solid pavement markings_____ in mm color type per linear mile kilometer item no .
num .
preformed plastic skip pavement markings_____ in mm color type per gross linear foot meter item no .
num .
preformed plastic skip pavement markings_____ in mm color type per gross linear mile kilometer item no .
num .
preformed plastic pavement markings per square yard meter item no .
num .
preformed plastic pavement markings words or symbols color type per each item no .
num .
wet reflective preformed solid pavement markings_____ in mm color type per linear foot meter item no .
num .
wet reflective preformed solid pavement markings_____ in mm color type per linear mile kilometer item no .
num .
wet reflective preformed skip pavement markings_____ in mm color type per gross linear foot meter item no .
num .
wet reflective preformed skip pavement markings_____ in mm color type per gross linear mile kilometer item no .
num .
wet reflective preformed pavement markings per square yard meter item no .
num .
wet preformed pavement markings words or symbols color type per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numpolyurea traffic stripe num general description this work includes furnishing and applying reflectorized standard and wet weather polyurea traffic stripe according to the plans and these specifications .
this item also includes applying words and symbols according to plan details specifications and the current manual on uniform traffic control devices .
num definitions painted stripes solid or broken skip lines .
the location and color are designated on the plans .
skip traffic stripes painted segments between unpainted gaps on a designated sequence with a ratio of num num ft num m segment and num ft num m gap as specified on the plans .
the location and color are designated on the plans .
section numpolyurea traffic stripe num num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
section numremoval of pavement markings b. referenced documents qpl num qpl num aashto m num aci method num astm c num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm e num astm e num astm e num astm g num astm g num federal standard no .
numanum sop num us epa method num us epa method numc num materials a .
general requirements use polyurea material that has been evaluated num year field evaluation by the national transportation product evaluation panel ntpep test facility or other approved test facility .
use polyurea material produced from an approved source listed on qpl num .
use a polyurea composition that is specifically formulated for use as a durable pavement marking material and for application at elevated temperatures not exceeding num ºf num ºc .
ensure the liquid markings consist of a twocomponent part a and part b num solids polyurea film formulated and designed to provide a simple volumetric mixing ratio as recommended by the manufacturer .
use white or yellow films for the markings .
ensure that these films are manufactured without the use of lead chromate pigments or other similar leadcontaining chemicals .
ensure that the white polyurea contains not less than num by weight rutile titanium dioxide pigment to insure adequate opacity hiding powerand reflective properties .
section numpolyurea traffic stripe num b .
glass spheres and reflective composite optics use glass spheres andor reflective composite optics for the reflective media system that ensures the polyurea pavement markings meet the reflectance performance requirements in subsection num .
do not use beads andor optics containing greater then num ppm total arsenic num ppm total antimony or num ppm total lead when tested according to the most recent us epa methods num and num or other approved methods .
ensure glass spheres meet the requirements of aashto m num .
use glass spheres produced from an approved source listed on qpl num .
glass spheres conforming to an alternative gradation may be used provided all other requirements of aashto m num and this specification are met .
obtain approval from the office of materials to use alternate gradations .
c. finished product requirements num .
composition ensure that the retroreflective pavement markings consist of a mixture of highquality resins curing agent and pigments with a reflective layer bonded to the top surface consisting of glass spheres andor reflective composite optics .
num .
color meet these color requirements white markings are pure white and free from dirt or tint .
yellow markings are federal yellow in color .
the material does not change its color and brightness characteristics after prolonged exposure to sunlight .
num .
skid resistance ensure the surface of the retroreflective marking provides an initial average skid resistance value of num bpn when tested according to astm enum .
num .
color and weathering resistance ensure that the mixed polyurea compound both white and yellow when applied to num in num mm x numin num mm aluminum panels at num num mils num mm num mmwet thickness without glass beads and exposed in a q.u.v .
environmental testing chamber as described in astm gnum conforms to the following minimum requirements the color of the white polyurea compound is not darker than federal standard no .
numanum .
the color of the yellow polyurea compound meets the requirements of the federal yellow color chart .
num .
drying time laboratory when tested in accordance with astm dnum the polyurea marking material shall reach a nopickup condition in num minutes or less .
perform this test with aashto mnum type num beads applied at a rate of num pounds per square foot num kgmnum .
ensure that the drying time does not increase substantially with decreasing temperature .
num .
drying time field when installed at num ºf num ºc at a thickness of num num mils num mm num mm above the surface of the pavement on open graded asphalt concrete friction coureses and num num mils num mm num mm on all other pavement types and reflectorized with glass spheres andor reflective composite optics ensure that the polyurea markings reach a notrack condition in less than num minutes .
dry to notracking will be considered as the condition where no visual deposition of the polyurea marking to the pavement surface is observed when viewed from a distance of num feet num m after a traveling vehicles tires have passed over the marking .
num .
abrasion resistance ensure that the wear index of the polyurea compound does not exceed num lbs num mg when tested in accordance with astm cnum using a csnum wheel and under a load of num lbs num g for num cycles .
num .
adhesion to concrete ensure that the polyurea pavement marking materials when tested according to aci method num have such a high degree of adhesion to the specified concrete surface that there is a num concrete failure in the performance of this test .
condition the prepared specimens at room temperature num º num ºf num ºc for a minimum of num hours and maximum of num hours prior to the performance of this test .
section numpolyurea traffic stripe num num .
adhesion to asphalt ensure that the polyurea pavement marking materials when tested according to aci method num have such a high degree of adhesion to the specified asphalt surface that there is a num asphalt failure in the performance of this test .
condition the prepared specimens at room temperature num º num ºf num ºc for a minimum of num hours and maximum of num hours prior to the performance of this test .
num construction requirements num equipment a .
traveling traffic stripe painter to apply the traffic marking material use a mobile truck mounted and self contained pavement marking machine specifically designed to apply twocomponent liquid materials and glass beads in a continuous and skipline pattern .
apply the twocomponent liquid materials through airless impingement mixing guns .
the guns must accommodate a plural component material system at the manufacturers recommended volumetric mixing ratio .
the guns must have the capacity to deliver materials from approximately num gal num l to num gal num l per minute to compensate for a typical range of application speeds of num mph num kmh to num mph num kmh .
ensure that the machine travels at a uniform rate of speed both uphill and downhill .
select the necessary accessories such as spray tip mix chamber or static tube and rod diameter to ensure proper mixing .
ensure that the machine meets the following the machine is capable of applying three separate stripes either solid or skip in any specified pattern by utilizing three adjacent spray nozzles at the same time .
each nozzle is equipped with satisfactory cutoff valves that will apply skip lines automatically .
the application equipment is maneuverable to the extent that straight lines can be followed and normal curves can be made in a true arc .
the truckmounted unit is provided with accessories to allow for the marking of symbols and legends .
the mobile applicator provides individual material reservoirs for the storage of part a and part b of the resin composition .
the applicator is equipped with heating equipment of sufficient capacity to maintain the individual resin components at the manufacturers recommended temperature for spray application .
the applicator is equipped with separate temperature controls for each component .
the applicator is equipped with glass spheres dispensing equipment and capable of applying the glass spheres at a uniform rate .
the application equipment is equipped with metering devices or pressure gauges on the proportioning pumps as well as stroke counters to monitor volumetric usage .
ensure that the metering devices or pressure gauges and stroke counters are visible .
the applicator is equipped with all the necessary spray equipment mixers compressors and other appurtenances to allow for the placement of reflectorized pavement markings in a simultaneous sequence of operations .
b .
cleaning equipment use brushes brooms scrapers grinders highpressure water jets or air blasters to remove dirt dust grease oil and other foreign matter from painting surfaces without damaging the underlying pavement .
num preparation for asphaltic concrete pavement do not begin placement of polyurea pavement markings until num calendar days after completion of the final surface course .
section numpolyurea traffic stripe num notify the engineer prior to the placement of the polyurea materials .
furnish the engineer with the manufacturers name and batch numbers of the polyurea materials and glass spheres to be used .
ensure that the approved batch numbers appear on the polyurea materials and glass spheres packages .
before painting thoroughly clean pavement surfaces of dust dirt grease oil and all other foreign matter .
remove concrete curing compounds on new portland cement concrete surfaces and existing pavement markings on both concrete and asphalt surfaces .
num construction a. atmospheric conditions apply pavement markings only during conditions of dry weather and subsequently dry pavement surfaces .
ensure that the pavement surface temperature and the ambient temperature at the time of installation are both greater than num ºf num ºc and that the relative humidity is not greater than num .
b. alignment ensure that the traffic stripe is the specified length width and placement .
on sections where no previously applied markings are present ensure accurate stripe location by establishing control points at spaced intervals .
the engineer will approve control points .
c. application apply the pavement markings as follows num .
apply the liquid marking material by spray method and according to the manufacturers installation instructions .
num .
ensure marking configurations are in accordance with the manual on uniform traffic control devices .
num .
place the reflectorized pavement markings only on properly prepared surfaces and at the widths and patterns designated on the plans .
do not begin marking operations until applicable surface preparation work is completed and approved by the engineer .
num .
airblast the surface first to remove any dirt and residues from the pavement .
then apply the pavement markings as a continuous operation .
num .
heat component a and component b to the manufacturers recommended temperatures .
num .
ensure that mixing of the two components occurs in a static tube or impingement chamber prior to reaching the application spray nozzle .
num .
spray the mixed resin onto the pavement at a rate to obtain a minimum uniform dry thickness of num mils num mils num mm num mm above the surface of the pavement on open graded asphalt concrete friction coureses and num mils num mils num mm num mm above the surface of the pavement on all other pavement types .
num .
immediately following application drop the glass spheres andor reflective composite optics onto the liquid marking at the application rates recommended by the binder manufacture .
num .
the work will be subject to application rate checks for both compnent a and component b spheres andor reflective composite optics .
following an application of glass spheres andor reflective composite optics and upon curing ensure that the resulting marking is an adherent reflectorized stripe of the specified thickness and width that is capable of resisting deformation by traffic .
d. protective measures protect newly applied polyurea as follows num .
traffic control and protect traffic with warning and directional signs during striping .
set up warning signs before beginning each operation and place signs well ahead of the striping equipment .
when necessary use a pilot car to protect both the traffic and the striping operation .
section numpolyurea traffic stripe num num .
fresh polyurea protect the freshly painted stripe using cones or other satisfactory devices .
repair stripe damage or pavement smudges caused by traffic according to subsection num .
e. appearance and tolerance of variance continually deviating from stated dimensions is cause for stopping the work and removing the nonconforming stripe .
see section num .
adhere to the following measurements num .
width do not lay stripe less than the specified width .
do not lay stripe more than num in num mm over the specified width .
num .
length ensure that the num ft num m painted skip stripe and the num ft num m gap between painted segments vary no more than num ft num mm each .
num .
alignment a .
ensure that the stripe does not deviate from the intended alignment by more than num in num m on straight lines or curves of num degree or less .
b .
ensure that the stripe does not deviate by more than num in num mm on curves exceeding num degree .
num quality acceptance a .
general for a minimum of num days from the time of placement ensure the polyurea traffic pavement marking material shows no signs of failure due to blistering excessive cracking chipping bleeding staining discoloration oil content of the pavement materials smearing or spreading under heat deterioration due to contact with grease deposits oil diesel fuel or gasoline drippings spilling poor adhesion to the pavement material vehicular damage and normal wear .
in the event that failures mentioned above occur ensure corrective work is completed at no additional cost to the department .
ensure that stripes and segments of stripes are cleancut and uniform .
markings that do not appear uniform or satisfactory either during the day or night or do not meet specifications or become marred or damaged by traffic or from other causes will be corrected at the contractors expense .
sections of stripe words and symbols placed according to the plans and specifications and have dried so that material will not be picked up or marred by vehicle tires will be accepted .
obtain pavement marking retroreflectivity values with a num meter geometry retroreflectometer .
num .
correction of alignment when correcting a deviation that exceeds the permissible tolerance in alignment do the following a .
remove the affected portion of stripe plus an additional num ft num m in each direction in accordance with section num. b .
paint a new stripe according to these specifications .
num .
removal of excess material remove misted dripped or spattered material to the engineers satisfaction .
do not damage the underlying pavement during removal .
refer to the applicable portions of section num .
b .
initial retroreflectivity num .
longitudinal lines within num days of installation ensure the inplace markings meet the following minimum reflectance values a .
standard polyurea traffic material section numpolyurea traffic stripe num white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum b .
wet weather polyurea traffic material white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum wet recovery astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum for each center line edge line and skip line measure retroreflectivity num times for each mile num times within the first num ft num m num times in the middle and num times within the last num ft num m. for projects less than one mile in length measure retroreflectivity num times as above .
record all retro reflectivity measurements on the form omr cvp num in sop num .
num .
messages symbols and transverse lines within num days of installation ensure the inplace markings when tested according to astm e num meet the following minimum reflectance value of num mcdluxmnum .
perform at a minimum one retroreflectivety measurement at one message one symbol and one transverse line per intersection .
take one measurement per mile for locations other than intersections i.e .
school messages railroad messages bike symbols etc .
c. six month retroreflectivity longitudinal lines maintain the following minimum reflectance values for num days after installation num .
standard polyurea traffic material white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum num .
wet weather polyurea traffic material white yellow dry astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum wet recovery astm e num num mcdluxmnum num mcdluxmnum retest the inplace markings according to subsection num.b.num num days after installation to ensure these minimum retroreflectance values are maintained .
note the contractor is responsible for retroreflectivity testing .
furnish initial test results to the engineer within num days of application .
furnish num month test results to the engineer within num days of application or prior to final acceptance whichever comes first .
d. thickness check the thicknesses on all skip lines edge lines and center lines by placing durable tape film or metal plate of known and uniform thickness on an area to be striped .
after the striper has passed over remove the sample and measure the thickness with calipers or a micrometer .
for each center line edge line and skip line measure thickness above the pavement num times for each mile once within the first num ft num m once in the middle and once within the last num ft num m. for projects less than one mile in length measure the thicknesss above the pavement num times .
record thickness measurements on the form omr cvp num in sop num .
section numpolyurea traffic stripe num submit results to engineer .
e. corrective work for each mile section if polyurea traffic stripe fails to meet plan details or specifications or deviates from stated dimensions correct it at no additional cost to the department .
if removal of pavement markings is necessary perform it according to section num and place it according to this specification .
no additional payment will be made for removal and replacement of unsatisfactory striping .
ensure corrective work is completed at no additional cost to the department .
perform testing according to this specification .
any retest due to failures will be performed at no additional cost to the department .
furnish all test reports to the department .
retroreflectivity and thickness longitudinal line deficiency a deficiency will ensure when two or more location average results as recorded on form omr cvp num within a onemile section do not meet the performance criteria herein .
the entire line within this one mile section will be determined to be deficient .
if the evaluated section is less than num mile a single location average result not meeting the performance criteria herein will result in the entire line to be determined to be deficient .
retroreflectivity transverse markings and symbol deficiency a single location average result on the marking or symbol not meeting the performance criteria herein will result in the marking or symbol to be determined to be deficient .
num verification see sop num .
num measurement when traffic stripe is paid for by the square yard meter the number of square yards meters painted is measured and the space between stripes is included in the overall measurement .
linear measurements are made on the painted surface by an electronic measuring device attached to a vehicle .
on curves chord measurements not exceeding num linear feet num linear meters are used .
traffic stripe and markings complete in place are measured and accepted for payment as follows a .
solid traffic stripe solid traffic stripe is measured by the linear foot meter linear mile kilometer or square yard meter .
breaks or omissions in solid lines or stripes at street or road intersections are not measured .
b .
skip traffic stripe skip traffic stripe is measured by the gross linear foot meter or gross linear mile kilometer .
unpainted spaces between the stripes are included in the overall measurements if the plan ratio of num to num remains uninterrupted .
measurement begins and ends on a stripe .
c. pavement markings pavement markings words and symbols completed according to plan dimensions are measured by the unit .
num payment payment will be full compensation for the work under this section including the following cleaning and preparing surfaces furnishing materials including paints beads and thinners applying curing and protecting paints protecting traffic including providing and placing necessary warning signs furnishing tools machines and other equipment necessary to complete the item section numpolyurea traffic stripe num payment will be made under item no .
num solid polyurea traffic stripe _____ in mm color per linear mile kilometer item no .
num skip polyurea traffic stripe _____in mm color per gross linear mile kilometer item no .
num solid polyurea traffic stripe _____in mm color per linear foot meter item no .
num skip polyurea traffic stripe _____in mm color per gross linear foot meter item no .
num polyurea pavement markings words and symbols color per each item no .
num polyurea traffic stripe _____in mm color per square yard meter item no .
num wet weather solid polyurea traffic stripe _____ in mm color per linear mile kilometer item no .
num wet weather skip polyurea traffic stripe _____in mm color per gross linear mile kilometer item no .
num wet weather solid polyurea traffic stripe _____in mm color per linear foot meter item no .
num wet weather skip polyurea traffic stripe _____in mm color per gross linear foot meter item no .
num wet weather polyurea pavement markings words and symbols color per each item no .
num wet weather polyurea traffic stripe _____in mm color per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numhot applied preformed plastic pavement markings num general description this work includes furnishing and placing hot applied preformed plastic pavement markings according to these specifications and at locations shown in the plans or as otherwise directed .
use applied markings that are very durable impervious to oil and grease and provide immediate and continuing retroreflectivity .
use hot applied preformed plastic pavement markings that are compatible with existing alkyd and hydrocarbon thermoplastic material .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways aashto m num num submittals transfer to the department all manufacturer warranties or guarantees for heatapplied preformed plastic marking materials .
ensure that warranties or guarantees can be transferred .
section numhot applied preformed plastic pavement markings num num materials a .
marking characteristics ensure that markings have the following characteristics num .
composition the pavement marking material shall consist of a homogeneous mixture of high quality hydrocarbon resin alkyd resin or modified ester rosin solution in conjunction with aggregates pigments binders and glass beads .
use thermoplastic material that conforms to aashto m num except for relevant differences due to the material being supplied in a preformed state .
the markings shall contain at least num glass beads that conform to aashto m num type num .
use glass beads that are clear and transparent with at least num true spheres .
the glass beads shall have a minimum index of refraction of num .
num .
pigmentation a .
white the white markings shall contain at least num by weight of titanium dioxide pigment meeting astm d num type ii rutile .
the color shall be federal highway white color num as per federal standard num .
the white markings shall have a minimum daylight reflectance y value at num num of num. b. yellow the yellow markings shall contain sufficient yellow pigment to ensure a color of federal highway yellow color num as per federal standard num .
the yellow markings shall have a minimum daylight reflectance y value at num num of num .
num .
shapes and sizes prefabricated legends and symbols must conform to the applicable shapes and sizes outlined in the manual on uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways .
as an option turn arrows and combination arrows may come without preapplied surface glass beads to allow reversibility .
num .
thickness ensure that the material is at least num in num mm thick .
num .
retroreflectivity the preformed markings shall have the following initial minimum reflectivity values white num incidence angle and num divergence angle num candle powerft candle ftnum num mclxm yellow num incidence angle and num divergence angle num candlepowerft candle ftnum num mclxm num .
skid resistance the surface of the preformed markings shall provide a minimum skid resistance of num bpm when tested according to astm e num .
b .
heating characteristics the preformed markings shall be capable of being affixed to bituminous or portland cement concrete pavements by the use of the normal heat of a torch recommended by the manufacturer and according to the manufacturers installation guidelines .
the preformed markings shall have resealing characteristics so that it will fuse with itself and with previously applied marking material of the same composition under normal conditions of use .
num delivery storage and handling the markings shall be manufactured and packaged in a way that permits storage at normal shelf temperatures for up to one year after purchase .
section numhot applied preformed plastic pavement markings num num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. preconditions for applying markings with heat apply markings under the following conditions num .
apply markings when the ambient temperature is num f num c or above .
num .
apply markings when the pavement is clean dry and free of debris .
num .
apply dropon glass beads to the entire surface of preformed markings that do not have factory preapplied surface beads .
num .
apply the dropon glass beads to the preformed marking material while still in a liquid state .
use beads that meet the same requirements specified in subsection num.a .
num quality acceptance materials shall be evaluated by the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep the georgia department of transportation or other state dot test facilities before being approved for use .
data generated from the field tests will be used to select those materials that have performed satisfactorily during the evaluation period .
hot applied preformed plastic pavement markings that have met the laboratory test and field test requirements will be placed on the georgia department of transportation qualified products list .
the manufacturer shall certify that the hot applied preformed plastic pavement markings supplied to construction and maintenance projects is formulated of the same material as when tested by ntpep and will conform to the requirements of this specification .
products that have met all the requirements in this section but fail to perform adequately in actual use will be removed from the qualified products list .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement heatapplied preformed plastic pavement markings complete inplace and accepted are measured as follows a .
solid traffic stripe solid traffic stripe of the color width and type shown on the plans or in the proposal will be measured by the linear foot meter or linear mile kilometer as specified .
breaks or omissions in solid lines or stripes at street or road intersections will not be measured for payment .
b .
skip traffic stripe skip traffic stripe of the color width and type shown on the plans or in the proposal will be measured by the gross linear foot meter or gross linear mile kilometer as specified .
the unpainted spaces between the stripes will be included in the overall measurement if the plan ratio remains uninterrupted .
measurement will begin and end on a stripe .
section numhot applied preformed plastic pavement markings num c. payment by square yard meter when hot applied preformed plastic pavement markings are paid for by the square yard meter the actual number of square yards meters covered will be measured in the overall measurement including the space between the markings .
the color width and type shall be indicated on the plans .
d. heat applied preformed plastic each heatapplied preformed plastic word or symbol complete according to plan dimensions is measured by the unit .
the code for each word or symbol is stated in the plan .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment in each case will be full compensation for all aspects of heatapplied markings including adhesives cleaning application and traffic control necessary to complete the item .
payment will be made under item no .
num hot applied preformed plastic solid pavement markings_____ in mm color type per linear foot meter item no .
num hot applied preformed plastic solid pavement markings_____ in mm color type per linear mile kilometer item no .
num hot applied preformed plastic skip pavement markings_____ in mm color type per gross linear foot meter item no .
num hot applied preformed plastic skip pavement markings_____ in mm color type per gross linear mile kilometer item no .
num hot applied preformed plastic pavement markings per square yard meter item no .
num hot applied preformed plastic pavement markings words or symbols color type per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numsanitary sewers num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numelectric distribution systems num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numgas distribution system num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numvertical drainage wicks num general description this work includes furnishing and installing vertical drainage wicks according to locations and depths shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials b. referenced documents astm d num astm d num astm d num num submittals a .
materials certification furnish the engineer with materials certification in duplicate according to subsection num materials certification .
b .
installation sequence and method details submit installation sequence and method details to the engineer for review at least two weeks before installing the drainage wick .
the engineers approval of the installation sequence and method does not constitute acceptance of the installation method .
if at any time the engineer feels the installation method does not produce a satisfactory drainage wick alter the method or equipment to comply with these specifications .
num materials a .
drain fabrication ensure the following use drainage wicks consisting of a bandshaped plastic case permitting continuous vertical drainage wrapped in a filter jacket installed in the ground by displacement methods and spaced and arranged as shown on the plans .
ensure drainage wicks are a prefabricated type consisting of a plastic drainage core encased in or integrated with a nonwoven polyester filter jacket .
use a bandshaped drain with an aspect ratio width divided section numvertical drainage wicks num by thickness not exceeding num .
ensure the jacket allows free passage of pore water to the core without loss of soil material or piping .
ensure the core provides continuous vertical drainage .
ensure the assembled drains are resistant to wet rot mildew bacterial action insects salts acids alkalis solvents or any other ingredients in the site groundwater harmful to the drains .
use drains free from defects rips holes or flaws .
ensure the filter jacket is capable of resisting all bending puncturing and tensile forces imposed during installation and during the design life of the drain .
use a jacket material resistant to localized damage e.g .
punching through the filter by sand or gravel particles and sufficiently rigid to withstand lateral earth pressures due to embedment and surcharge so the vertical flow capacity through the core will not be adversely affected .
ensure the jacket material is sufficiently flexible to bend smoothly during installation and induced consolidation settlement without damage and will not undergo cracking or peeling during installation of the drain .
ensure the core is a continuous plastic material fabricated to promote drainage along the axis of the vertical drain .
b .
physical properties ensure that the drain meets minimum requirements according to the following filter breaking load astm d num num lbsin width num nmm width mullenburst astm d num num lbsinnum num kpa elmendorf tear astm d num num grams permeability coefficient numxnum insec numxnum num mms num delivery storage and handling a .
drain protection ensure that the drain is wrapped in burlap or a similar heavyduty covering during shipment and storage .
b .
storage protection protect the storage area from sunlight mud dirt dust debris and detrimental substances .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment the contractor is responsible for selecting the proper size and amount of equipment .
a .
approval of equipment adhere to the following requirements for equipment num .
secure approval of all equipment before beginning work .
num .
promptly replace or supplement unsatisfactory equipment .
num .
note that equipment is approved for use on a trial basis .
num .
remove replace or supplement equipment that proves unsatisfactory after a short test section is complete .
b .
required equipment choose a type of carrier depending upon the desired installation force and then ensure the following section numvertical drainage wicks num the carrier is equipped with a mandrel or sleeve to protect the wick from tears cuts and abrasions during installation .
the protective mandrel or sleeve has at least a num in² num mm² cross sectional area .
c. precautions take precautions to protect instrumentation devices .
replace at no additional cost to the department any equipment that is damaged or becomes unreliable during construction due to construction operations .
num preparation a .
location stakes prior to drain installation the engineer will stake the proposed drain locations .
take reasonable precautions to preserve the stakes .
ensure that drain locations do not vary by more than num in num mm from locations indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
b .
trial drain install a trial drain at a location designated by the engineer to demonstrate that the equipment method and materials will provide a satisfactory installation according to this specification .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
installation depth num .
install drainage wicks to the depth shown on the plans or to a depth where reasonable efforts at further penetration fail .
the engineer may vary the wick depths spacings or numbers installed and may revise plan limits for this work .
num .
provide a means of determining the wick depth and quantity of wick used at each drain location and at anytime .
b .
installation of drains num .
normal installation use a mandrel or sleeve to install the drainage wick as follows a .
ensure that the mandrel or sleeve completely encloses and protects the drainage wick during installation .
b .
force the mandrel containing the wick vertically into the ground to the required depth .
c. cut the mandrel neatly at its upper end after installation .
d. ensure that a num in to num in num mm to num mm length of wick protrudes from the ground .
num .
drilling upper soils if necessary drill through the dense upper soils before installing the prefabricated drains .
do not drill more than num ft num mm into the underlying compressible soils as determined by the engineer .
num .
obstruction of depth if obstructions can not be penetrated using normal and accepted procedures do the following a .
complete the drain from the point of obstruction to the surface .
b .
notify the engineer .
c. at the direction of the engineer install a new drain within num in num mm of the obstructed drain .
num .
wick section numvertical drainage wicks num make splices or connections in the drainage wick to ensure continuity .
c. wick alignment num .
carefully check equipment for plumbness before advancing each wick .
num .
ensure that wicks do not deviate more than num inft num mmm from the vertical .
num quality acceptance no compensation will be allowed for materials work performed or drilling if wicks are unsatisfactory .
the engineer will reject wicks that are out of location by more than num in num mm damaged in construction improperly completed num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work is measured according to the following drill holes are measured in linear feet meters to the nearest num ft num m. vertical drainage wicks are measured in linear feet meters to the nearest num ft num m. num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price for the accepted quantity of drill holes and vertical drainage wicks complete and inplace .
payment is full compensation for drilling holes furnishing materials placing materials providing labor equipment tools and incidentals necessary to complete the work the contract price will be for the number of drains at the spacing shown on the plans .
payment will be made under item no .
num drill holes per linear foot meter item no .
num vertical drainage wicks per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numhorizontal drain num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section nummiscellaneous drainage structures num general description this work includes constructing catch basins drop inlets manholes junction boxes spring boxes drain inlets special inlets with safety grates and vertical tee sections .
construct according to these specifications and the lines and grades shown on the plans or as established by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numexcavation and backfill for minor structures section numconcrete structures section numrubble masonry section numbrick masonry section numfine aggregate section numportland cement section nummasonry materials section numconcrete pipe section numreinforcement and tensioning steel section numcastings and forgings section numprecast concrete catch basin drop inlet and manhole units b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials the structures in this section may be constructed of brick castinplace concrete or precast concrete unless the plans or proposal specifies a specific type of construction .
use rubble masonry only when specified on the plans .
ensure that materials meet the following specifications section nummiscellaneous drainage structures num material section class a or b concrete num sand for bedding material num fine aggregate for mortar num portland cement num brick num masonry stone num mortar and grout num nonreinforced concrete pipe num steel bars for reinforcement num gray iron castings num precast reinforced concrete catch basin drop inlet and manhole units num ensure that the materials for fabricating special inlets and their safety grates are according to plan details .
construct the following manholes and drainage structures from precast or castinplace concrete structures within the backfill limits of mechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls structures within num ft num m of the wall foundations front .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. excavation and backfill excavate and prepare foundations for the structures included in this section place pipe through the structures according to section num .
b .
concrete concrete units may be either pouredinplace or precast .
construct units as follows num .
pouredinplace units section nummiscellaneous drainage structures num the throat or other nonreinforced portions of catch basins may be class b concrete .
use class a concrete for the top slab .
construct units according to section num .
num .
precast reinforced concrete units construct precast reinforced concrete units as follows a. holes for pipe cast each unit with the number and dimensions of pipe holes necessary to incorporate the unit into the drainage system according to plan details .
installation conditions may require additional pipe for which no holes have been cast .
if so make the holes and repair or replace to the engineers satisfaction pipe damaged during the process .
b .
pipe connections use mortar or class a concrete to connect pipe to units .
c. installation of precast concrete num precast reinforced units set these units to within num in num mm of grade on a bed of compacted sand num in to num in num mm to num mm thick .
num sectional precast reinforced units when using these units to buildup extradepth catch basins or drop inlets fill the joints between sections with mortar and wipe smooth .
c. brick masonry construct brick masonry structures according to section num .
d. mortar rubble masonry construct rubble masonry structures according to section num .
e. castings hold frame castings securely in place to proper line and grade .
make castings an integral part of the complete structure .
after completion ensure that castings subject to traffic use are firm and stable under traffic .
f. maintenance thoroughly clean fallen masonry silt debris and other foreign matter from structures .
g. safety grates fabricate safety grates according to plan details .
h. sanitary sewer manholes ensure that sanitary and combination sanitary and storm sewer manholes conform to the following requirements and the related specifications .
num .
form invert channels shape invert channels to the lines and grades shown on the plans or as established by the engineer .
ensure that channel surfaces are smooth .
form invert channels by one of the following methods directly form the invert channel in the concrete base of the manhole .
construct the invert channel of brick and mortar .
lay halfround tile in the concrete base of the manhole .
lay round sewer pipe through the manhole and cut out the top half of the pipe after the concrete base has set .
do not use this method if the plans provide for an offset drop in the invert .
num .
plaster outside walls section nummiscellaneous drainage structures num plaster outside walls as follows a. saturate the outside wall of each brick manhole with water .
b. plaster the wall smooth with a mortar coat at least num in num mm thick .
manufacture the mortar according to section num with the following exceptions manufacture the mortar with one part cement to two parts mortar sand .
do not add hydrated lime .
num .
connections to manholes complete manhole connections to the engineers satisfaction and as follows a .
carefully connect existing sewer lines to new manholes to prevent infiltration of foreign substances .
b. construct manholes in or adjacent to existing sewer lines according to section num to maintain continuous sewage flow in existing lines .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement catch basins drop inlets manholes junction boxes drain inlets special inlets and safety grates complete in place and accepted are measured for payment according to the following a .
catch basins and drop inlets each catch basin or drop inlet is grouped for measurement as follows group num structures connected to pipe num in num mm or less in diameter regardless of the pipe skew group num structures connected to pipe over num in num mm diameter regardless of the pipe skew catch basins or drop inlets complete in place and accepted are measured by the unit .
in addition each catch basin or drop inlet deeper than num ft numm is measured for additional payment .
the extra depth is measured in linear feet meters .
b. manholes manholes are measured for payment as follows num .
sanitary and storm sewer manholes sanitary sewer manholes and storm sewer manholes are measured separately and divided into two types type num structures connected to pipe num in num mm or less in diameter regardless of the pipe skew type num structures connected to pipe num in to num in num mm to num mm diameter regardless of the pipe skew each manhole is measured by the unit .
num .
manhole additional depth in addition to types num and num above each manhole deeper than num ft num m is measured for additional payment termed manhole additional depth .
this additional depth is measured in linear feet meters and does not include the upper num ft num m. manhole additional depth is classed as follows manhole additional depth class num applies to each manhole deeper than num ft num m but not deeper than num ft. num m class num payment is for the manhole depth between num ft and num ft. num m and num m. manhole additional depth class num applies to each manhole deeper than num ft num m but not deeper than num ft num m. class num payment is for the manhole depth between num ft and num ft num m and num m. section nummiscellaneous drainage structures num manhole additional depth class num applies to each manhole deeper than num ft num m but not deeper than num ft num m. class num payment is for the manhole depth between num ft and num ft num m and num m. manhole additional depth class num applies to each manhole deeper than num ft num m but not deeper than num ft num m. class num payment is the manhole depth between num ft and num ft num m and num m. manhole additional depth is measured for payment at the class that includes the greatest depth below the original num ft num m. for example a manhole num ft numm deep would be measured and paid for as follows storm or sanitary sewer manhole type_____ per each storm or sanitary sewer manhole type_____ additional depth class num num linear feet num linear meters c. junction boxes spring boxes and drain inlets junction boxes spring boxes and drain inlets are measured by the unit .
num .
each junction box will be complete according to plan details .
num .
each drain inlet will consist of a pipe elbow or tee concrete collar and casting of the required diameter .
num .
each spring box will be complete according to plan details .
d. safety grates safety grates fabricated and installed according to plan details are measured by the square foot meter computed from the overall surface dimensions of each grate .
e. special inlets for safety grates special inlets complete in place are measured for payment in cubic yards meters according to section num .
f. vertical tee sections or saddles vertical tee sections are not measured for separate payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment for the various structures under this section will be made as follows a .
catch basins and drop inlets catch basins or drop inlets will be paid for at the contract price per each .
depth in excess of num ft num m will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter .
payment is full compensation for the following furnishing castings making pipe connections regardless of skew providing materials making forms and disposing of surplus material b. manholes sanitary sewer and storm sewer manholes complete in place will be paid for at the contract price per each .
manhole additional depth of the appropriate class will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter .
payment is full compensation for the following section nummiscellaneous drainage structures num furnishing castings fittings and other appurtenances called for on the plans to complete the item making pipe connections regardless of skew providing materials making forms and disposing of surplus material note no additional payment will be made for connecting manholes to existing or new sewer lines .
include costs related to connections in the contract price for the structure .
c. junction boxes spring boxes and drain inlets junction boxes spring boxes or drain inlets will be paid for at the contract price per each .
payment is full compensation for the following furnishing castings fittings and other appurtenances called for on the plans to complete the item making pipe connections regardless of skew providing materials making forms and disposing of surplus material d. pipe pipe entering or exiting catch basins drop inlets manholes junction boxes spring boxes or drain inlets will be paid for under the section of the specifications governing the pipe .
e. sand bedding material for precast structures no separate payment will be made for this material .
its cost is included in the contract price for the structure under which it is used .
f. excavation and normal backfill no separate payment will be made for excavation and normal backfill .
their cost is included in the contract price for the structure being excavated .
g. safety grates safety grates will be paid for at the contract price per square foot meter .
h. inlets for safety grates inlets for safety grates will be paid for at the contract price per cubic yard meter of class a concrete including reinforcing steel .
i. vertical tee sections or saddles vertical tee sections will be included in payment for the section of structure they are incorporated in .
no separate payment will be made for excavation backfill and disposal of surplus material .
payment will be made under item no .
num catch basin group_____ per each item no .
num catch basin group_____ additional depth per linear foot meter item no .
num drop inlet group_____ per each item no .
num drop inlet group_____ additional depth per linear foot meter item no .
num sanitary sewer manhole type_____ per each item no .
num sanitary sewer manhole type_____ additional depth class_____ per linear foot meter item no .
num storm sewer manhole type_____ per each section nummiscellaneous drainage structures num item no .
num storm sewer manhole type_____ additional depth class_____ per linear foot meter item no .
num junction box per each item no .
num spring box per each item no .
num drain inlet __ in mm per each item no .
num safety grate type_____ per square foot meter item no .
num class a concrete including bar reinforcing steel per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numwater distribution system num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numappurtenances for water systems num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numhighway lighting num general description this work includes furnishing and installing roadway and structure lighting systems according to the specifications and plan details .
num definitions conduit metallic or nonmetallic pipe tube or duct .
rigid conduit metallic conduit unless otherwise noted .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numroadway excavation section numconcrete structures section numlighting standards and luminaires section numelectrical wire cable and conduit section numhigh level lighting systems section numcoarse aggregate section numfine aggregate section numhighway lighting num section numcuring agents section numreinforcement and tensioning steel section numcastings and forgings section numpaint section numlighting standards and towers section numluminaires section numelectrical wire and cable section numelectrical conduit section nummiscellaneous electrical materials b .
related documents gdt num gdt num gdt num num submittals a .
purchase list before purchasing materials submit num copies of the complete materials and structures list including shop drawings to the engineer for approval .
include the manufacturers name catalog numbers and other descriptive data needed to clearly define each item .
b .
manufacturers certifications num .
certification of construction items secure supplier or manufacturer certifications including mill certificates guaranteeing the construction items were manufactured according to the specifications .
ensure that the certificate shows that representative samples were tested and test results conform to the specifications .
num .
certification of quantity attach a copy of the bill of lading sales order or list showing the quantity of materials furnished for a specific project .
make this part of the certification by reference .
c. manufacturers guarantees after the work is complete and accepted obtain manufacturers guarantees for the mechanical and electrical equipment used .
give these to the engineer who will pass them to the agency responsible for continued equipment maintenance .
num materials furnish only new materials and equipment for this work .
ensure that materials meet the following requirements unless otherwise indicated section numhighway lighting num material section portland cement concrete class a num coarse aggregate num fine aggregate num cement concrete curing materials num bar reinforcement for concrete structures num gray iron castings num paints field painting num lighting standards and towers num luminaires num electric wire and cable num electric conduit num miscellaneous electrical materials num a .
codes and regulations ensure that all materials and work performed meet the latest revisions of the following standard codes and regulations national electrical code nec national electrical safety code illuminating engineering society american national standards institute ansi power company regulations and standards codes regulations and rules in the work area or municipality in addition to the above ensure that electrical materials meet the following standards provided a standard exists for that material underwriters laboratories inc. ul american institute of electrical engineers aiee national electrical manufacturers association nema num delivery storage and handling dispose of excess or unsuitable material according to section num .
num construction requirements num personnel a .
approved contractors ensure that the contractor performing this work is on the departments list of approved electrical contractors or electrical subcontractors .
b .
qualified electrician always have a qualified electrician on the job site when pulling electrical wiring or making electrical connections .
a qualified electrician is either of the following an electrician with a class ii license issued by the georgia state construction industry licensing board section numhighway lighting num an electrician who has completed an approved fouryear apprenticeship training program and is classified as a journeyman electrician have the qualified electrician show his or her classification to the engineer in charge .
for further definition see subsection num .
num equipment ensure that equipment is at the project site and approved before construction begins .
num preparation before beginning work pay applicable fees and obtain needed permits from power companies or governmental agencies .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
installing conduit num .
general requirements for conduit install the specified size and type of conduit at the locations given on the plans or as directed .
a .
cut and ream conduit as follows num cut metallic conduit threads and then ream the ends .
num ream other conduit as necessary .
num cut conduit ends square .
num ensure that conduit ends butt solidly in the joints to form a smooth raceway for cables .
b .
ensure conduit joints form a watertight seal by doing the following num coat metallic conduit threads with red or white lead pipe compound or thermoplastic seal and then securely connect them .
num form asbestos cement conduit joints with hot tar asphalt or bitumen paint then drive tightly .
num form plastic and bituminous fiber conduit joints as recommended by the conduit manufacturer and as approved by the engineer .
c. install bushings in conduit to protect the conductors .
d. cap or plug conduit as follows num thread and cap the ends of metallic conduit intended for future use .
num plug the ends of nonmetallic conduit runs to keep water or other foreign matter out of the conduit .
e. build conduit runs in straight lines where possible .
if sweeps are necessary use long sweep bends with a radius of at least num times the conduits nominal diameter unless otherwise specified .
num .
conduit on structures install conduits condulets hangers expansion fittings and accessories on structures according to the plans and the following unless otherwise specified a .
run conduit parallel to beams trusses supports pier caps etc .
as directly as possible .
b .
install horizontal runs in a slight grade without forming low spots that may prevent proper drainage .
c. run conduits with smooth easy bends .
d. hold conduit in boxes with locknuts .
e. do not clamp or attach conduit to beam flanges .
f. use bushings to protect the conductors .
num .
underground conduit installation section numhighway lighting num use encased or direct burial conduit for underground installations .
install the conduit in a trench excavated according to plan dimensions and lines .
follow the requirements for avoiding obstructions described in subsection num.a.num.b below .
a. trench excavation unless specified on the plans do not excavate conduit trenches through existing pavement or surfaced shoulders .
install the conduit under the existing pavement by jacking boring or using other approved means .
when the plans specifically allow a trench through an existing pavement or surfaced shoulder restore the pavement surface base and subgrade to the engineers satisfaction .
include pavement surface base and subgrade removal disposal and restoration in the contract price for the items to which they pertain .
excavate trenches as follows num unless otherwise specified cut conduit trenches on a slight grade num percent minimum for drainage .
num when the grade can not be maintained all one way grade the duct lines from the center in both directions down to the ends .
avoid pockets or traps where moisture may accumulate .
num make the trench walls vertical .
num tamp the trench bottom as necessary for a firm conduit foundation .
num sheet and brace the trenches when required .
num adequately support pipe and other structures exposed in trenches if support is necessary to prevent damage .
include furnishing installing and removing sheeting bracing and supports in the contract prices for other items as they pertain .
b. obstructions to excavation before excavating determine the location of electrical lines drainage or utility facilities .
avoid damaging these while working .
in addition avoid conflict with proposed guardrail sign posts etc .
if necessary due to obstructions slightly change the locations of conduit runs pull boxes etc .
as approved by the engineer .
make the following allowances around obstructions num where possible provide at least num in num mm between the finished conduit runs and utility facilities such as gas lines water mains and other underground facilities not related to the electrical system .
num where the conduit run is adjacent to concrete walls piers footings etc .
maintain at least num in num mm of undisturbed earth or firmly compacted soil between the conduit and the adjacent concrete .
num when the conduit is encased maintain at least num in num mm of undisturbed earth or firmly compacted soil between the encasement and adjacent concrete .
c. encased conduit place encased conduit at the locations shown on the plans .
unless otherwise specified follow these requirements for encased conduit use class a concrete according to section num .
use precast concrete encasement only if approved by the engineer .
run a mandrel test on completed installations .
ream duct openings to remove burrs or foreign matter .
immediately following testing thoroughly clean conduit in a manner acceptable to the engineer .
after cleaning finished conduit that will not be wired until a future date provide and install a weatherproof cap at each open end .
have the engineer inspect and approve this work .
install new underground concrete encasement as follows num construct encasement under pavements or surfaces so that it extends at least num in num mm beyond the outside edges of pavement paved shoulders sidewalks or curbs when no shoulder or sidewalk is indicated .
num ensure that the end of installed conduit extends at least num in num mm beyond the encasement .
section numhighway lighting num if using type i nonmetallic conduit in the encasement use type ii nonmetallic conduit for the num in num mm beyond the encasement and for the last num in num mm within the encasement .
num place num in num mm of concrete in the trench bottom to support the conduit .
num plug the conduit ends temporarily to keep concrete or foreign material out then place the conduit in the trench .
num pour concrete into the trench to at least num in num mm above the conduit .
num do not encase conduit in concrete until tested inspected and approved by the engineer .
see subsection num.a.num below .
num cure concrete encasement according to subsection num.z except reduce the curing period to num hours .
num .
direct burial conduit install direct burial conduit underground according to the plans using the following conduit types rigid galvanized steel rigid aluminum bituminous fiber asbestos cement unplasticized polyvinyl chloride when the trench bottom is rock install direct burial conduit in a bed of wellcompacted finegrained soil at least num in num mm thick .
ensure the trench is deep enough for the finish cover to be at least num in num mm from the top surface of raw ground at least num in num mm from the bottom side of pavement num .
backfill over underground conduit do not backfill encased conduit until the concrete encasement has cured at least num hours .
a .
once the engineer has inspected and approved the direct burial conduit installation promptly backfill it to the required grade .
use soil without rocks or other foreign matter .
b. backfill with approved material in layers no deeper than num in num mm loose depth .
c. compact each layer to num percent of the maximum dry density as determined by test method gdt num gdt num or gdt num .
num .
testing conduit after installing conduit test it with a mandrel in the engineers presence as follows a .
use a num in num mm mandrel with a diameter num in num mm smaller than the conduit diameter .
b .
repair conduits that the mandrel will not pass through .
if repairs can not be made to the engineers satisfaction remove and replace the conduit at no additional cost to the department .
b. constructing pull and junction boxes construct pull and junction boxes according to the design dimensions and locations shown on the plans .
num .
box construction a. construct concrete boxes from class a concrete according to section num .
ensure that precast concrete boxes follow the same requirements .
b .
use manufactured units if the engineer determines that they are equal to concrete boxes in design quality and structural strength .
num .
covers provide cast iron steel or reinforced concrete covers with each pull or junction box according to the plans .
ground the cast iron or steel covers to electrical junction or pull boxes according to nec section numc and nec section num .
section numhighway lighting num num .
conduit entrance holes after installing conduit seal the conduit entrance holes in pull or junction boxes to the engineers satisfaction .
blank off unused entrance holes and openings that will be used in the future to extend conduit .
use suitable plastic bituminous fiber or other approved plugs that keep foreign matter out .
num .
drainage provide pull and junction boxes with a drainage hole unless the application or the engineer dictate otherwise .
provide a drainage system for each groundmounted box to ensure that no water accumulates inside the box .
c. installing underground cable for lighting circuits for underground lighting circuits use cable with or without conduit according to the plans .
when installing cable under existing pavements or surfaced shoulders install specified conduit according to subsection num.a.num .
num .
cable slack when cable is brought through the base of the lighting standard or junction box leave enough slack to allow the connections to be made outside the standard or box .
num .
cable in conduit carefully pull cables into place in conduits using approved methods so that the cable is installed without electrical or mechanical damage .
install as follows a .
use powdered soapstone talc or other inert lubricants when placing conductors in conduit .
b .
handle and install conductors carefully to prevent kinks bends or other distortions that could damage the conductor or outer covering .
c. pull all cables within a single conduit at the same time .
when pulling cables through hand holes in pole shafts etc .
place a pad of firm rubber or other suitable material between the cable and the opening edges to prevent cable damage .
num .
direct burial cable in trenches do not unreel and pull cables into the trench from one end .
unreel and lay them alongside the trench then lay them in the trench as follows a .
snake the cables slightly in the trench to allow for settling of earth .
b .
do not allow cable to crossover in the trench .
num .
splices splice conductors according to the national electrical code and the splice manufacturers recommendations .
splices are subject to the engineers approval .
follow these requirements for splicing conductors including underground cable splices if specified make splices watertight .
make splices only in junction boxes and pole bases unless otherwise shown on the plans .
when making straight or line splices in the samesized conductors use tinplated copper compression tubular splices .
when making splices in differentsized conductors or conductors with different terminating directions a .
use tinplated copper compression ring tongue terminals on each conductor .
b. bolt the conductorsterminals together with stainless steel or high strength silicone bronze hardware .
use locknuts pal nuts or lock washers to keep connections tight .
do not use split bolt connectors .
use an oxidation inhibitor compound on aluminum conductor connections .
num .
heatshrinkable tubing around splices after making a conductor splice insulate it with heatshrinkable tubing supplied by the manufacturer with an adhesive coating on the inner wall .
section numhighway lighting num follow these requirements for heatshrinkable tubing use shrink tubing with insulation thickness equal to or greater than the insulation thickness of the conductor .
use ul listed heatshrinkable tubing that meets ansi cnum latest edition requirements for submersible and direct buried splices .
apply heatshrinkable tubing as follows a .
when connections are bolted together wrap the bolted connection with cloth tape before applying the heat shrinkable tubing .
b. pad sharp points and edges on splices to prevent the heatshrinkable tubing from splitting during shrinking .
c. place the shrink tubing to have at least num in num mm of seal length on the conductor beyond the splice after the tube is fully recovered .
num .
grounding ground underground cable as follows a. connect neutralgrounding conductors to the ground rod at all control points and to the ground wire cast in pole foundations .
use the type and size of continuous neutralgrounding conductors shown on the plans .
connect according to plan details .
b .
install ground rods adjacent to light standard bases at locations shown on the plans .
install ground rods in one of the following ways num driven ground rods a drive single ground rods vertically until the top of the rod is at least num in num mm below the finished ground .
b attach a length of no .
num awg bare solid soft drawn or mediumhard drawn copper ground wire to the ground rod .
use suitable ground rod clamps .
c connect the wire to the standard base grounding nut .
num laid ground rods when sufficient penetration can not be obtained in the above manner place the following ground rod system a place num parallel ground rods at least num ft num m centertocenter horizontally and at least num in num mm below the finished ground .
b join and fasten these rods to the grounding nut of the standard base with no .
num awg bare solid soft drawn or medium hard drawn copper ground wire and suitable clamps .
d. installing light standard and towers install the specified design kind and size of light standards or towers at planspecified locations .
install these structures complete with specified supporting assembly and luminaires to the mounting heights shown on the plans .
consider transformer bases to be an integral part of the lighting standard unless otherwise specified .
install light standards and towers as follows num .
installing foundations a .
foundations for boltdown base standards with anchor or transformer bases install these as follows num excavate a hole the size and depth shown on the plans .
remove and dispose of excavated material as directed by the engineer .
num place the specified type and size anchor bolts according to the pole manufacturers recommendations .
hold these securely by a template to ensure proper position in the completed foundation .
note never attempt to realign the anchor bolts after pouring the foundation .
section numhighway lighting num num place conduits in foundations orient them to accommodate service cables and securely hold them to avoid displacement .
num pour class a concrete into the excavated area to the following depths a first pour against undisturbed earth up to num in num mm below the finished ground line .
b then using an approved form continue to pour to the finished top of the foundation elevation as specified .
num chamfer the top and formed portions of the foundation edges .
num give a type iii finish to all portions of the foundation above finished grade down to at least num in num mm below finished grade according to subsection num.ab.num type iiispecial surface coating finish .
num where breakaway bases are required do not allow any portion of the base or anchor bolts to protrude more than num in num mm above the ground line .
b .
tower foundations and pole foundations on structures construct these according to plan details .
where breakaway bases are required do not allow any portion of the base or anchor bolts to protrude more than num in num mm above the ground line .
c. foundations for prestressed concretebutt base standards excavate for prestressed concrete butt base lighting standard foundations either manually or mechanically .
when excavating num dig or drill holes to the depths and diameters shown on the plans .
num place and compact num in num mm of crushed stone in the bottom of the hole .
use crushed stone according to subsection num with stone size num .
num .
installing light standards and towers on foundations erect the standards or towers as recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the engineer .
erect carefully to avoid marring the finish or damaging the standard .
ground the lighting supports according to the plans .
a .
installing boltdown base standards with anchor or transformer bases after installing foundations according to subsection num.d.num install lighting standards as follows num when using bracket arm type use metal shims or double nuts supplied with the poles to plumb the pole about its center axis .
num when using the single arm type unless otherwise specified install the luminaire and hardware then plumb the back side of the standard providing a slight rake or lean away from the traveled way .
b .
installing prestressed concretebutt base standards after installing foundations according to subsection num.d.num install prestressed concretebutt base standards as follows num position the pole in the center of the hole at grade and hold it in place as follows .
a set two bracket arm lighting standards to plumb .
b rake single bracket arm lighting standards according to subsection num.d.num.a.num .
num fill the space surrounding the pole butt base as follows fill with crushed stone applied in numin nummm layers .
use crushed stone according to subsection num with stone size num .
compact each layer with mechanical tamping equipment .
moisten the stone backfill as necessary .
fill the area to the bottom edge of the cable entrance in the butt base .
num install the cable .
num continue to fill and compact the area with numin num mm layers of crushed stone to num in num mm below grade .
section numhighway lighting num num backfill the remaining num in num mm with soil in num equal layers thoroughly compacting each layer .
num .
installing frangible or breakaway standards ensure that frangible or breakaway lighting standards meet the breakaway requirements according to plan details and aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
e. bridge lighting installations when installing lighting on a bridge examine the bridge plans or the completed structure whichever applies to determine the proposed or existing details that affect the lighting standards .
do this before ordering the standards .
immediately report to the engineer discrepancies between the highway lighting plans the existing bridge structure or the proposed bridge plans so that these differences can be reconciled .
f. bracket arms install the specified type design kind dimensions and number of bracket arms on the lighting standards according to the plans .
g. luminaires mount or install the specified design and size of luminaire shown on the plans .
level according to the manufacturers recommendations and plan details and as approved by the engineer .
num .
position the luminaires position luminaires to illuminate the roadway as follows a .
provide glare shields on luminaires if required by the plans .
b .
where a lighting unit illuminates a roadway portion on a grade rotate the luminaire on its major axis to bring the minor axis parallel to the roadway .
num .
install pole and bracket cable install the pole and bracket cable as follows a. clamp cables into the proper terminals on the luminaires terminal board .
b. splice cables to the proper phase and neutral conductors outside the handhole in the pole base .
c. ensure that cables contain specified size and type intheline fuses and waterproof holders within each phase conductor .
d. leave enough slack in cables to check or replace the fuse outside of the handhole .
num .
finish the installation a .
after making the required circuit splices outside the handhole place wires inside the handhole .
b .
leave slack in cables for future maintenance .
c. attach a suitable identification tag to each phase cable using white for the neutral grounding wire .
d. clean the light control surfaces and glassware after installation .
clean according to the luminaire manufacturers recommendations .
h. miscellaneous electrical items install the following according to plan details ground rods fuses arresters circuit breakers disconnect switches photoelectric controls magnetic contactors assemblies related components and incidental hardware .
consider these items to be incidental to the lighting system and include their cost in the contract price for other items .
i .
power source make prior arrangements for furnishing power to operate the lighting system .
notify the power company at least num days before needing to connect to the power source .
section numhighway lighting num connect the lighting system to the secondaries of the local power suppliers overhead or underground distribution system at the locations indicated on the plans .
unless otherwise specified install the service pole metallic conduit riser weatherproof circuit breaker and weatherhead with enough wire to connect to the power source .
j .
field painting after erecting nongalvanized steel standards thoroughly clean and touch up the standards as required with numb orange or original type primer .
apply remaining coats according to system v heavy exposure in section num unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
k. seed and sod repair if areas previously seeded or sodded are disturbed during this work sprig reseed with mulch or resod those areas according to section num .
l. final cleanup do final cleanup according to subsection num as it applies .
before final inspection touch up finishes clean surfaces and perform other tasks as directed by the engineer to ensure the works effectiveness and neat appearance .
num quality acceptance a .
field painting if the finish on galvanized steel material is scratched chipped or otherwise damaged the material will be rejected .
repair the finish only with the engineers approval according to section num .
b .
testing complete and energize each lighting circuit as early as practicable .
before beginning testing provide an electrician with a megger a voltmeter and an ammeter to perform the following tests .
perform the tests in the presence of the departments inspectors for each lighting circuit .
make test data part of the project records .
num .
megger reading megger the circuit conductors to be certain that the phase conductors have no grounds before connecting them to the source breaker sign structure lighting standard wiring or lightning arresters .
test as follows a .
test numvolt systems at num volts dc .
b .
test systems under num volts at num volts dc .
c. apply the test voltage for num minutes .
the minimum acceptable megger reading is one megohm .
num .
service voltage measure the service voltage as follows a .
measure the service voltage between the phase conductors before turning the circuit breaker on at the service point .
also measure the service voltage between each phase conductor and the neutral or ground .
b .
after observing the proper voltage as indicated on the plans turn the circuit breaker on wait num minutes for the luminaires to warm up and repeat the voltage measurements .
c. after the circuit has been energized for at least num minutes measure the load current in each phase conductor and in the neutral at the service point .
ensure that the current in the phase conductors is balanced and that there is no current in the neutral .
section numhighway lighting num c. final acceptance final acceptance of the lighting system will be withheld for a numday testing period of continuous nightly automatic operation or until all other items have been accepted whichever occurs later .
the testing period begins after completion of the lighting work .
the contractor is responsible for energy costs during the testing period .
num .
test and acceptance time begin the test period after one of the following whichever occurs later completion of the lighting work acceptance of all other items in the contract except grassing any portion of this test period that occurs after all other work has been accepted will not be charged against the contract time .
num .
correction of defects correct defects in material or workmanship at no expense to the department if they occur during one of the following periods whichever occurs later during the numday test period before the project is accepted if defects are identified during the numday test correct the defects then continue the test for another num days .
run the test each time a defect is identified and corrected until achieving uninterrupted continuous nightly automatic operation for num days .
num .
final voltage test after the testing period and at final acceptance provide an electrician a voltmeter and an ammeter to perform this test as in subsection num.b.num above .
perform the test in the presence of the departments inspectors for each lighting circuit .
make this test data part of project records .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement highway lighting items complete in place and accepted are measured as follows a .
lump sum when the contract contains an item for highway lighting on a lump sum basis measurement is for the total of all items installed .
b .
separate items when the contract contains items for separate elements of highway lighting measurement for each item is as follows num .
conduit encased conduit direct burial and conduit on structures are measured by the linear foot meter for the type and size installed .
num .
accessory items a .
electrical junction boxes are measured by the unit complete in place for all types unless separated by type on the plans .
b .
pull boxes ground rods fuses arresters circuit breakers disconnect switches photoelectric controls and magnetic contractors are not measured for payment separately but are included in the overall cost of the lighting installation .
num .
cable cable is measured by the linear foot meter from centertocenter of pull boxes light standards etc .
for each specified conductor type number and size .
section numhighway lighting num no additional allowance is made for slack length length inside equipment or standards and similar instances where additional wire length is required .
cable for lighting towers and the pole and bracket cable lighting standards is not measured separately for payment .
num .
lighting standards and towers each lighting standard with or without a base or each lighting tower of the specified kind design and mounting height m.h .
is measured by the unit complete in place .
foundations for towers are measured separately .
appurtenances for lighting standards and towers are measured as follows a .
the service car of the specified type and design is measured by the unit including the drive motor .
b .
lowering device power supply units are not measured for payment separately unless shown on the plans as a separate payment item .
unless otherwise specified furnish one power supply unit for each project .
c. foundations for lighting standards are not measured separately for payment .
for lighting tower foundations only the class a concrete reinforcement steel and piling are measured according to applicable sections .
num .
luminaires luminaires of the specified size type and design are measured per each by the unit .
num .
transformer bases transformer bases if shown on the plans as a separate pay item are measured by the unit .
num .
service pole risers service pole risers are measured by the unit complete in place .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment for highway lighting will be made as follows a .
lump sum when the contract indicates that payment for highway lighting elements will be made on a lump sum basis the lump sum payment is full compensation for materials labor equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the item according to plan details .
b .
separate items when the contract contains items for various highway lighting elements payment will be made for each item as follows num .
conduit a .
encased conduit will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter complete in place for each type installed .
payment is full compensation for excavating required sheeting backfilling disposing of excess or unsuitable material furnishing and placing materials installing concrete conduit and reinforcement when specified installing bends joints fittings and appurtenances and installing encased conduit complete .
b .
direct burial conduit will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter complete in place .
payment is full compensation for all applicable work and materials noted under subsection num.b.num.a for required conduit jacking and bedding materials .
c. conduit on structures will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter complete in place .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing all materials including condulets hangers expansion fittings grounding materials associated hardware and accessories and installation of conduit complete .
num .
accessory items section numhighway lighting num a .
electrical junction boxes will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
b .
pull boxes ground rods fuses arresters circuit breakers disconnect switches photoelectric controls and magnetic contactors will not be paid for separately .
they will be included in the overall cost of the lighting installation .
num .
cable cable including direct burial cable will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot meter complete in place .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing the cable and ground materials making splices joints and connections trenching furnishing and placing cushion and backfill material and disposing of excess or unsuitable excavated material .
cable for lighting towers and the pole and bracket cable for lighting standards will not be paid for separately but will be considered as an integral part of the lighting tower or lighting standard .
num .
lighting standards and towers each light standard or lighting tower will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing the complete lighting standard or tower including the bracket arms or high mast luminaire support and lowering assembly and associated hardware and connections furnishing grounding material furnishing backfill materials backfilling reshaping to proper contours and repairing seeded or sodded areas .
appurtenances for lighting standards and towers will be paid for as follows a .
when lighting towers are designed for the use of a service car normally one unit is required for each project and will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment is full compensation for furnishing the complete service car including the drive motor and required accessories .
b .
if specified as a separate payment item the power supply unit will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment is full compensation for furnishing the complete power supply unit including transformer if required and required accessories .
c. foundations for lighting standards are considered an integral part of the lighting standard and will not be paid for separately .
for lighting tower foundations only the class a concrete reinforcement steel and piling will be paid for separately according to the applicable sections .
num .
luminaires luminaires will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing the complete luminaire .
installation includes ballasts lamps glare shields where required and associated hardware and wiring .
num .
transformer bases when shown on the plans as a separate payment item transformer bases will be paid for by the unit for each specific size shown on the plans .
num .
service pole risers these will be paid for at the contract unit price per each .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing the complete service pole riser as shown on the plans .
installation includes the wood pole metallic conduit riser weatherproof circuit breakers weatherhead enough wire to connect to the power source and other required accessories .
payment will be made under sections num num and num .
num .
seed and sod repair include the costs incurred in reseeding resodding and otherwise restoring the areas to their original condition in the contract price for other items .
these will not be paid for separately .
num .
energy cost during testing the contractor is responsible for the energy cost of each circuit or part of a circuit during the test period .
the cost of energy consumed after the successful completion of the numday test period will be borne by others .
section numhighway lighting num payment items related to this section are described in the following sections lighting standards and luminaires section num electrical wire cable and conduit section num high level lighting systems section num num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numlighting standards and luminaires num general description this work includes furnishing and installing lighting standards and luminaires for roadway and highway structure lighting systems either complete or as indicated on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numhighway lighting section numlighting standards and towers section numluminaires b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals refer to subsection num .
num materials use materials that meet the requirements of subsection num and the following material specification lighting standards and towers section num luminaires section num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
section numlighting standards and luminaires num num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction perform construction according to subsection num .
num quality acceptance refer to subsection num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement measurement and payment will conform to subsection num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment will be made under item no .
num lighting standardaluminum _____mh post top per each item no .
num lighting standardaluminum _____mh _____arm per each item no .
num lighting standardsteel _____mh post top per each item no .
num lighting standardsteel _____mh _____arm per each item no .
num lighting standardprestressed concrete _____mh post top per each item no .
num lighting standardprestressed concrete_____ mh _____arm per each item no .
num lighting standard _______ mh post top per each item no .
num lighting standard________ mh _____arm per each item no .
num transformer basealuminum_____ in mm per each item no .
num luminaire description per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section num electrical wire cable and conduit num general description this work includes furnishing and installing wire cable and conduit for roadway and structure lighting systems and for intelligent transportation systems its complete or as indicated on the plans .
num definitions refer to general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numroadway excavation section numembankments section numjacking or boring pipe section numtraffic signal installation section numhighway lighting section numelectrical wire and cable section numelectrical conduit b. referenced documents refer to general provisions num through num .
national electrical manufacturers association nema standards publication tc num and num american society for testing and materials astm cnum astm d num astm d num astm d num astmd num astmd num astm d num astmd num astmd num astm d num american petroleum institute api spec num lr federal specification wcnuma num submittals a .
lighting refer to subsection num .
b .
its section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num num .
use only products and materials that meet the requirements of these minimum specifications and are listed on the departments qualified products list .
products appearing on the qualified products list qpl are exempt from normal submittal requirements .
these products have been evaluated by the office of traffic operations and have proven their capability of meeting the appropriate georgia department of transportation specification .
any of these products may be used without submitting catalogue cuts sampling or pretesting .
the contractor shall submit a letter to the field engineer stating which qpl items they will use .
the field engineer andor department designee must ascertain that the construction item is the same material identified on the appropriate qpl and will acknowledge receipt of these items in the project diary or as required by the construction manual .
num .
submit submittal data for all test procedures and routine maintenance procedures required for these items within num calendar days after the notice to proceed and prior to any installation unless noted otherwise in the contract documents .
num .
submit to the engineer for approval two num hard copies and one num electronic pdf copy of the manufacturers operational documentation service and maintenance documentation and all other materials required within these specifications .
num .
provide submittal data that is neat legible and orderly .
neatly organize each package of submittal data and separate by hardware item .
use the materials certification package index and transmittal form contained in section num of the special provisions for each pay item to document and list all material and components that are included in the submittal package .
any submittal data submitted without the indextransmittal form or that is incomplete will be rejected .
num .
submittal data shall include complete technical and performance specifications on all elements of the conduit system .
below is a sample listing of submittal data requirements by subsection .
num .
for subsection num.a conduit nonmetal type num power service submit materials submittal data for the conduit fittings pull boxes and electrical service wire .
num .
for subsection num.b conduit nonmetal type num submit materials submittal data for conduit couplings and coupling procedures .
num .
for subsection num.c conduit fiberglass submit materials submittal data for conduit couplings and fittings and coupling and fittings procedures .
num .
for subsection num.d conduit duct bank submit materials submittal data for conduit couplings and coupling procedures .
num .
for subsection num.e flexible fabric innerduct .
submit materials data for the innerduct installation procedures and maintenance procedures .
num .
for subsection num.f pull tape submit materials submittal data for pull tape and installation procedure .
num .
for subsection num.g duct plugs submit materials submittal data for duct plugs for empty conduit and duct plugs with cable installed .
section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num num .
for subsection num.h conduit detection wire submit materials submittal data for conduit detection wire and testing procedure .
num .
for subsection num.i electrical communication box type ___ submit materials submittal data for electrical communication box ring and cover conduit terminators cable racks and hardware sealant and conduit alignment jigs or spacers .
num .
for subsection num.b.num electrical communication box rehabilitation submit materials submittal data for cable racks and hardware .
num .
for subsection num.b.num directional boring submit for the engineers approval a plan showing the proposed methods for the installation of the horizontal directional bore .
the engineer will review the proposed installation plan within num working days of receipt by the department .
no directional boring work will be allowed until the contractors submitted plan is approved by the engineer .
this plan shall include the following detail as a minimum a .
list of projects completed by the company performing the boring operation environment of installation urban work river crossing freeway diameter of product installation and length of bores .
this list of projects must include the name address and phone number of an owners representative with knowledge of the performance of the work .
provide at least five previously completed projects of similar scope as the boring work included in this contract .
b .
list of the contractors key personnel with a resume of boring experience .
the department will be the sole judge of the qualifications of the foreman and the drill operators .
c. location of all proposed boring entry and exit pits .
d. proposed alignment of bore both horizontal and vertical .
the proposed alignment shall maintain a minimum clearance of num inches num mm or num times the diameter of the final product installation whichever is greater at any obstruction .
boring will not be allowed in select backfill areas such as at mechanically stabilized wall locations .
e. proposed diameter of bore .
this diameter is the diameter of the final product installation .
f. proposed diameter of pilot borehole .
g. proposed diameter of back reamer .
in no case shall the diameter of the back reamer exceed num times the diameter of the final product installation .
h. proposed depth of cover .
the depth of cover shall be equal to or greater than num times the diameter of the final product installation or num inches whichever is greater .
additionally the minimum depth of cover allowed in paved shoulders shall be num feet num meters .
the minimum depth of cover outside of the paved shoulder shall be num feet num meters .
i .
evaluation of soil conditions to be encountered .
full soil survey not required .
as a minimum excavate the entrance and exit pits for the proposed bore and determine the nature of the material likely to be encountered .
the drilling fluid composition should be based on the evaluation of the materials encountered in the bore pit excavation .
j .
proposed composition of drilling fluid .
k. proposed drilling fluid pressure and flow rates .
l. proposed drilling fluid management plan .
m. proposed pull back rate .
section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num n. type of tracking system .
c. as built drawings provide the department with drawings that detail the final installation route of all cable .
show all routes and locations of the final cable installation inplace and complete .
for aerial cable installations show poles pole attachment heights spans colocations splice closures maintenancestorage coils and vertical risers .
for underground cable installations show conduit size quantity and routes pull boxes and ecbs closures and cabinet terminations .
except for standard bound materials bind all numxnum documentation including num x num drawings folded to numxnum in logical groupings in looseleaf binders of either the numring or plastic slidering type .
permanently and appropriately label each such bound grouping of documentation .
furnish at least five num copies of all bound documentation .
num materials num lighting use materials that meet the requirements of subsection num and the following material specification electrical wire and cable section num electrical conduit section num num its all conduit products shall be installed applied inspected andor utilized in accordance with the construction section of these standard specifications .
all conduit shall be labeled with durable identification data which will provide traceability of the manufacturer plant location manufacturedate date codes shift and machine of manufacturer conduit size inner diameter trade size and wall thicknessrating and sequential foot marking .
line text height shall be at least ½ in .
num mm .
text labeling shall occur a maximum of every num ft. num m. the text shall be indelibly printed in high contrast to the conduit .
the text shall be oriented to face up for underground installation the text shall be oriented to face down for under bridge installation .
the conduit shall also be labeled as shown below .
this labeling shall occur a maximum of every num ft. num m. any additional wording on the conduit such as this side up or this side down shall be consistent with the installation orientation .
the spigot end of the duct shall have a circumferential insertion depth mark to insure that proper insertion depth is achieved .
this mark is not required for spigots with threaded fittings .
a. conduit nonmetal type num power service conduit and fittings shall be schedule num unplasticized polyvinyl chloride pvc that meets federal specification wc numa .
georgia d.o.t .
cable for assistance call num georgia d.o.t .
cable for section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num b. conduit nonmetal type num conduit shall be manufactured from virgin highdensity polyethylene hdpe .
conduit shall be extruded from colored material for uniform fullthickness coloring .
where striping is required a minimum of three colored longitudinal stripes of hdpe material shall be coextruded on the conduit outer wall .
the three stripes shall be equally spaced around the circumference and continuous for the entire length of conduit .
printed or embossed striping is not permitted .
unless otherwise noted in the contract documents color code for conduit used for type num installation shall comply with the conduit duct bank color code schedule listed on the plan detail sheet .
num .
num in .
num mm conduit shall conform to astm dnum and shall meet the following requirements nominal outer diameter num in .
num mm minimum inner diameter num in .
num mm minimum wall thickness num in .
num mm num .
num¼ in .
num mm conduit shall conform to astm dnum and shall meet the following requirements nominal outer diameter num in .
num mm minimum inner diameter num in .
num mm minimum wall thickness num in .
num mm num .
num½ in .
num mm conduit shall conform to astm dnum and shall meet the following requirements nominal outer diameter num in .
num mm minimum inner diameter num in .
num mm minimum wall thickness num in .
num mm num .
num in .
num mm conduit shall conform to astm dnum and shall meet the following requirements nominal outer diameter num in .
num mm minimum inner diameter num in .
num mm minimum wall thickness num in .
num mm c. conduit fiberglass conduit shall be manufactured from fiberglass reinforced epoxy .
the conduit shall be bullet resistant capable of preventing the penetration of a num caliber slug fired from a distance of num ft. num m. the conduit shall conform to the following physical and mechanical properties when tested in accordance with the referenced specification .
all accessories and fittings including couplings and expansion joints shall meet all the same bullet resistant requirements as the conduit .
all conduit and fittings shall be black .
physical and mechanical properties test methods ultimate tensile strength num psi num kpa min .
astm d num dielectric strength num voltsmil .
astm d num water absorption num max .
astm d num specific gravity num num astm d num glass content num num api spec num lr barcol hardness num astm d num num .
num in .
num mm conduit shall meet the following requirements nominal outer diameter num in .
tolerance num num mm tolerance num minimum inner diameter num in .
num mm minimum wall thickness num in .
num mm section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num num .
num in .
num mm conduit shall meet the following requirements nominal outer diameter num in .
tolerance num num mm tolerance num minimum inner diameter num in .
num mm minimum wall thickness num in .
num mm d. conduit duct bank conduit in duct banks shall be manufactured from hdpe and shall conform to the requirements in section num.c conduit duct bank type num shall include six num¼ num mm conduits and three num num mm conduits .
conduit duct bank type num shall include eight num¼ num mm conduits and three num mm conduits .
conduit duct bank type num shall include four num mm conduits .
conduit duct bank type special shall be as shown in the plans .
where required in the contract documents conduits shall be located and secured in the conduit duct bank by conduit spacers configured into an assembly that is appropriate for the duct bank type .
conduit spacer shall be steel or molded high impact polystyrene that is resistant to rot and moisture absorption .
spacers shall be manufactured to have an interlocking design such that spacers for different conduits can be assembled for the appropriate duct bank configuration .
all spacers on the bottom of an assembly shall be base that includes a flat base with a minimum of num innum num mmnum of bearing area for each bottom conduit .
e. flexible fabric innerduct the flexible fabric innerduct shall be a woven sleeve containing single or multicell textile innerduct used to optimize allocation of cables within conduit structures .
the flexible fabric innerduct shall have a solid copper polyvinyl color coated conductor numawg minimum for tracing and rated for a minimum of num amps and num volts .
the flexible fabric innerduct shall contain a flat woven pull tape with a minimum of num lb num kg tensile strength .
sizes shall be num¼ in .
num mm num in .
num mm num in .
num mm and num in .
num mm or as specified in the plans .
f. couplings and fittings coupling shall be by epoxy adhesive interference joint with bell and spigot or stop coupling fittings only .
couplings shall be airtight and watertight .
all couplings shall be installed in accordance with the conduit and the coupling manufacturers recommendations .
only couplings of the same type of fiberglass as specified above are permitted .
fixed bends and sweeps shall be used no flexible bends are permitted .
bends and sweeps shall be compatible with the coupling requirements above .
bends and sweeps shall be of consistent radius and inner diameter with a minimum radius of num times the inner diameter .
in no case shall bends exceed a num degree direction change .
g. pull tape num .
pull tape shall be detectable and shall consist of a single num awg copper wire with polyethylene or pvc jacket woven into a polyester tape .
the tape shall have the following properties a .
num lbs .
num kg tensile strength b. flat not round construction c. printed foot markings d. prelubricated for reduced pulling tension at start of cable pull e. low susceptibility to absorption of moisture moisture resistant f. corrosion resistant embedded conductor section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num h. duct plugs install blank duct plugs in each empty conduit that enters an ecb pull box hub or building entrance .
the plug shall be sized to fit the conduit in which it is used and shall provide a watertight and airtight seal by use of mechanical expansion .
no sealants or caulks shall be used .
the duct plug shall have inner rings to which pull tape can be tied .
all metallic components shall be stainless steel .
install a fiber optic inner duct plug in each conduit that enters an ecb pull box hub or building entrance and has a cable installed in it .
the plug shall be sized to fit the conduit and cable with which it is used and shall be a split plug with a bushing assembly for sealing around the cable by mechanical compression .
all metallic components shall be stainless steel .
i. conduit detection wire conduit detection wire shall be num awg stranded greeninsulated thwn or thhnthwn conductor .
j .
electrical communication box design electrical communication box and cover in accordance with astm cnum .
ensure that the walls floor and roof be minimum num in .
thicknesses .
num delivery storage and handling refer to general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel a .
lighting refer to subsection num .
b .
its refer to subsection num except the installation of conduit for fiber optic cable shall not require the presence of a qualified electrician on the job site .
num equipment refer to general provisions num through num .
num preparation refer to general provisions num through num .
num fabrication a .
lighting refer to general provisions num through num .
b .
its refer to general provisions num through num .
num .
electrical communication box a .
form electrical communication box from num psi concrete in accordance with section num .
manufacture and install the electrical communication box in accordance with details which include the dimensions associated section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num with each type of electrical communication box .
seal all joints and seams in the electrical communication boxes created from manufacture or final assembly with manufacturerapproved sealant .
b .
form electrical communication box with one num knockout window and three num conduit terminators for conduit nonmetal type num num in .
on each wall of the electrical communication box as shown in the details .
the knockout window shall remain sealed unless used for conduit duct bank termination .
provide num in .
to num in .
separation between conduit terminators .
install conduit into terminators as shown in plans and seal with manufacturer approved sealant .
c. install two num cable racks minimum num in .
in length on each wall of the electrical communication box as shown in the details .
install cable racks directly to the wall or use the shortest standoff bracket possible .
include cable support arms num in .
to num in .
in length with plastic or ceramic insulators with each rack .
install one num cable support arm per rack for each cable installed plus one num cable support arm per rack as spare .
manufacture all cable racks cable support arms and mountingfastening hardware of hotdipped galvanized steel .
num construction a .
lighting perform construction according to subsection num .
b .
its num .
perform construction according to subsection num .
num .
electrical power service assembly a. furnish and install electrical cables conduit and power service necessary to make the system fully operational .
b .
electrical cables furnish and install electrical cables for providing electrical power service to the site and for providing telephone andor dsl service andor cable service from the telephone company demarcation point to the equipment cabinet .
furnish and install electrical cables used for power service including grounding in accordance with the standard specifications for electrical lighting and traffic signal equipment .
furnish and install electrical cables used for power supply as shown in the detail drawings .
do not splice any cable shield or conductor used for power supply .
identify all conductors of all cables by color and number .
identify the conductor function in asbuilt documentation included in the cabinet documentation .
electrical cables installed for telephone service from the telephone company demarcation point to the equipment cabinet shall be minimum num awg twisted pair uvresistant shielded cable rated for wetdry direct burial use .
install telephone service cable directly to or into the equipment cabinet in accordance with telephone company procedures .
install telephone service cable from the telephone company demarcation point to the equipment cabinet .
unless otherwise shown in the plans or directed by the engineer install the telephone cable underground in conduit of minimum num in .
num mm diameter .
make all necessary connections at the telephone interface box and inside the equipment cabinet for proper operation of the video control signaling and communications signaling .
neatly coil a minimum of num ft. num m of telephone service cable in the bottom of the cabinet .
c. electrical conduit install electrical conduit to provide enclosures for electrical cables at or terminating at the site .
furnish and install electrical conduit in accordance with the standard specifications for electrical lighting and traffic signal equipment and as required below .
make all above ground electrical conduit and conduit bodies rigid metal except as noted below .
terminate all aboveground conduit in either a weather head or in a cabinet .
all conduits entering a polemounted section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num equipment cabinet shall enter through the bottom with at least one conduit body with a sealable removable cover for pulling access .
all conduits entering in a basemounted cabinet shall enter through the foundation and the basemount adapter .
install electrical conduits for electrical power service drops to the cabinet in the diameter indicated in the plans .
conduits used as risers from a cabinet shall be minimum num in .
num mm diameter .
make nipples welded collars conduit bodies e.g .
lb condulets and weather heads in hollow metal or concrete poles at the device mounting locations and at the cabinet mounting locations a minimum num in .
num mm diameter .
d. electrical power service furnish and install materials and equipment to bring electrical power service to the cabinet from the source shown in the plans .
furnish and install electrical power service in accordance with the standard specifications for electrical lighting and traffic signal equipment and as required below .
provide and terminate electrical power service equipment at the power service source as shown in the plans .
if the power service source is shown as a new power service drop then furnish and install an electrical power service assembly at the new service drop location in accordance with the standard specifications .
include as a minimum with the electrical power service equipment at a new drop a service disconnect surge arrestor grounding electrode and conductor and all necessary conduit wiring and hardware .
provide a ground conductor other than the electrical service conduit between the electrical service disconnect ground buss and the equipment cabinet service entrance terminal block se .
furnish and install a service metering base where required by the local utility or electrical codes or where shown in the plans .
include a minimum num ampere circuit breaker with electrical service disconnects .
mount the electrical surge arrestor on the disconnect housing .
the arrestor shall be rated for a maximum permissible line to ground voltage of numrms and shall be in conformance with nema standards for surge arrestors .
electrical service conduit shall be minimum num in .
num mm diameter .
separate electrical service conduit from all other conduit .
this conduit can not contain any other wiring .
dedicate electrical service conduit from the electric utility drop point through the meter base and disconnect and to the cabinet where the electrical service conduit shall enter the cabinet through the cabinet bottom .
if the power service source is an existing service drop then furnish and install the necessary materials and equipment to supply service to the cabinet from the existing service drop .
unless otherwise shown in the plans service the cabinet from a dedicated branch circuit with circuit breaker .
make all electrical service installation from the existing drop point as specified for new power service drops above .
furnish and install surge suppression at all electrical power service sources .
ground all electrical power service sources and bond the ac neutral and ground at the power service source only .
the contractor will establish accounts with the appropriate utility provider .
after all accounts are established the contractor will submit the utility transfer form to the appropriate dot utility office through the engineer for transfer .
the engineer will provide the utility transfer form to the contractor .
num .
conduit nonmetal type num power service a .
install conduit as indicated in the plans .
if the conduit is shown in the plans crossing under pavement that portion of the conduit shall be replaced with conduit nonmetal type num .
install the conduit nonmetal type num via the directional bore method in accordance with subsection num.b.num and construction details .
b .
install type num pull boxes if in unpaved shoulder or concrete ground mounted electrical junction boxes if in pavement along the conduit route between the electrical service pole and the equipment cabinet requiring power .
install the pull boxes as described in section num and in details that meet requirements in section num except that the covers should be furnished with the logo electrical .
make any repairs to pavement required as a result of the installation of electrical junction boxes in accordance with department standards .
within the conduit and pull boxes install electrical service wire that meets requirements in section num .
install any transformers as may be required because of voltage drops between the electrical service pole and the equipment cabinet requiring power .
section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num num .
conduit nonmetal type num a .
whenever possible conduits shall be placed in continuous manufactured lengths without coupling .
b. conduit shall be placed in the straightest orientation possible reducing bends rises and waves .
conduits shall be held in place during backfilling when necessary to keep straight .
where field conditions require the trench to change direction and bends are necessary the bends shall be formed in the trench and should be smooth and gentle and shall not have less than a num foot radius as measured to the inside surface of the conduit c. coupling make every effort to minimize coupling .
coupling shall only be permitted with the advance permission of the engineer .
couplings shall be airtight and watertight .
all couplings shall be installed in accordance with the conduit and the coupling manufacturers recommendations .
only couplings of the type specified below and approved by the conduit manufacturer are permitted .
couplings shall be accomplished only by hydraulic presson or electrofusion coupling methods .
use hydraulic presson couplings of seamless toolgrade tubular aluminum with sealing barbs and center stop .
use hydraulic compression duct coupling tools and follow all manufacturers installation procedures fully inserting both conduit sections to the coupling center stop .
use prefabricated electrofusion couplings that are fieldinstalled using the coupling manufacturers recommended automatic selfmonitoring fusing machine and installation procedures .
do not use any other coupling methods .
d. termination type num conduits shall be terminated in pull boxes in accordance with section num and the standard details of the contract documents .
unless otherwise shown in the plans terminate type num conduits in different types of underground spaces as follows type num conduits shall be terminated in electrical communications boxes ecbs and types num and num pull boxes using factoryinstalled terminators in the ecb or pull box .
only conduit adhesive sealants recommended by the terminator and conduit manufacturers shall be used .
type num conduits shall be terminated in types num num num nums and nums pull boxes bonded to a pvc sweep through the open bottom .
type num conduits shall be terminated in types num and num pull boxes directly through cored holes in the side walls in accordance with section num .
num .
conduit fiberglass a. bridge or structureattached conduit where the fiberglass conduit is specified in the plans andor by the engineer to be attached to a bridge or other structure bridge hanger assemblies expansion joints deflection fittings and conduit support devices are required and shall be designed for application to the specific bridge or structure for which they will be used .
the department shall approve all materials and design of bridgeattached conduit systems prior to any field installation .
all bridge hanger assembly components that are in contact with the conduits outer surface shall be manufactured of the same fiberglass reinforced epoxy material or shall employ lowfriction roller bushings .
b .
termination fiberglass conduits shall be terminated in ecbs using factoryinstalled terminators in the ecb or by grouting and setting in a knockout window as shown in the standard details of the contract documents .
adhesive sealants recommended by the terminator and conduit manufacturers shall be used .
num .
conduit duct bank install conduit duct banks by configuring individual conduits into a continuous duct bank from termination point to termination point as shown in the standard details and other contract documents .
section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num a. coupling make every effort to minimize coupling .
coupling shall only be permitted with the advance permission of the engineer .
couplings shall be airtight and watertight .
all couplings shall be installed in accordance with the conduit and the coupling manufacturers recommendations .
only couplings of the type specified below and approved by the conduit manufacturer are permitted .
couplings shall be accomplished only by hydraulic presson or electrofusion coupling methods .
use hydraulic presson couplings of seamless toolgrade tubular aluminum with sealing barbs and center stop .
use hydraulic compression duct coupling tools and follow all manufacturers installation procedures fully inserting both conduit sections to the coupling center stop .
use prefabricated electrofusion couplings that are fieldinstalled using the coupling manufacturers recommended automatic selfmonitoring fusing machine and installation procedures .
do not use any other coupling methods .
b .
termination conduit duct banks shall be terminated in electrical communications boxes ecbs and pull boxes as shown in the standard details of the contract documents and in accordance with section num .
duct banks terminated in ecbs shall be installed into factoryinstalled knockout windows only which shall be fully grouted and sealed around all conduits and to the full thickness of the box wall .
duct banks terminated in pull boxes shall be installed into factoryinstalled conduit terminators conduit adhesive sealants recommended by the terminator and conduit manufacturers shall be used .
num .
flexible fabric innerduct secure from the manufacturer or supplier of the flexible fiber innerduct and provide to the department complete and comprehensive written installation manuals .
at any time during the construction process ensure that the manufacturer or supplier provides technical assistance to the contractor andor the department .
num .
pull tape install pull tape by hand pulling blowing or via vacuum method into each empty conduit during conduit installation .
install the pull tape after conduit testing has been completed .
install and secure num ft num m of slacked pull tape in each empty conduit or cell at each vault .
secure the pull tape by tying it to the duct plug for the conduit in which it is installed .
num .
conduit detection wire install one conduit detection wire in the trench during conduit installation directly below the conduit or at the same level as the conduit .
all conduit installed by use of directional boring shall include the installation of a conduit detection wire .
the conduit detection wire shall be pulled with or in the bored conduit .
if more than one conduit is being installed in a single bore only one conduit detection wire shall be required .
when conduit detection wire installation is required in existing conduit install one conduit detection wire in the existing conduit or in one of the existing innerducts .
the conduit detection wire shall be continuous and unspliced between pull boxes or vaults and shall enter the pull boxes or vaults at the same location as the conduit with which it is installed .
coil and secure num ft num m of conduit detection wire in each pull box or vault .
num .
electrical communication box install electrical communication box on a num in .
layer of compacted coarse aggregate .
terminate conduit duct banks as shown in the details .
prior to grouting compact backfill for the entire length of trench to within num ft. of the electrical communication box .
bundle conduit as shown on conduit duct bank installation details with cable ties wire or duct tape .
secure and align individual conduits of conduit duct bank with conduit alignment jigs ensuring that the conduits enter the electrical communication box level straight and perpendicular to the wall .
construct conduit alignment jigs of plywood or use conduit spacers in accordance with section num .
allow grout around individual conduits of conduit duct bank to set prior to final backfilling and paving around the electrical section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num communication box .
do not use concrete for any backfill around the electrical communication box or the conduit approaches to the electrical communication box within num ft .
install electrical communication boxes in the shoulder lane whenever possible unless shown otherwise in the plans .
in the case of narrow shoulder lanes where the electrical communication box extends beyond the edge of pavement backfill to the top of the electrical communication box .
never install any portion of the electrical communication box in the travel lane .
num .
electrical communication box rehabilitation a .
establish the location of the electrical communication box recognizing that pavement may have been placed over the cover of the electrical communication box .
b .
open the cover of the electrical communication box which may include the use of power tools to accomplish and the removal of pavement .
c. remove existing fiber optic cable coils temporarily ensuring no kinks or abrasions are made to the fiber optic cable .
d. clean the interior of the electrical communication box and remove any debris trash mud silt and water .
e. reseal all joints and seams in the electrical communication box with silicone sealant type a as specified in section num. f. install two num cable racks per wall for inside wall widths greater than or equal to num in .
install one num rack per wall for inside wall widths less than num in .
but greater or equal to num in .
install no racks for inside wall widths less than num in .
cable rack height shall be equal to inside height of the electrical communication box minus num in .
install cable racks such that the bottom of the cable rack is no greater than num in .
from the bottom of the electrical communication box .
install cable racks such that the distance between successive racks and the electrical communication box corners is equal to the extent permitted by the presence of knockout windows andor conduit terminators .
install cable racks directly to the wall or use the shortest standoff bracket possible .
include cable support arms num in .
to num in .
in length with plastic or ceramic insulators with each rack .
install one num cable support arm per rack for each cable previously installed or being installed as part of the project plus one num cable support arm per rack as spare .
manufacture all cable racks cable support arms and mountingfastening hardware of hotdipped galvanized steel .
g. reset the electrical communication box and cover assembly such that the cover is at the elevation of the paved shoulder lane .
install class a concrete hes and num in .
of num mm superpave or concrete surface to match existing paved shoulder .
h. label any unlabeled fiber optic cables in accordance with labeling requirements set forth in section num. i .
if a suitable unused conduit terminator does not exist and a conduit is being terminated into an existing electrical communication box neatly core conduit entry hole in electrical communication box wall and seal around conduit with silicone sealant or grout as necessary to prevent soil andor water intrusion into the electrical communication box .
num .
jacking conduit refer to the requirements of section num .
num .
directional boring conduit suitable pits or trenches shall be excavated for the boring operation and for placing end joints or termination connectors of conduit when required .
pits or trenches shall be securely sheeted and braced where necessary to prevent caving .
section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num where directional boring is required under railroads highways streets or other facilities construction shall be done in the manner that will not interfere with the operation of the facility and shall not weaken the roadbed or structure .
no roadway pavement subgrade roadbed paved shoulder or unpaved median shall be disturbed or excavated as part of the boring or pipe placing operation for any reason without written authorization by the engineer .
in the above areas any broken or damaged boring rodstem boring head including transmittertransponder locating heads and cutter heads couplings including backreaming swivel or connector couplings or any other material that can not be retrieved as part of the pullback operation shall become the property of the department and shall be abandoned in place unless otherwise authorized in writing by the engineer .
there shall be no additional payment for abandoned material .
continuously monitor the location and alignment of the pilot drill progress to insure compliance with the proposed installation alignment and to verify depth of the bore .
monitoring shall be accomplished by manual plotting based on location and depth readings provided by the locatingtracking system or by computer generated bore logs which map the bore path based on information provided by the locatingtracking system .
readings or plots shall be obtained on every drill rod and provided to the engineer on a daily basis for asbuilts .
monitoring of the drilling fluids such as the pumping rate pressures viscosity and density during the pilot bore back reaming andor pipe installation stages shall be undertaken to ensure adequate removal of soil cuttings and to ensure that the stability of the borehole is maintained .
drilling fluid pressures should not exceed that which can be supported by the overburden soil pressure to prevent heaving or a hydraulic fracture of the soils .
excess drilling fluids shall be contained at the entry and exit points until recycled or removed from the site .
ensure that all drilling fluids are disposed of in a manner acceptable to the appropriate local state and federal regulations .
the contractors work will be immediately suspended whenever drilling fluids seep to the surface other than in the boring entrance or exit pit .
the contractor must propose a method to prevent further seepage and must remove and dispose of any drilling fluid on the surface prior to resuming the boring operation .
to minimize heaving during pullback the pullback rate should be determined to maximize the removal of soil cuttings and minimize compaction of the ground surrounding the borehole .
the pullback rate shall also minimize over cutting of the borehole during the back reaming operation to ensure that excessive voids are not created resulting in post installation settlement .
any surfaces damaged by the work shall be restored to their preconstruction conditions .
all costs associated with the restoration are to be borne by the contractor .
the distance that the excavation extends beyond the end of the bore will depend upon the character of the excavated material but shall not exceed num feet num meters in any case .
this distance shall be decreased on instructions from the engineer if the character of the material being excavated makes it desirable .
once the directional boring is begun the operation shall be carried on without interruption insofar as practical .
the pits or trenches excavated to facilitate boring operations shall be backfilled immediately after the boring has been completed .
the boring shall proceed from a surface staging area provided for the boring equipment and workers .
the location of the staging area shall be approved by the engineer .
the holes shall be bored mechanically .
excavated material will be placed near the top of the working pit and disposed of as required .
the use of water or other fluids in connection with the boring operation will be permitted only to the extent necessary to lubricate cutting .
jetting will not be permitted .
excavation will not be paid for separately but all of the provisions of section num and num shall govern .
in unconsolidated soil formations a gelforming colloidal drilling fluid consisting of at least num high grade carefully processed bentonite may be used to consolidate excavated material seal the walls of the hole and furnish lubrication for subsequent removal of material and immediate backreaminginstallation of conduit .
flow pressure on the drilling fluid shall be continuously monitored and maintained at the minimal pressure required to place the fluid .
at no time shall the flow pressure exceed num psi num k pa and should normally not exceed num psi num k pa. all drilling fluid spoils shall be completely removed from both ends of the bore and properly disposed of at a location provided by the contractor .
section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num allowable variation from line and grade established by the engineer shall be a maximum of num percent .
any voids which develop during the installation operation and are determined by the engineer to be detrimental to the work shall be pressure grouted with an approved mix .
directional boring operations inherently include the risk of encountering under grade obstructions that begin to alter the bore direction .
should an obstruction be encountered the engineer shall be notified immediately .
attempts at corrective measures to restore the proper bore alignment should include but are not limited to boring deeper or shallower if minimum pipe depth can be maintained moving the boring head to the right or left of the obstruction or attempt to bore through the obstruction if other than solid rock .
to restore the bore alignment a minimum of three attempts shall be made to the engineers satisfaction at each encountered obstruction with different corrective measures .
if a suitable bore alignment can not be restored the engineer may authorize a relocation of the bore .
unsuccessful boring attempts shall be paid in accordance with sections num and num below using the obstruction location as one end of the measured length of directional boring .
num quality acceptance testing a .
lighting refer to subsection num .
b .
its refer to subsection num .
num .
conduit test every conduit after the conduit is installed and before cable or pull tape is installed .
perform testing on all conduit types in this specification including but not limited to each conduit in duct banks and each innerduct .
all testing shall be performed using the procedures and mandrel size recommended by the conduit manufacturer .
testing shall be performed in the presence of the engineer .
payment for all testing is included in the cost of the conduit .
num .
conduit detection wire perform a continuity or tone test after installation to confirm that a continuous run of conduit detection wire was installed between pull boxes or vaults .
for conduit detection wire installed in a trench test the conduit detection wire after backfilling compaction and ecb installation is complete .
for conduit detection wire installed in a trench with fulldepth conduit backfill test the conduit detection wire before and after backfilling .
the purpose of this test is to document that no damage or separation of the conduit detection wire has occurred during the installation of wire backfilling of the trench or ecb installation .
prepare a test plan supplying equipment conducting the test and documenting the results .
submit a test plan at least num working days prior to the desired testing date .
testing shall not begin until the engineer has approved the test plan and all tests shall be conducted in the presence of the engineer .
num contractor warranty and maintenance a .
lighting see subsection num.c manufacturers guarantees b .
its provide a one year manufacturer support usual and customary warranties period for all electrical wire cable and conduit materials furnished and installed as part of the its system .
include in warranty and support all contractor or manufacturer activities related to maintenance removal and replacement of electrical wire cable and conduit materials during the period of support .
begin the manufacturer warranty support period upon successful completion of acceptance testing as outlined in subsection of num .
all manufacturer warranties shall be continuous throughout the period and state that they are subject to transfer to the department .
section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num num measurement num lighting measurement will conform to subsection num .
num its flexible fabric innerduct conduit duct bank fiberglass conduit and conduit will be measured for payment by the type and size actually installed per linear foot .
complete functional and accepted .
unless otherwise specified in the plans all costs for materials cutting asphalt or concrete trenching installing backfilling trench restoring asphalt or concrete drilling existing concrete shoulder installing num rebar replacement of existing transverse joint material directional boring and testing of flexible fabric innerduct conduit duct bank conduit fiberglass conduit pull tape duct plugs and conduit detection wire shall be included in the overall cost of the flexible fabric innerduct conduit duct bank fiberglass conduit and conduit .
conduit detection wire installed in existing conduit will be measured for payment by the amount actually installed per linear foot complete functional and accepted .
payment for installing conduit detection wire in existing conduit will be paid for at the contract unit price per linear foot or linear meter .
such payment will be full compensation for furnishing installing and testing the wire .
electrical power service assemblies are measured for payment by the number actually installed per each complete functional and accepted .
for each assembly installed furnish all required items including but not limited to conduit riser wiring hardware disconnect meter base meter and class num num ft. num m timber pole at no separate cost to the department .
exceptions to the previous sentence include horizontal conduit wiring type num pull boxes electrical junction boxes and directional bores between the electrical service pole to the equipment cabinet requiring power service which will be measured for payment as conduit nonmetal type num power service .
conduit nonmetal type num power service will be measured for payment by the horizontal distance actually installed .
no separate measurement will be made for type num pull boxes electrical junction boxes electrical wire directional bores transformers pavement repair or any other required materials .
all cost for materials required for providing electrical power from the electrical service pole to the equipment cabinet shall be included in the overall cost of conduit nonmetal type num power service .
electrical communication box type ____ will be measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
no separate measurement will be made for cable racks cable support arms compacted backfill material compacted coarse aggregate pavement removal or pavement installation .
electrical communication box rehabilitation will be measured for payment by the electrical communication box that was rehabilitated as previously defined .
no separate measurement will be made for cable racks cable support arms pavement removal or pavement installation .
directional bores will be measured by the horizontal linear foot meter of bore complete in place .
the measurement for payment shall be determined by obtaining measurements from the points at which the bore arrives at the required minimum acceptable depth at the entrance and exit of the boring operation following the central axis of the bore .
directional boring above the minimum acceptable depth shall not be measured for payment .
num limits refer to general provisions num through num .
num payment payment will be made under item no .
num cable type___ .
awg no.___ per linear foot meter item no .
num multiconductor cable type___ no .
of each size and awg no .
per linear foot meter item no .
num conduitrigid size per linear foot meter item no .
num conduit nonmetal type size per linear foot meter item no .
num conduit nonmetal type num power service size per linear foot meter item no .
num conduitencased type size no .
of ways per linear foot meter section numelectrical wire cable and conduit num item no .
num conduitflexible size per linear foot meter item no .
num conduit fiberglass size per linear foot meter item no .
num flexible fabric innerduct size per linear foot meter item no .
num conduit duct bank type _ per linear foot meter item no .
num conduit detection wire per linear foot meter item no .
num service pole riser per each item no .
num electrical communication box type per each item no .
num electrical communication box rehabilitation per each item no .
num electrical power service assembly type per each item no .
num electrical junction box per each item no .
num lighting system per lump sum item no .
num directional bore size per linear foot meter for directional bore the work performed and materials furnished as prescribed by this item and measured as provided under measurement will be paid for at the contract price per linear foot meter for directional boring of the size of bore specified which shall be full compensation for furnishing the bore and all incidentals necessary to complete the item .
all excavated material resulting from the directional boring operations shall be disposed of or used as directed by the engineer at no additional cost to the department .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numhigh level lighting systems num general description this work includes furnishing and installing lighting towers and highlevel luminaires for roadway lighting systems complete as indicated on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numhighway lighting section numlighting standards and towers section numluminaires b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals refer to subsection num .
num materials use materials that meet the requirements of subsection num and the following section numhigh level lighting systems num material specification lighting standards and towers section num luminaires section num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction perform construction according to subsection num .
num quality acceptance refer to subsection num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance contractor warranty and maintenance shall conform to section num .
refer to subsection num num measurement measurement will conform to section num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment will be made under item no .
num lighting towersteel _____mh per each item no .
num lighting towersteel _____mhincluding lowering equipment per each item no .
num high level luminairetype_____ _____watt _____lamp per each item no .
num service car per each item no .
num lowering device power supply unit per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numblast cleaning portland cement concrete structures num general description this work includes blast cleaning portland cement concrete surfaces and removing blasting residue from roadway and shoulder surfaces .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummeasurement and payment b .
related documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment maintain and use the following equipment for this work so as not to threaten anyones safety or health .
blastingcleaning equipment supporting traffic control devices such as arrow boards signs barricades cones etc .
according to the traffic control section of the contract and the mutcd a .
environmental protection provide blasting equipment with either of the following environmental protections an enclosure to keep dust from escaping into the surrounding area water spraying equipment that encircles the blast nozzles to suppress the dust created by the blasting operation b .
protective devices provide and have personnel use eye and hearing protection devices when working near the blasting operation .
also provide personnel with respirators with appropriate filters or with forced air hoods when working in dust contaminated areas .
section numblast cleaning portland cement concrete structures num num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
blast cleaning methods use any of the following blast cleaning methods dry abrasive blasting with compressed air blast nozzles and abrasive recirculating dry abrasive blasting with compressed air blast nozzles abrasive and a recovery system dry abrasive blasting with centrifugal wheels and abrasive recirculating dry abrasive blasting with centrifugal wheels abrasive and a recovery system wet abrasive blasting with compressed air blast nozzles abrasive and a water injection system b .
blast cleaning operation follow these requirements for blast cleaning operations num .
when using compressed air in the blasting operation provide and maintain traps to prevent contaminating the blasted substrate with oil or grease .
num .
when blast cleaning within num ft num m of a lane occupied by traffic immediately remove the residue to prevent a traffic hazard .
num .
control dust to the engineers satisfaction to protect motorists from reduced visibility or damage to passing vehicles .
the engineer judges dust control effectiveness .
if the engineer believes that the blasting makes the highway unsafe stop operations until instituting effective dust control measures .
c. appearance of the blasted surface blast the surface uniformly leaving only minute quantities of existing coating remaining in pit surface imperfections .
the remaining existing coating may be no more than one percent of the blastcleaned surface in each square yard meter .
match the structures finished appearance to the standard photographs .
copies of these can be found in the district office the office of materials or the office of maintenance .
num quality acceptance all work performed under this specification is subject to timely inspection by the department .
correct defective work by reblasting at no additional cost to the department .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement blast cleaning of the portland cement concrete structures is measured by the square foot meter according to section num .
median barrier walls are measured by the linear mile kilometer for variable height .
each face of the blastcleaned wall is measured separately .
num limits general provisions num through num .
section numblast cleaning portland cement concrete structures num num payment blast cleaning will be paid for at the contract unit price bid .
payment is full compensation for costs direct and indirect incurred in complying with the requirements of this specification .
payment will be made under item no .
num blast cleaning portland cement concrete structures per square yard meter item no .
num blast cleaning portland cement concrete median barriersvariable height per linear mile kilometer num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numradio tower antenna num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numtraffic signal timing num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section nummotorist aid call box num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numstatic scale system num general description this work includes furnishing and installing components for threeaxle load static scale weighing systems according to the plans and specifications .
install the scales in truck weighing stations .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numdefinitions and terms section numcontrol of work section numstatic scale system num section numprosecution and progress section nummeasurement and payment section numconcrete structures section numreinforcement steel section numreinforcement and tensioning steel b .
related documents national institute of standards and technology handbook num num submittals a .
material equipment and shop drawings after the contract is awarded submit the following to the engineer for approval complete materials list complete shop drawings list of equipment with supporting data that will be incorporated into the work identify each item on the material and equipment list with an applicable section and subsection from the specifications .
allow the department num days for review of materials equipment shop drawings and other manufacturers data .
b .
manufacturers data along with the materials and equipment list submit manufacturers catalogs cuts diagrams performance curves charts and other data demonstrating that equipment adheres to the specifications and plans .
model numbers alone are not acceptable .
c. manufacturers guarantees and instructions submit manufacturers guarantees on materials and equipment as well as manufacturers instruction manuals .
the engineer will transmit these to the department for future operation and maintenance of the truck scale system .
ensure that guarantees are subject to transfer .
d. contractor warranty before beginning work furnish a written warranty for the static scale system according to subsection num .
e. brand names or equal when materials and equipment are designated in the plans or specifications by brand names or equal the equal materials may be used with the engineers approval .
submit the name and complete description of the equal material or equipment in writing .
also submit supporting data for equipment performance according to subsection num above .
num materials ensure that materials and equipment conform to the electronic axle load scale plans and these specifications .
the contractors attention is directed to subsection num.a specifications of other organizations .
furnish new materials and equipment subject to the engineers approval .
a .
electronic axle truck scale components use the following standard package components and accessories for permanent scale installation according to the plans and this section three electronic weighing platforms section numstatic scale system num three weight indicating and recording elements with one totalizer reinforced concrete scale pits and approach aprons traffic signal lights and controls conduit and cable with electrical installation for axle scales and traffic signal lights b .
weighing platforms and load cells install each of the num weighing platforms in a common pit capable of simultaneously weighing num tandem axles that vary from num in to num in num m to num m centertocenter .
install each weighing platform with the following capacities at least num lb num num kg capacity capacity to weigh an axle unit up to num ft num m wide in one operation oneaxle maximum capacity capability to withstand num percent transit side load num .
load cells install each weighing platform with electronic load cells with the following capabilities at least num lb num kg capacity at least num percent overload rating onetime static overload capacity of at least num percent of normal without structural failure environmentally seal each cell against moisture and corrosion under normal pit conditions .
see subsection num.a reinforced concrete scale pit construction .
num .
axle scales ensure that each weighing platforms axle load scale has a num percent test load acceptance tolerance according to the national institute of standards and technology handbook num .
num .
axle weigh bridges equip each weighing platforms axle weigh bridge with appropriate check devices designed to prevent the reinforced concrete platform from moving horizontally .
c. weight indicating and recording elements use easily replaced and repaired plugin weight indicators printers interfacing and memory storage units .
power the weight indicating and recording elements using a numvolt ac num hertz single phase electricity .
furnish one spare weight indicator and one spare electronic printer in case of electronic equipment interruptions .
num .
digital weight indicator provide each weighing platform with an individually housed digital indicator with these features weight indicating capability of maximum num lb num kg increments measuring capability of up to num lbs num num kg fivedigit illuminated displays using at least ½ in num mm high digits easily replaced snapin snapout type printed circuit boards for the indicator electronics pushbutton zero that can eventually take an additional outside digital indicator for driver viewing num .
printer recorder provide an individually housed dotmatrix programmable printertotalizer capable of printing letters and numbers on paper tape with the following format georgia department of transportation _______________ county weigh station section numstatic scale system num _______________ bound lane _______________ datetime the following chart is a format example only .
axle num num lbs num kg axle num num lbs num kg axle num num lbs num kg axle num num lbs num kg axle num num lbs num kg axle num num lbs num kg gross num lbs num num kg a .
install printer systems with the following print control switches on each individual weighing platform totalizer memory bank status indicators capable of num percent accuracy for each of the numaxle load scales twentyfourhour clocks d. reinforced concrete scale pits see subsection num.a reinforced concrete scale pit construction .
e. traffic signal lights and controls use three traffic signals equipped as follows two num in num mm diameter lenses two numwatt signal bulbs visors over each lens f. conduit and cable furnish and install according to the national electrical code conduit cable and pull boxes junction boxes shielding grounding surge voltage lightning protection between the weight indicating and recording element and the scale the weight platforms pit light receptacle and appurtenances .
see subsection num.d for installation .
num delivery storage and handling do not use the interstate rightofway outside the truck weighing station to store equipment or supplies .
num construction requirements num personnel a .
training during the acceptance performance test apt period following installation train at least num departmentdesignated people to operate and maintain the truck weighing station systems .
furnish two operations and maintenance manuals for each set of platforms .
num .
provide one day of onthe jobinstruction in weighing trucks and using controls for weighing recording and traffic signal .
num .
provide one day of training in routine maintenance and troubleshooting to determine probable causes of malfunctions .
section numstatic scale system num b .
assistance during apt provide a trained static scale system specialist to assist in system operation for approximately one week during the apt .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation truck weighing station construction may already be in progress .
coordinate operations with utility companies and other contractors to complete the work quickly .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction maintain limit of access to the truck weighing station .
enter and exit the station by ramps only .
a. reinforced concrete scale pit construction furnish the reinforced concrete scale pits complete including the structural design .
ensure the structural design supports the maximum compression load cell overload capacity without structural failure see subsection num.b .
num .
concrete work install scale pit concrete including sleeves piping conduits anchors frames other items to be builtin and other required work and appurtenances .
do concrete work according to section num and section num .
use deformed billet steel bars for bar reinforcement steel according to subsection num .
num .
scale pit construction construct scale pits and aprons at locations designated on the plans and as follows a .
make the top of the pit and aprons flush and level with the adjoining pavement .
b. furnish and install a pit drain connected to a num in num mm drain line provided by the department to a point below and near the center of the scale pit unless otherwise noted on the plans .
c. provide a floatcontrolled high water alarm system in the scale pits that automatically activates a red warning light within the operators tower when water in the scale pit reaches num in num mm deep .
d. install an alarm buzzer with the high water alarm system in the operators tower .
equip the buzzer with a volume control .
e. provide scale pits with an access cover and manhole with at least num ft num m of vertical crawl space for equipment inspection and maintenance .
f. enclose each scale platform and pit with steel coping .
b .
traffic lights and controls install and wire three red stopgreen go traffic signal lights and controls as indicated on the plans .
and as follows num .
place two of these traffic lights in the bypass lane .
operate these using one common threeposition redoffgreen toggle switch located on the counter in the operations tower .
num .
place the third traffic light at the axle load scales area .
operate this at the scales console in the operations tower .
c. span and calibration adjustments place span and calibration adjustments for the entire weighing system inside the weighing station building at the indicators .
install the adjustments so that replacing the circuit board does not require recalibration of the scales .
section numstatic scale system num d. cable and conduit connections install cable connections in conduit between the elements and the platform scales .
follow these requirements for cable and installation conform to section xv of the scale manufacturers associations specification recommendations .
use armored flexible cable between scale pits and load cells .
use schedule num pvc for the buried conduit between the scale pits and the operations building .
environmentally seal the load cell and underground connector cable connections .
num quality acceptance time is of the essence in this contract .
complete installation and testing on or before the project completion date and be ready for the departments acceptance performance test .
test with weights certified and calibrated according to georgia department of agriculture standards .
measure the acceptance tolerance of the weighing system according to subsection num.b .
a .
acceptance performance test apt the apt shall demonstrate to the departments satisfaction that the static scale system consistently meets the performance requirements of the plans and specifications .
at the conclusion of a successful apt apply num percent maintenance tolerance to the scales and equipment until they are recalibrated .
num .
testing procedure submit a test plan to the department for approval within num days after the notice to proceed .
begin the apt on the first normal working day following completion calibration and testing of the installation .
during the apt period the department will operate the static scale system for approximately num hours per day num days per week for num consecutive weeks .
provide a trained static scale system specialist to assist in the operation for approximately num week .
num .
failure or delay in completing work on time the contractors attention is directed to subsection num failure or delay in completing work on time .
liquidated damages will start on the day after the project completion date if the installation is not complete and ready for the apt .
deductions for liquidated damages for each day of overrun in contract time will stop when the apt begins .
num contractor warranty and maintenance a. static scale system warranty before beginning construction warrant the static scale system equipment in writing against defective material and workmanship .
furnish the written warranty to the department when submitting shop drawings for approval .
include the provision that warranties are subject to transfer to the department .
warrant that for num months from the beginning date of the apt that equipment will perform according to subsection num.b and subsection num.c continuously serving as intended under conditions required for the equipment .
the written warranty must be accepted and approved by the department before beginning installation of the static scale system .
the warranty excludes damage caused by fire flooding lightning accidents vandalism or natural disasters .
section numstatic scale system num b .
warranty service write the warranty to cover materials equipment service labor travel and incidentals necessary for warranty service at no additional cost to the department .
provide warranty service including the following num .
every num days during the period of warranty calibrate to acceptance tolerance of scales using certified test weights .
num .
make additional warranty calls during regularly scheduled working hours monday through friday as requested by the chief of permits and enforcement or a duly authorized representative .
make a maximum of num calls during the warranty period without additional charge to the department .
perform requested warranty service either the same day or on the first working day following the request .
num measurement this work will not be measured separately for payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment electronic axle load truck static scale system will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
payment is full compensation for materials equipment labor tools direction and incidentals necessary to complete the item according to the specifications and plans .
payment includes the spare weight indicator and standby printer calibration and testing a nummonth warranty and department personnel training .
partial payments will be made on the basis of the following schedule of payments expressed as a percentage of the contract lump sum price scale pit construction num furnishing installing and calibrating the scales weight indicatorrecording element and totalizerprinter num end of numday acceptance performance testing as described under subsection num num payment will be made under item no .
num electronic axle load truck static scale system truck weighing station_____ per lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numweighin motion scale system num general description this work includes furnishing and installing weighinmotion system in truck weighing stations according to the plans and specifications .
the departments objective is to have a system that automatically preselects vehicles in motion for weighing then automatically directs the vehicles to the enforcement scales .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
section numweighin motion scale system num num related references a .
standard specifications section numdefinitions and terms section numcontrol of work section numprosecution and progress section nummeasurement and payment section numconcrete structures section numreinforcement steel section numhighway lighting section numelectrical conduit b. referenced documents scale manufacturers association handbook num insulated power cable engineers association specifications national bureau of standard handbook num code of public transportation state of georgia num submittals after the contract is awarded submit the items listed below to the engineer for approval .
allow the department num days for review of materials equipment shop drawings and other manufacturers data .
when the department approves the shop drawings and other items listed herein assume responsibility for furnishing material or performing work as required by the plans and these specifications .
meet the requirements of the acceptance performance test apt according to subsection num .
a .
equipment performance supporting data furnish documentation according to subsection num that demonstrates to the departments satisfaction that equipment proposed for use in the weighinmotion scale system is of standard manufacture has been available for purchase for at least two years has a proven acceptable performance history under conditions similar to those for the intended use include the following information with the equipment documentation detailed descriptions of how the system requirements will be met drawings showing control and display panels with descriptions description of a similar installation with the standard package components described in subsection num.a that has been in use for at least num year or has satisfactorily completed one project for the department including the owners name owners address a contact name a contact telephone number section numweighin motion scale system num b .
demonstration demonstrate to the department by means of a preexisting weighinmotion system which has been fabricated with the component equipment to be used on this project that the contractor has successfully provided and installed a weighin motion system which is fully operative and has been in use for not less than one year and is meeting the weighing performance requirements in subsection num quality acceptance .
upon request by the engineer arrange the preexisting system demonstration and furnish operations performance data to the department within num days after the request .
the department will at its option and expense provide selected persons to view the demonstration .
c. manufacturers data along with the materials and equipment list submit manufacturers catalogs cuts diagrams performance curves charts and other data demonstrating that equipment complies with the specifications and plans .
model numbers alone are not acceptable .
d. warranty before beginning work furnish a written warranty for the static scale system according to subsection num .
e. manufacturers guarantees and instructions submit manufacturers guarantees on materials and equipment as well as manufacturers instruction manuals .
the engineer will transmit these to the department for future operation and maintenance of the truck scale system .
ensure guarantees are subject to transfer .
f. brand names or equal materials and equipment designated on the plans or specifications as brand names or equal may be substituted for equal materials with the engineers approval .
submit the name and complete description of the equal material or equipment in writing .
also submit supporting data for equipment performance .
num materials a. weighinmotion scale components the work includes but is not limited to the following standard package components .
construct accessories as shown on the plans and as described in these specifications .
electronic weighing platforms speedpresence detectors inductive loop type with presence detector loops speed detector loops weight indicator recording elements and control unit with digital processor overheight detector traffic control subsystems components will automatically preselect vehicles with one of the following conditions for legal static weighing or over dimension measuring exceeds manually entered threshold axle or gross weight exceeds bridge formula weight and axle spacing limitations according to subsection num.a is within num in num mm or above of the maximum height limitation as set forth herein section numweighin motion scale system num b .
electronic axle load scale plans ensure that materials and equipment for this work conform to the electronic axle load scale plans and these specifications .
the contractors attention is directed to subsection num.a specifications of other organizations .
c. scalepits and weighing platforms use scale pits and weighing platforms as follows num .
scale pits furnish the structural design of and install scale pits .
ensure that the onetime overload capacity without structural failure is at least num percent of the legal axle load limit .
num .
weighing platforms furnish and install weighing platforms with a minimum load capacity of at least num percent of the legal axle load limit .
d. inductive loops furnish and install inductive loops in existing concrete pavement according to subsection num.b .
e. weight indicator recording elements and control unit with digital processor refer to subsection num.c .
f. traffic control subsystem furnish and install the traffic control subsystem according to the plans these specifications and subsection num.d .
g. conduit and cable with electrical wiring furnish and install cables according to the nec section xv of the national bureau of standards handbook num the plans subsection num.e and the following num .
rigid steel conduit use according to subsection num.a.num .
num .
nonmetallic conduit use according to subsection num .
num .
flexible conduit use flexible conduit with these features galvanized steel core liquid tight jacket of polyvinyl chloride pvc continuous copper bonding conductor wound spirally between the convolutions ul approved flexible conduit num .
use wire and cable that conforms to the applicable sections of the ipcea insulated power cable engineers association specifications snum .
use pull and junction boxes according to subsection num.b .
num delivery storage and handling do not use the interstate rightofway outside the truck weighing station to store equipment or supplies .
num construction requirements num personnel a .
training during the acceptance testing period following installation train at least num departmentdesignated people to operate and maintain truck weighing station systems .
section numweighin motion scale system num b .
assistance during apt provide a trained static scale system specialist to assist in system operation for approximately one week during the apt .
see subsection num.d .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation truck weighing station construction may be in progress .
coordinate operations with utility companies and other contractors to complete the work quickly .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. scalepits and weighing platforms construct the scale pits in existing pavement and base material as shown on a typical section according to section num and section num and as follows .
closely coordinate efforts with other contractors .
num .
install a drain line to an outlet beyond the shoulder pavement .
num .
make the entire weighinmotion scales flush with the pavement .
ensure that the completed scales do not rock or hammer .
num .
hermetically seal and treat the load cells to prevent moisture penetration and corrosion under normal pit conditions .
b. inductive loops saw cut pavement install the loop wires and seal the saw cuts to the engineers satisfaction .
provide a loop detector in the bypass lane that detects a vehicle that was directed by the automatic sorting system to proceed to the static axle scales but has incorrectly proceeded to the bypass lane .
equip the loop detector to activate a buzzer at the operators console to alert the operator .
c. weight indicator recording elements and control unit with digital processor furnish and install the weight indicator recording elements and control unit with a digital processor in the operations office that will be provided by others .
others will install the heating and air conditioning system in the operations office environment where the equipment will perform .
num .
electrical service electrical service provided by others in the operations office will be numvolt num hertz plus or minus num hertz single phase service .
provide for power connections from panel board a to the equipment in the operations office .
num .
threshold indicators furnish and install detection devices that use overhead traffic control signs to automatically direct vehicles to the static system under the following conditions the vehicle exceeds an operatorentered threshold speed when passing over scales .
the vehicle is out of position so that all wheels do not pass over the scales .
provide thumb wheel switches or a keyboard on the operators console so that threshold weights for axle and gross weights can be entered into the instrumentation .
when the operatorentered threshold weights are exceeded have the instrumentation automatically activate the overhead traffic control sign and eye level polemounted sign directing the preselected vehicle to the static scale system .
section numweighin motion scale system num num .
control signs and indicators provide a highintensity light on the back of each overhead signal head that will illuminate at the same time the green arrow is illuminated .
install two repeater pin lights at the weighinmotion console that indicate the vehicle has been directed to the static scales or the bypass lane .
provide a manual switch in the operations office to override the automatic mode of the overhead signs .
num .
statistical data printer equip the operators console with a microprocessor with changeable program that stores recalls and provides statistical data in hard copy via a printer .
the printer shall print at the operators discretion the weight indicator video display identifying axle weights axle spacing length of vehicle and gross weights to include datatime and velocity for each vehicle weighed in motion .
equip the printer to print axle and gross weight data in no more than three seconds .
num .
selection distance program the instrumentation to preselect successive vehicles one second or more apart from tail to head .
num .
automatic zero provide automatic zero tracking along with an adapter connection for field changing the indicating and recording weight units from pounds to kilograms .
d. traffic control subsystem furnish and install the following components num .
lamps furnish and install reflector lamps using international traffic engineers colors in red for the x and green for the arrow .
use signals capable of the number of indications shown on the plans and clearly visible at num mile num m under normal atmospheric conditions .
use lamp sockets and lamps that are ul approved for outdoor service .
use lamps rated at num volts with a manufacturers life expectancy of no less than num hours .
ensure that if two lamp bulbs fail the lamp continues to indicate the proper signal .
num .
lighting effects provide control signals with hinged and ventilated protective sun screens to eliminate phantom effects from unlighted lamps .
screens also protect the signal lamps from damage from thrown objects and birds .
num .
other furnish and install poles cables guys and anchors and appurtenances including controls and electrical connections between the operations office and the overhead signs and cable .
e. conduit and cable with electrical wiring install cables in rigid galvanized steel or schedule num polyvinyl chloride pvc conduit between load cells junction boxes and electronic instrumentation .
install only smooth standard dimension conduit according to the following in exposed outside areas install rigid galvanized steel conduit unless otherwise indicated .
in underground areas install rigid galvanized steel or schedule num pvc conduit .
for inside areas other than installations in concrete slabs install electrical metallic tubing emt conduit if desired .
make conduit connections to moveable or vibrating equipment with the correct length of flexible conduit .
num .
installation procedures install conduit as follows section numweighin motion scale system num a .
use at least four num in num mm rigid galvanized steel conduits to attach the electrical junction box at the operators console to a groundmounted junction box num ft num m from the building .
the junction box is provided by the building contractor .
b .
shield the electronic cable connecting the transducers and instrumentation .
interconnect and carry shields to a single common ground .
c. use a ground separate from the power source ground .
provide it for the transducer instrumentation only .
d. environmentally seal transducer and underground connector cable connections .
num .
grounding system furnish and install surge voltage lightning protection consisting of num ft num m grounding rods at each transducer load cell location at the balance boxs and at the instrumentation input .
ensure that the grounding system meets national electric code requirements .
ground the scale platforms at num locations with num in num mm diameter grounding rods num ft num m long and a continuous length of ground bus .
ground each platform at least once .
num .
instrument input provide the instrument input balance boxs and each pair of transducer load cells with fast acting twostage shunting circuitry and surge capacity that are compatible with the transducers and electronic components .
ensure that the surge voltage lightning protection system is electrically passive at normal circuit operating voltage and returns to a passive state after the surge voltage has been shunted .
the shunted circuitry shall be capable of being tested and repaired independently of the scale operating parts and circuitry .
num quality acceptance a .
scale performance requirements ensure that the weighinmotion scale system automatically and accurately weighs each axle of a multiaxle vehicle up to num axles within the tolerances given in this subsection .
ensure that the system establishes the gross weight of the vehicle by totaling the individual axle weights .
vehicle weight is defined as the vehicle weight established by static weighing on axle load scales with an acceptance tolerance of num percent of test load according to the national bureau of standard handbook num .
use the axle load truck scales regularly used for enforcement weighing within the truck weighing station .
ensure that the systems measurement of the distance in feet meters between two or more consecutive axles on num lbs num num kg vehicles gross weight is within num percent of a distance measured by permits and enforcement officers using standard measuring equipment and techniques .
ensure that num percent of the vehicles checked for compliance with the bridge formula outlined below are measured to this accuracy .
num .
bridge formula have operators confirm that the system checks vehicles with a gross weight of num lbs num num kg or more for compliance with the bridge formula provisions of chapter num article num section num of the code of public transportation state of georgia .
num .
speed and rate of vehicles build the weighing system to perform the above functions while up to num vehicles per minute pass in motion over the scales .
ensure that weights are accurate as a variety of multiple axle trucks pass over the scales at speeds from num mph to num mph num to num kph num .
gross weight ensure that the scales accurately establish the vehicle gross weight as follows at speeds above num mph num kph within plus or minus num percent of the actual vehicle gross weight and within a num percent confidence level section numweighin motion scale system num at speeds below num mph num kph within plus or minus num percent of actual vehicle gross weight within a num percent confidence level num .
axle weight ensure that the scales establish vehicle axle weights as follows at speeds above num mph num kph within plus or minus num percent of the vehicle axle weight and within a num percent confidence level at speeds below num mph num kph within plus or minus num percent of the vehicle axle weight and within a num percent confidence level num .
accuracy limits ensure num to num percent of load limits up to num lbs num kg for a single axle weight and num lbs num num kg for gross vehicle weight .
num .
environmental conditions ensure that the weighinmotion system operates under typical environmental conditions experienced in the state of georgia .
num .
overheight detection device include the following overheight detection devices with the scale system a .
in the vicinity install an overheight detection device near the scales to detect vehicles num ft num m high or more adjustable to num ft num in num m. ensure that this detector operates under the same conditions of vehicle speeds numbers of vehicles per minute and environmental conditions required for other components of the system .
have the system automatically direct vehicles at or above the present height limit to the static scales .
b .
at the approach at the approach to the static scales used for enforcement weighing where indicated on the plans install another overheight detection device that will detect a vehicle num ft num in num m high or more .
install a momentary adjustable volume audible alarm and a red light set to blink for num seconds in the operators office to alert the operator of a possible overheight violation .
b .
time is of the essence time is of the essence in this contract .
complete installation and testing on or before the project completion date and be ready for the departments acceptance performance test .
num .
failure or delay in completing work on time the contractors attention is directed to subsection num failure or delay in completing work on time .
liquidated damages for each day of project overrun will start on the day after the project completion date if the installation is not complete and ready for the apt .
liquidated damages will stop when the apt begins .
at the end of the apt period if the weighinmotion scale system as described on the plans and these specifications does not perform to the satisfaction of the department the department reserves the right to continue testing or reject the entire system .
num .
removal of equipment if the department rejects the entire weighinmotion scale system the contractor may remove the electronic weighing platforms weight indicator recording elements and control unit with digital processor .
the contractor may not remove inductive loops traffic control subsystem overhead signs conduit and cable with electrical wiring .
these will become the departments property .
c. testing before the apt begins run calibration and performance tests on the weighinmotion scale system with weights certified and calibrated according to georgia department of agriculture standards .
section numweighin motion scale system num the weighinmotion scale platforms will be statically calibrated to plus or minus num percent between num lbs and num lbs num kg and num kg when the weights are uniformly distributed over two num in² num m² areas anywhere on the scale platforms measure for acceptance tolerances according to subsection num.a .
d. acceptance performance test apt the apt shall demonstrate to the departments satisfaction that the weighinmotion scale system consistently meets the performance requirements of the plans and specifications .
submit a test plan to the department for approval within thirty num days after notice to proceed .
the apt period shall begin on the first normal working day following completion calibration and testing of the installation .
during the apt period num .
the department will operate the weighinmotion preselection system for approximately num hours per day num days per week for num consecutive weeks .
num .
department personnel will check the calibrated performance by obtaining actual vehicle weight samples .
num .
provide a trained static scale system specialist to assist in the apt operation for approximately one week .
num contractor warranty and maintenance a. weighinmotion scale system warranty before beginning construction warrant the weighinmotion scale system equipment in writing against defective material and workmanship .
furnish the written warranty to the department when submitting shop drawings for approval .
include the provision that warranties are subject to transfer to the department .
warrant that for num months from the beginning date of the apt the equipment will perform according to subsection num.a operating as intended under conditions required for the equipment .
have the written warranty accepted and approved by the department before beginning installation of the weighinmotion scale system .
the warranty excludes damage caused by fire flooding lightning accidents vandalism or natural disasters .
provide warranty service within num hours of notice that warranty work is required excluding weekends .
num measurement this work will not be measured separately for payment num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the weighinmotion scale system as described above will be paid for at the contract lump sum price .
payment is full compensation for all materials equipment labor tools superintendence and incidentals necessary to complete the item according to the plans and specifications .
payment also includes calibration and testing acceptance performance testing a num month warranty and department personnel training .
section numweighin motion scale system num a percentage of the contract lump sum price will be paid according to the following cost schedule completion of installation calibration and testing of the entire weighinmotion scale system num completion of the acceptance performance test to the satisfaction of the department .
num payment will be made under item no .
num weighinmotion scale system truck weighing station_____ per lump sum num adjustments if the apt does not demonstrate that the performance requirements of the plans and specifications have been successfully accomplished to the satisfaction of the department and the department rejects the entire weighinmotion scale system payment to the contractor will be limited to num percent of the contract lump sum price .
section numautomatic vehicle identification system tws num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numtruck weigh station operations system num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numweather monitoring and reporting system num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numelevator systems num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numgrassing num general description this work includes preparing the ground furnishing planting seeding fertilizing sodding and mulching disturbed areas within the rightofway limits and easement areas adjacent to the rightofway as shown on the plans except as designated by the engineer to remain natural .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numreclamation of material pits and waste areas section nummiscellaneous erosion control items section numwood fiber section numemulsified asphalt section numlime section numseed and sod section numfertilizers section nummiscellaneous planting materials section numpolyacrylamide b. referenced documents qpl num qpl num num submittals submit manufacturers product expiration date along with written instructions to ensure proper application safety storage and handling of polyacrylamide products used in the work .
num materials use materials that meet the requirements of the following specifications section numgrassing num material section wood fiber mulch num agricultural lime num seed num sod num fertilizer num plant topsoil num mulch num inoculants num tackifiers qpl num anionic polyacrylamide qpl num section num a .
seeds whenever seeds are specified by their common names use the strains indicated by their botanical names .
b .
water obtain the water for grassing from an approved source .
use water free of harmful chemicals acids alkalies and other substances that may harm plant growth or emit odors .
do not use salt or brackish water .
c. agricultural lime agricultural lime rates will be based on a laboratory soil test report .
the contractor is responsible for ensuring the tests are performed by an approved laboratory .
provide a copy of test results to the engineer .
refer to section num lime and gsp num of the sampling and testing inspection manual for additional information on rates use handling and sampling procedures .
d. fertilizer mixed grade fertilizer analysis and rates will be based on a laboratory soil test report .
the contractor is responsible for ensuring the tests are performed by an approved laboratory .
provide a copy of test results to the engineer .
refer to section num fertilizer and gsp num of the sampling and testing inspection manual for additional information on rates use handling and sampling procedures .
e. mulch use straw or hay mulch according to subsection num.g .
use wood fiber mulch in hydroseeding according to subsection num.f.num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment use grassing equipment able to produce the required results .
section numgrassing num never allow the grading height of cut to exceed the grassing equipments operating range .
a. mulch material equipment use mulching equipment that uniformly cuts the specified materials into the soil to the required control depth .
b. hydroseeding equipment for hydroseeding equipment see subsection num.f .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction follow the planting zones planting dates types of seed seed mixtures and application rates described throughout this section .
the engineer has the authority to alter the planting dates as set forth by a period of num weeks .
this numweek period may be applied to either the beginning of the specified planting andor to the end of the end of the specified planting season .
in general obtain the engineers approval before changing the ground cover type .
do not use annual rye grass seeds with permanent grassing .
follow the planting zones indicated on the georgia state planting zone map below .
sod may be installed throughout the year weather permitting .
for permanent grassing apply the combined amounts of all seeds for each time period within each planting zone and roadway location listed in the seeding table below .
do not exceed the amounts of specified seed .
section numgrassing num planting zone map section numgrassing num nonnative grass seeding table num temporary and permanent seed types for shoulders medians and slopes num or flatter common name botanical name classtype rateacre planting zone planting dates common bermuda grass hulled cynodon dactylon required permanent grass num num num april num august num common bermuda grass unhulled num num common bermuda grass hulled cynodon dactylon required permanent grass num num num april num october num common bermuda grass unhulled num num bahaia grass paspalum motatum num num rye grass millet cereal grass oats lolium penne spsp .
multiflorum echinochloa cursgalli avena sativa temporary grass num num num september num april num rye grass millet cereal grass oats lolium penne spsp .
multiflorum echinochloa cursgalli avena sativa temporary grass num num num october num march num section numgrassing num nonnative seeding table num temporary and permanent seed types for back slopes fill slopes and areas which will not be subject to frequent mowing slopes steeper than num common name botanical name classtype rateacre planting zone planting dates interstate lespedeza lespedeza sericea permanent grass num num march num august num weeping lovegrass eragrostis curvula temporary grass num interstate lespedeza lespedeza sericea permanent grass num num september num february num tall fescue festuca arundinacea temporary grass num interstate lespedeza lespedeza sericea permanent grass num num april num october num weeping love grass eragrostis curvula temporary grass num interstate lespedeza lespedeza sericea permanent grass num num november num march num weeping love grass eragrostis curvula temporary grass num section numgrassing num native grass seeding table num for nonmowable slopes or areas designated as permanent native grass plots .
plant native seed mixes on back slopes fill slopes and areas which will not be subject to frequent mowing slopes steeper than num .
see plan sheetsplant lists for detailed native restoration and riparian mitigation seed mix combinations to be applied at a minimum rate total of num num lbs per acre kghectare for each combined mix .
if the mix is not provided in the plan sheets use a minimum of num species based on planting dates shown above .
common name botanical name classtype rateacre planting zone planting dates canada wild rye elymus canadensis cool season minimum num num num october num march num virginia wild rye elymus virginicus cool season minimum num num num october num march num bottlebrush grass hystrix patula cool season minimum num num num october num march num little bluestem schizachyrium scoparium andropogon scoparius warm season minimum num num num marchnum august num indiangrass sorghastrum nutans warm season minimum num num num march num august num eastern gama grass tripsacum dactyloides warm season minimum num num num march num august num rice cut grass leersia oryzoides warm season minimum num num num march num august num deertongue panicum clandestinum warm season minimum num num num march num august num switchgrass panicum virgatum warm season minimum num num num march num august num woolgrass scirpus cyperinus cool season minimum num num num october num march num river oats chasmanthium latifolium cool season minimum num num num october num march num purple top tridens flavus warm season minimum num num num march num august num section numgrassing num herbaceous plant seeding table num approved for riparian mitigation or for seed mixes on slopes steeper than numrequiring permanent planting for native restoration and riparian mitigation seed mix combinations use table num for approved native herbaceous seed types in combination with table num of native grass seeds .
native restoration and riparian seed mixes should incorporate a mix of num native grass types see table num and num native herbaceous types see table num applied at a minimum rate total of num num lbs per acre kghectare for each combined mix .
common name botanical name classtype rateacre planting zone planting dates joe pye weed eupatorium fistulosum herbaceous perennial minimum num num num september num may num ironweed vernonia novaboracensis herbaceous perennial up to num num march num august num white snakeroot ageratina altissima eupatorium rugosum herbaceous perennial up to num num september num may num swamp milkweed asclepias incarnata herbaceous perennial up to num num march num august num frost aster aster pilosus symphyotrichum pilosum herbaceous perennial up to num num september num may num partridge pea chamaecrista fasciculata cassia fasciculata herbaceous perennial up to num num march num august num lanceleaf coreopsis coreopsis lanceolata herbaceous perennial up to num num september num may num tall coreopsis coreopteris tripteris herbaceous perennial up to num num september num may num boneset eupatorium perfoliatum herbaceous perennial up to num num september num may num sneezeweed helenium autumnale herbaceous perennial up to num num september num may num swamp sunflower helianthus angustifolius herbaceous perennial up to num num march num august num fringed loosestrife lysimachia ciliata herbaceous perennial up to num num september num may num wild bergamot monarda fistulosa herbaceous perennial up to num num september num may num mountain mint pycnanthemum tenuifolium herbaceous perennial up to num num september num may num blackeyed susan rudbeckia hirta herbaceous perennial up to num num september num may num goldenrod solidago nemoralis herbaceous perennial up to num num september num may num butterfly weed aesclepias tuberose herbaceous perennial up to num num march num august num section numgrassing num table num temporary grass species seeding rates and planting dates species rates per num sq .
ft. rates per acre planting date by zone num num num num num rye grain num lbs num lbs num num num num num num ryegrass num lbs num lbs num num num num num num rye annual lespedeza num lbs num lbs num lbs num lbs num num num num num num weeping lovegrass num lbs num lbs num num num num num num sudangrass num lbs num lbs num num num num num num browntop millet num lbs num lbs num num num num num num wheat num lbs num lbs num num num num num num when stage construction or other conditions prevent completing a roadway section continuously apply temporary grassing to control erosion .
temporary grassing is used to stabilize disturbed areas for more than sixty num calendar days .
temporary grass may be applied any time of the year utilizing the appropriate seed species and application rate as shown in the chart above .
apply mulch to areas planted in temporary grass at the rate of ¾ inch to num inches .
do not place slope mats on areas planted in temporary grass .
a .
ground preparation prepare the ground by plowing under any temporary grass areas and preparing the soil as follows num .
slopes num or flatter on slopes num or flatter plow shoulders and embankment slopes to between num in and num in num mm and num mm deep .
plow front and back slopes in cuts to no less than num in num mm deep .
after plowing thoroughly disk the area until pulverized to the plowed depth .
num .
slopes steeper than num serrate slopes steeper than num according to plan details when required .
on embankment slopes and cut slopes not requiring serration sufficient as determined by the engineer prepare the ground to develop an adequate seed bed using any of the following methods as directed by the engineer plow to a depth whatever depth is practicable .
use a spiked chain .
walk with a cleated track dozer .
scarify .
disking cut slopes and fill slopes is not required .
num .
all slopes a. obstructions remove boulders stumps large roots large clods and other objects that interfere with grassing or may slide into the ditch .
b. topsoil section numgrassing num spread topsoil stockpiled during grading evenly over cut and fill slopes after preparing the ground .
push topsoil from the top over serrated slopes .
do not operate equipment on the face of completed serrated cuts .
num .
native restoration areas riparian areas stream restoration areas and wetland and stream mitigation areas .
for permanent grassing in native restoration areas multitrophic native planting areas riparian areas stream restoration areas and wetland and stream mitigation areas provide the minimum ground preparation necessary to provide seed to soil contact .
riparian areas may also be seeded using the notill method .
the notill method is defined by planting permanent grass seeds using a drilltype seeder over existing vegetation without plowing or tilling soil .
ensure that existing vegetation is less than num inches in height this may be achieved by mowing or using a mechanical string trimmer .
b. grassing adjacent to existing lawns when grassing areas adjacent to residential or commercial lawns the engineer shall change the plant material to match the type of grass growing on the adjacent lawn .
the contract unit price will not be modified for this substitution .
c. temporary grassing apply temporary grassing according to subsection num.f .
determine lime requirements by a laboratory soil test .
refer to seeding table num for species amounts of seed and planting dates .
in march or april of the year following planting and as soon as the weather is suitable replace all areas of temporary grass with permanent grass by plowing or overseeding using the notill method .
if the notill method is used ensure that temporary grass is less than num inches in height this may be achieved by mowing .
additional mulch will be required only if the temporary grass does not provide adequate mulch to meet the requirements of subsection num.g mulching .
temporary grass when required will be paid for according to section num .
projects that consist of asphalt resurfacing with shoulder reconstruction andor shoulder widening type ii wood fiber blanket is used to stabilize disturbed areas no till seeding will be used when permanent grassing is applied and the areas will not be redisturbed .
d. applying agricultural lime and fertilizer mixed grade apply and mix lime and fertilizer as follows num .
agricultural lime uniformly spread agricultural lime on the ground at the approximate rate determined by the laboratory soil test .
a .
agricultural lime may be used as filler material in mixed grade fertilizer in lieu of inert material .
the use of agricultural lime as filler material is to be shown on the fertilizer bag or invoice from the supplier .
do not deduct any amount of fertilizer when lime is used as filler .
num .
fertilizer mixed grade uniformly spread the fertilizer selected according to subsection num.d over the ground or by use of hydroseeding .
for bid purposes base estimated quantities on an initial application of num lbacre of num .
num .
mixing before proceeding uniformly work the lime and fertilizer into the top num in num mm of soil using harrows rotary tillers or other equipment acceptable to the engineer .
on cut slopes steeper than num other than serrated slopes reduce the mixing depth to the maximum practical depth as determined by the engineer .
omit mixing on serrated slopes .
num .
native restoration areas multitropic native planting areas riparian areas stream restoration areas and wetland and stream mitigation areas omit the application of lime and fetilizer within riparian areas .
section numgrassing num e. seeding prepare seed and sow as follows num .
inoculation of seed inoculate each kind of leguminous seed separately with the appropriate commercial culture according to the manufacturers instructions for the culture .
when hydroseeding double the inoculation rate .
protect inoculated seed from the sun and plant it the same day it is inoculated .
num .
sowing weather permitting sow seed within num hours after preparing the seed bed and applying the fertilizer and lime .
sow seed uniformly at the rates specified in the seeding tables .
use approved mechanical seed drills rotary hand seeders hydroseeding equipment or other equipment to uniformly apply the seed .
do not distribute by hand .
to distribute the seeds evenly sow seed types separately except for similarly sized and weighted seeds .
they may be mixed and sown together .
do not sow during windy weather when the prepared surface is crusted or when the ground is frozen wet or otherwise nontillable .
num .
overseeding temporary grass areas that were prepared in accordance with subsection num.a may be overseeded using the notill method .
the notill method is defined by planting permanent grass seeds using a drilltype seeder over existing temporary grass without plowing or tilling soil and in accordance with subsection num.c .
num .
riparian seed mix shall be used when specified in the plans .
a mix of at least three num species from seeding table num native grasses and at least two num species from seeding table num approved riparian mitigation herbaceous plants .
the seed shall be applied as permanent grassing within those areas designated on the plans .
the kinds of seed shall be used according to the appropriate planting dates given in the tables .
f. hydroseeding hydroseeding may be used on any grassing area .
under this method spread the seed fertilizer and wood fiber mulch in the form of a slurry .
seeds of all sizes may be mixed together .
apply hydroseeding as follows num .
use wood fiber mulch as a metering agent and seed bed regardless of which mulching method is chosen .
apply wood fiber mulch at approximately num lbsacre num kgha .
num .
prepare the ground for hydroseeding as for conventional seeding in subsection num.a .
num .
use specially designed equipment to mix and apply the slurry uniformly over the entire seeding area .
num .
agitate the slurry mixture during application .
num .
discharge slurry within one hour after being combined in the hydroseeder .
do not hydroseed when winds prevent an even application .
num .
closely follow the equipment manufacturers directions unless the engineer modifies the application methods .
num .
mulch the entire hydroseeded area according to subsection num.f.num above and subsection num.g below .
native restoration areas multitropic native planting areas riparian areas stream restoration areas and wetland and stream mitigation areas may be hydroseeded .
when hydroseeding in these areas only use water seed and wood fiber mulch .
g. mulching except as noted in subsection num.b and subsection num.c apply mulch immediately after seeding areas as follows areas with permanent grass seed and covered with slope mats or blankets will not require mulch .
evenly apply straw or hay mulch between num in and num in num mm and num mm deep according to the texture and moisture content of the mulch material .
section numgrassing num mulch shall allow sunlight to penetrate and air to circulate as well as shade the ground reduce erosion and conserve soil moisture .
if the type of mulch is not specified on the plans or in the proposal use any of the following as specified .
num .
mulch with tackifier apply mulch with tackifier regardless of whether using ground or hydroseeding equipment for seeding .
a. mulch uniformly applied manually or with special blower equipment designed for the purpose .
when using a blower thoroughly loosen baled material before feeding it into the machine so that it is broken up .
b .
after distributing the mulch initially redistribute it to bare or inadequately covered areas in clumps dense enough to prevent new grass from emerging if required .
do not apply mulch on windy days .
e. apply enough tackifier to the mulch to hold it in place .
immediately replace mulch that blows away .
if distributing the mulch by hand immediately apply the tackifier uniformly over the mulched areas .
tackifier use a tackifier listed in the laboratory qualified products manual and apply at the manufacturers recommended rates .
num .
walkedinmulch apply walkedinmulch on slopes ranging in steepness from num to num and treat as follows a .
immediately walk it into the soil with a cleated track dozer .
make dozer passes vertically up and down the slope .
b .
where walkedinmulch is used do not roll or cover the seeds as specified in subsection num.e.num .
num .
apply only wheat straw mulch on riparian areas stream restoration areas and wetland and stream mitigation areas after they have been seeded .
the wheat straw mulch is to be applied with a maximum thickness of num inch .
h. sod furnish and install sod in all areas shown on the plans or designated by the engineer .
num .
kinds of sod use only common bermudagrass cyndon dactylon or one of the following bermudagrass varieties tifway num tifway ii tift num tifton num midlawn midiron gnnum vamont no dwarf bermuda types shall be used .
sod shall be nurserygrown and be accompanied with a georgia department of agriculture live plant license certificate or stamp .
sod shall consist of live dense wellrooted material free of weeds and insects as described by the georgia live plant act .
num .
type and size of sod furnish either big roll or block sod .
ensure that big roll sod is a minimum of num inches wide by num feet long .
minimum dimensions for block sod are num inches wide by num inches long .
ensure all sod consists of a uniform soil thickness of not less than num inch .
num .
ground preparation excavate the ground deep enough and prepare it according to subsection num.a to allow placing of sod .
spread soil meeting the requirements of subsection num on prepared area to a depth of num inches .
num .
application of lime and fertilizer apply lime and fertilizer according to subsection num.d within num hours prior to installing sod .
num .
weather limitation section numgrassing num do not place sod on frozen ground or where snow may hinder establishment .
num .
install sod install sod as follows place sod by hand or by mechanical means so that joints are tightly abutted with no overlaps or gaps .
use soil to fill cracks between sod pieces but do not smother the grass .
stake sod placed in ditches or slopes steeper than num or any other areas where sod slipping can occur .
use wood stakes that are at least num in num mm in length and not more than num in num mm wide .
drive the stakes flush with the top of the sod .
use a minimum of num stakes per square yard meter to hold sod in place .
once sod is placed and staked as necessary tamp or roll it using adequate equipment to provide good contact with soil .
use caution to prevent tearing or displacement of sod during this process .
leave the finished surface of sodded areas smooth and uniform .
num .
watering sod after the sod has been placed and rolled or tamped water it to promote satisfactory growth .
additional watering will be needed in the absence of rainfall and during the hot dry summer months .
water may be applied by hydro seeder water truck or by other means approved by the engineer .
num .
dormant sod dormant bermuda grass sod can be installed .
however assume responsibility for all sod through establishment and until final acceptance .
num .
establishment sod will be inspected by the engineer at the end of the first spring after installation and at the time of final inspection .
replace any sod that is not live and growing .
any cost for replacing any unacceptable sod will be at the contractors expense .
i .
application of nitrogen apply nitrogen at approximately num lbsacre num kgha when specified by the engineer after plants have grown to num inches num mm in height .
one application is mandatory and must be applied before final acceptance .
apply nitrogen with mechanical hand spreaders or other approved spreaders capable of uniformly covering the grassed areas .
do not apply nitrogen on windy days or when foilage is damp .
do not apply nitrogen between october num and march num except in zone num .
num .
native restoration areas multitropic native planting areas riparian areas stream restoration areas and wetland and stream mitigation areas do not apply nitrogen to these areas .
j .
application of polyacrylamide pam num .
prepare soil according to project plans and specifications prior to applying pam .
num .
apply pam according to manufacturers recommendations and the requirements listed herein .
num .
apply polyacrylamide pam to all areas that receive permanent grassing .
num .
apply pam powder before grassing or pam emulsion to the hydroseeding operation .
num .
use only anionic pam .
num .
ensure that the application method provides uniform coverage to the target and avoids drift to nontarget areas including waters of the state .
section numgrassing num num .
achieve num reduction in soil loss as measured by a rainfall simulator test performed by a certified laboratory num hour storm duration num inches num mm rainfall per hour .
num .
ensure uniform coverage to the target area and minimize drift to nontarget areas .
apply anionic pam to all cut and fill slopes permanently grassed or temporarily grassed either prior to grassing or in conjunction with hydroseeding operations .
mulch will not be eliminated .
num .
use application rates in accordance with manufacturers instructions .
num .
do not exceed num lbsacreyear num kghayear .
num .
do not include polyacrylamide when planting in riparian areas stream restoration areas and wetland and stream mitigation areas num quality acceptance the engineer may require replanting of an area that shows unsatisfactory growth for any reason at any time .
except as otherwise specified or permitted by the engineer prepare replanting areas according to the specifications as if they were the initial planting areas .
use a soil test or the engineers guidance to determine the fertilizer type and application rate then furnish and apply the fertilizer .
num contractor warranty and maintenance a .
plant establishment before final acceptance provide plant establishment of the specified vegetation as follows num .
plant establishment preserve protect water reseed or replant and perform other work as necessary to keep the grassed areas in satisfactory condition .
num .
watering water the areas during this period as necessary to promote maximum growth .
num .
mowing mow seeded areas of medians shoulders and front slopes at least every num months .
avoid damaging desirable vegetation .
in addition mow as necessary to prevent tall grass from obstructing signs delineation traffic movements sight distance or otherwise becoming a hazard to motorists .
do not mow lespedezas or tall fescue until after the plants have gone to seed .
num .
do not mow riparian areas stream restoration areas or wetland and stream mitigation areas after planting .
b .
additional fertilizer mixed grade apply fertilizer based on the initial soil test report at half the recommended rate each spring after initial plant establishment .
for bid purposes apply num lbsacre of num .
continue annual applications until final acceptance .
this additional fertilizer will be measured and paid for at the contract unit price for fertilizer mixed grade .
do not apply additional fertilizer to native restoration areas multitropic native planting areas riparian areas stream restoration areas and wetland and stream mitigation areas .
c. growth and coverage provide satisfactory growth and coverage ensuring that vegetation growth is satisfactory with no bare spots larger thannum ft² num m² .
bare spots shall comprise no more than num percent of any given area .
an exception is given for seed not expected to have germinated and shown growth at that time .
d. permissible modifications when all items of the work are ready for final acceptance except for newly planted repaired areas or other areas with insufficient grass the contractor may fill the eroded areas or treat bare areas with sod obtained placed and handled according to subsection num.h .
section numgrassing num carefully maintain the line and grade established for shoulders front slopes medians and other critical areas .
sod as described above will not be paid for separately but will be an acceptable substitute for the satisfactory growth and coverage required under this specification .
these areas treated with sod are measured for payment under the item for which the sod is substituted .
num measurement a .
permanent grassing permanent grassing will be measured for payment by the acre hectare .
b. mulches straw or hay mulch applied to permanent grassing areas will be measured by the ton megagram .
wood fiber mulch furnished by the contractor for permanent grassing is not measured for separate payment .
c. quantity of sod sod is measured for payment by the number of square yards meters surface measure completed and accepted .
d. water water furnished and applied to promote a satisfactory growth is not measured for payment .
e. quantity of lime and fertilizer mixed grade lime and fertilizer are measured by the ton megagram .
lime used as a filler in fertilizer is measured by the ton megagram .
f. quantity of nitrogen used for permanent grassing nitrogen is measured in pounds kilograms based on the weight of fertilizer used and its nitrogen content .
g. replanting and plant establishments no measurement for payment is made for any materials or work required under subsection num and subsection num .
h. temporary grass temporary grass is measured for payment by the acre hectare according to section num .
i. seeded native restoration areas multitropic native planting areas riparian areas stream restoration areas and wetland and stream mitigation areas seeded native restoration areas multitropic native planting areas riparian areas stream restoration area and wetland and stream mitigation areas will be measured by the acre hectare .
and included under the pay item native restoration and riparian seeding .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment as grassing and planting progress the contractor will receive full measurement and payment on regular monthly estimates provided the work complies with the specifications .
section numgrassing num a .
permanent grassing permanent grassing will be paid for at the contract price per acre hectare complete and in place .
payment is full compensation for preparing the ground seeding wood fiber mulch polyacrylamide and providing plant establishment soil tests and other incidentals .
b .
straw or hay mulch straw or hay mulch required for permanent grassing will be paid for according to section num .
c. fertilizer mixed grade fertilizer mixed grade will be paid for at the contract price per ton megagram .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and applying the material .
d. lime lime will be paid for at the contract price per ton megagram .
lime used as filler in fertilizer will be paid for per ton megagram .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and applying the material .
e. nitrogen nitrogen will be paid for at the contract price per pound kilogram of nitrogen content .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and applying the material .
f. sod sod will be paid by the square yard meter in accordance with the following schedule of payments .
payment is full compensation for ground preparation including addition of topsoil furnishing and installing live sod and for plant establishment .
num .
num of the contract price per square yard will be paid at the satisfactory completion of the installation .
num .
num of the contract price will be paid upon satisfactory review of sod which is healthy weed free and viable at the inspection made at the end of the first spring after installation .. num .
num of the contract price will be paid upon satisfactory review of sod that is healthy weed free and viable at the final acceptance .
g. temporary grass temporary grass will be paid for under section num .
h. seeded native restoration areas multitropic native planting areas riparian areas stream restoration areas and wetland and stream mitigation areas seeded native restoration areas multitropic native planting areas riparian areas stream restoration area and wetland and stream mitigation areas will be paid for at the contract price per acre hectare complete and in place .
payment is full compensation for preparing the ground seeding and providing plant establishment and other incidentals .
and included under the pay item native restoration and riparian seeding .
payment will be made under item no .
num permanent grassing per acre hectare item no .
num agricultural lime per ton megagram item no .
num fertilizer mixed grade per ton megagram item no .
num fertilizer nitrogen content per pound kilogram item no .
num sod per square yard meter section numgrassing num item no .
num native restoration and riparian seeding per acre hectare num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numwildflower seeding num general description this work includes preparing the ground furnishing and planting wildflower and companion grass seeds applying fertilizer and applying lime if necessary to areas designated on the plans .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numlime section numseed and sod section numfertilizers b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials a .
general use materials that meet the requirements of the following specifications material specification agricultural lime num companion grass seed num fertilizers num b. wildflower seed use seed from the latest seasons crop .
use seed that meets the minimum germination rates listed in the wildflower seeding table with num percent seed purity and num percent weed seed .
proportion seed mixture according to the wildflower seeding table .
section numwildflower seeding num wildflower seeding table approx .
by weight botanical name common name germinantion num achillea millefolium white yarrow num num centaurea cyanus cornflower num num chamecrista fasicu lata partridge pea na num coreopsis lanceolata lanceleaved coreopsis num num coreopsis tinctoria plains coreopsis num num delphinium ajacis rocket larkspur num num escholzia californica california poppy num num gaillardia aristata perennial gaillardia num num gaillardia pulchella annual gaillardia num num monarda citriodora lemon mint num num nemonphila men ziesii baby blue eyes num num oenothera speciosa pink primrose na num papaver rhoeas corn poppy num num rubeckia hirta blackeyed susan num num salvia farinacea blue sage num num solidago spp .
goldenrod na num trifolium incarnatum crimson clover num num total mixplant at a rate of num lbsacre num kgha c. companion grass apply nurse or companion grass as follows planting season grass rate per acre hectare october num to february num tall fescue num lbs num kg d. fertilizer mixed grade select fertilizer mixed grade such as num num num or any other analysis within the following limits nitrogen num to num percent phosphorus num to num percent and potassium num to num percent num storage delivery and handling use seed delivered in original sealed packages bearing the producers guaranteed analysis for percentages of species mixture minimum germination rates and purity of seed .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
section numwildflower seeding num num equipment use approved mechanical seed drills drop spreaders and rotary spreaders to distribute seed .
num preparation a .
planting limits before preparing the ground stake planting limits according to the plans and as approved by the engineer .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
ground preparation prepare the ground as follows num .
plow between num in to num in num mm to num mm deep .
num .
after plowing thoroughly disk the area until pulverized then smooth the surface .
num .
remove large clods boulders stumps rocks and other foreign particles that will interfere with the work and seedling growth .
num .
wait num weeks after preparation then spray new growth with num gal per acre num l per hectareof roundup herbicide .
num .
wait at least num days before proceeding .
b .
application of lime and fertilizer mixed grade apply lime and fertilizer as follows num .
lime uniformly spread agricultural lime on the ground at the approximate rate determined by the engineer .
if the ph is num or higher no lime is required .
num .
fertilizer mixed grade spread the fertilizer mixed according to subsection num.d uniformly over the ground at approximately num lbsacre num kgha .
num .
mixing before doing further work on the area blend the lime and fertilizer uniformly into the top num in num mm of soil using harrows rotary tillers and other equipment approved by the engineer .
c. seeding weather permitting sow seed within num hours of applying the fertilizer and lime to the seed bed as follows num .
sow seed uniformly according to the rate specified in subsection num.b .
use approved mechanical seed drills or mix seed with dry sand and spread it with either a drop spreader or rotary spreader .
num .
cover the seed to no more than num in num mm deep .
num .
after seeding roll the area with a cultipacker or similar equipment to ensure good soil contact for seedling germination .
d. mulching after rolling the seed bed apply num ton per acre num mg per hectare of wood fiber mulch .
section numwildflower seeding num num quality acceptance a. replanting the engineer may require replanting an area that shows unsatisfactory growth .
except as otherwise specified by the engineer prepare replanting areas the same as the initial planting with the following exception use a soil test or the engineers guidance to determine the fertilizer type and application rate then furnish and apply the fertilizer .
b .
providing growth and coverage ensure that wildflower growth and coverage conforms with the intent of the contract for the vegetation except for seed not expected to germinate and show growth at that time .
ensure that vegetation shows a satisfactory visible growth with no bare spots larger than num ft² num m² .
bare spots shall be infrequent comprising no more than num percent of a given area .
num contractor warranty and maintenance a .
plant establishment preserve protect water reseed or replant and perform other work as necessary to keep the wildflower areas in satisfactory condition .
b. watering keep planted areas moist for num to num weeks during seedling germination and development .
following initial growth water the wildflower areas enough to promote maximum growth .
c. mowing mow once a year in late fall after seedheads have matured .
avoid damaging desirable vegetation .
num measurement a. wildflower seeding the number of acres hectares completed according to the above requirements and accepted by the engineer is measured for payment .
b .
wood fiber mulch mulch furnished and applied is not measured separately .
c. water water furnished and applied to promote a satisfactory growth is not measured for payment .
d. agricultural lime lime is measured by the ton megagram .
e. mixed grade fertilizer fertilizer is measured by the pound kilogram .
section numwildflower seeding num num limits work required under subsection num and subsection num is not measured for payment .
num payment wildflower seeded areas will be paid for as follows a. wildflower seeding when plants are satisfactorily planted num percent of the contract unit price bid per acre hectare will be paid on the next estimate .
until final acceptance perform required maintenance according to subsection num when necessary or as ordered by the engineer .
at final acceptance the remaining num percent will be paid .
payment is full compensation for preparing ground providing wildflower and companion grass seed applying seed watering mulching and establishing plants .
b .
mixed grade fertilizer fertilizer will be paid for at the contract price per pound kilogram .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and applying the material .
c. lime lime will be paid for at the contract price per ton megagram .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and applying the material .
payment will be made under item no .
num wildflower seeding per acre hectare item no .
num fertilizer mixed grade per pound kilogram item no .
num agricultural lime per ton megagram num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numvine shrub and tree planting num general description this work includes furnishing and planting vines shrubs trees and plants treating regenerated areas and environmental mitigation planting for riparian buffers and tidal marsh areas .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numprosecution and progress section nummitigation site construction section numgrassing section numvineshrub and tree planting num section numlime section numfertilizers section nummiscellaneous planting materials b. referenced documents standardized plant names ansi anum part num pruning standards ansi znum american standards for nursery stock num submittals a .
certificates of inspection submit certificates of inspection with the invoice for each shipment of plants as required by law for transportation .
file certificates with the engineer before the material is accepted .
plants may be rejected at the site regardless of federal or state government inspections at the place of growth .
b. substitutions when both primary and alternate plants are specified use the alternate only after providing written proof that the primary plants specified are not available .
in this case a supplemental agreement is not required to use the alternate plants .
when a primary or an alternate plant can not be furnished provide the engineer written proof that neither is available .
a supplemental agreement is required for substitute plants in this case .
use approved substitute plants as designated by the engineer equal in value to specified plants .
request substitutions at least thirty num days before the end of the planting season in the area .
num materials ensure that materials meet the requirements of the following specifications material section water num.b agricultural lime num fertilizers num plant topsoil num landscape mulch num vines shrubs trees and miscellaneous plants num tree paint num prepared plant topsoil num stakes num organic soil additives num a .
plant specifications furnish plants according to the plant name and specifications included on the plan sheets .
num .
plant names section numvineshrub and tree planting num ensure that the botanical and common names of plants specified conform to the most current edition of standardized plant names as adopted by the american joint committee on horticultural nomenclature .
num .
plants should be clearly labeled at the nursery .
labels should remain on the plants until inspected by the engineer .
num .
grades ensure that plants meet the grade requirements of the most current american nursery and landscape association ansi znum and any other requirements .
caliper used for establishing plant grades or trunk sizes is measured according to the american nursery and landscape association ansi znum .
plant trees with straight stems and symmetrical branches according to their natural growth .
trees with broken or damaged terminal or main stems will be rejected .
there shall be a single dominant leader to the top of the all large canopy shade trees .
there can be a double leader in the top num of the tree height .
trees should be rooting into the root ball so that soil or media remains intact and trunk and root ball move as one when lifted but not root bound .
the trunk should bend when gently pushed and should not be loose so it pivots at or below the soil line .
there shall be no roots greater than num diameter of the trunk circling more than onethird the way around in the top half of the root ball .
roots larger than this may be cut provided they are smaller than onethird the trunk diameter .
the leafbearing crown should be full and uniform .
leaves should show no evidence of chlorosis necrosis disease or insect infestation .
b. bare root seedlings use nurserygrown bare root seedlings which are a minimum of three num feet num meter in height above the ground with a num inch nummm caliper and a minimum primary root length of five inches num unless specified differently on the plan drawings .
use approved substitute plants as designated by the engineer equal in value to specified plants .
request substitutions at least num calendar days before the end of the planting season in the area .
wet swale bare root juncus effuses shall be fresh divisions with a full dense root base .
c. nursery plants unless otherwise specified use plants stockgrown in a licensed nursery under intensive care and cultivation for at least one year .
the largest branches of shade trees should be spaced at least num inches apart .
the branch system shall be normally developed and free of disease injurious insects disfiguring knots sunscald injuries bark abrasions dead or dry wood broken terminal growth or other disfigurements .
stems should show no evidence of dieback .
ensure that proper certificates of inspection and a complete list of the nursery growers accompany nursery grown plants .
see subsection num .
d. approval and selection of materials and work select materials and execute operations required under the specifications and drawings with the approval of the engineer .
remove rejected materials from the site promptly .
num delivery storage and handling a. barerooted plants protect bare root plants from drying out until planted .
uncovered roots without moistureloss gel coating shall be exposed to air no longer than num minutes .
b. balled and burlapped plants bb num .
burlap shall be a natural biodegradable material .
do not use synthetic burlap .
num .
replace plants rejected because of broken or loose balls or balls of less diameter than that specified .
section numvineshrub and tree planting num num .
protect the roots of balled and burlapped plants from moisture loss unless they are planted immediately after they are delivered .
num .
plants shall be harvested with the ball of earth in which they are growing intact .
c. containergrown plants keep containergrown plants moist but well drained until planted .
handle plants by the container or soil ball and not by the top growth .
d. heeledin plants properly maintain heeledin plants until they are planted .
do not allow plants to remain heeledin over the summer or for over num days without the engineers consent .
e. injury prevention injured plants will be rejected .
protect tops of shrubs and trees while in transit to prevent windburn .
f. live willow stake material live stakes shall be moistened capable of rooting without injury and stripped of all stems and leaves with a minimum of scarring .
the stakes shall be from num to num feet numm to numm in length with a basal end of num to num inches numcm to numcm in diameter .
the top ends shall be blunt and cut square and the butt ends angled .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a .
inspect plant material before digging the engineer will inspect trees or plants from the bidders source for acceptability and conformity to specification requirements for approval by the engineer .
when rejecting the trees or plants the engineer reserves the right to pursue and examine other sources of plants to find acceptable specimens .
this change will not constitute an increase in cost to the state .
b .
clear and grub clear and grub the planting area before planting or beginning to prepare the plant bed unless noted differently on the plans .
see section num .
c. prepare plant bed prepare for planting as follows num .
planting limits stake planting limits according to plan details and the engineer .
have the engineer approve the method of plant identification before planting .
for median plantings keep any woody plant a minimum of num feet numm from the edge of the plant bed to avoid vegetative growth into the roadway .
section numvineshrub and tree planting num for stream buffers identified as stream buffer or wet swales on plans the plant species shall be planted in a random intermixed manner throughout the entire planting area .
at the edges of the planting zone keep new plants a minimum of num feet numm from existing trees or permanent structures .
num .
applications of soil additives a .
apply fertilizer and lime to the plant bed according to the soil test report .
b .
spread an organic soil additive see subsection num evenly throughout the designated area to at least num in num mm deep .
thoroughly dig it into the soil to at least num in num mm deep using a rotary hoe type tiller or other equipment that evenly mixes the soil lime fertilizer and organic soil additive .
c. till the area until the surface is smooth and free of weeds roots rocks and other debris to the satisfaction of the engineer .
d. if the planting area lies within a multitrophic native planting area stream buffer wetland wet swale or marsh the addition of fertilizer or lime is prohibited .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
seasonal limitations for planting for geographic seasonal limitations refer to the planting zones map found in subsection num .
plant in zones num and num between october num and march num .
plant in zones num and num between november num and january num .
b .
planting operations plant using the method called for on the details and plan sheets .
before beginning planting of each area have available the necessary materials including prepared plant topsoil see subsection num water stakes and mulch .
plants shall be installed as straightupright as possible .
any plants found to be leaning or broken will not be accepted or paid for by the engineer .
when seasonal limitations and weather conditions permit continuously water mulch guy provide tree guards and stake as indicated on the plans and details until completing the last operation .
after completing planting provide a method for retaining water adjacent to the plant according to the details shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
protect marsh restoration areas from vehicles and machinery .
typical protective barriers are not to be used in tidal areas .
stakes that remain secure and are taller than the highest tide flagged with highly visible flagging tape are required to mark the area to be protected and offlimits for vehicles and machinery .
num .
planting by the pit method a .
placing barerooted plants plant barerooted plants delivered to the pit area .
protect roots from drying out until placing them in the pit .
num .
center plants in pits and spread roots as they originally grew .
num .
cover and prepare the topsoil according to details shown on the plans .
b .
placing balled and burlapped plants immediately plant these plants after they are delivered to the pit site .
num .
the pit diameter shall be a minimum of num times the diameter of the rootball .
center the ball in the prepared pit leaving the top of the ball num in num mm above the top of the ground for settlement .
num .
cut away and remove the top num of burlap from the rootball .
cut all ropes and twine pull the nails and drop the remaining burlap to the bottom of the hole .
cut away and remove all wire from the root ball .
num .
partially fill the pit with prepared plant topsoil and compact the soil enough to hold the ball firmly .
add mycorrhizal innoculant to plant topsoil if specified in plans .
section numvineshrub and tree planting num c. placing containergrown plants when the container is delivered to the pit site split the container from top to bottom and carefully remove the plant .
num .
the pit diameter shall be a minimum of num times the diameter of the rootball .
spread into the hole any major roots growing around the container or prune them to remove any circular growth .
num .
place the ball in the center of the prepared pit leaving the top of the ball num in num mm above the top of the ground for settlement .
num .
partially fill the pit with prepared plant topsoil and compact the soil enough to hold the ball firmly .
add mycorrhizal innoculant to plant topsoil if specified in plans .
d. completing pit plantings after placing pit plantings water plants thoroughly the same day regardless of weather or soil moisture conditions .
num .
after the water has soaked in add prepared plant topsoil and compact firmly up to num in nummm below the adjacent ground .
num .
stop compacting when the compacted prepared topsoil is num in num mm below the adjacent ground .
num .
fill the remainder of each pit with loose prepared plant topsoil according to the details shown on the plans .
num .
prepare the loose topsoil to retain water adjacent to the plant according to the plans or as directed by the engineer .
e. live stake plantings num .
plant live willow stakes at four num ft numm intervals or as indicated on the drawings with the buds facing upward .
num .
eighty num percent of the stake shall be installed below ground leaving twenty num percent extending above ground .
num .
stakes shall be placed deep enough to reach the water table during the dry season at an angle perpendicular to the slope .
num .
pack soil firmly around the hole after installation .
num .
install live willow salix spp .
stakes only in the dormant season according to the planting details and landscape plan notes .
num .
replace any live stakes that split during installation .
num .
planting using a dibble hoedad or reinforced planting shovel for wet swale and bare root seedlings .
planting shall only be done when there is adequate moisture in the ground and when the ground is not frozen .
provide proper root positioning and contact with the soil and eliminate all air pockets around roots .
roots of seedlings shall not be pinched or bent in a sideways or upturned direction .
each tree division or seedling shall be inserted into the hole such that the root collar of the tree will be at ground level after backfilling is complete .
allowance for burying the root collar below ground level shall not exceed one half inch in depth .
in no case shall planting result in the root collar remaining above ground level .
the soil back filled around the root system shall be compacted sufficiently to support the plant .
mow or use a string trimmer to a height of num in num mm in the area designated for restoration .
do not trim wet swales or retention basins where standing water is present .
grass the area designated for restoration with a native restoration or riparian seed mix and apply wheat straw mulch to the area before planting seedlings .
plant within num hours after mowing or string trimming the site .
num .
restoration and enhancement of tidal marsh areas are subject to possible wave energy requiring the use of a plant anchor for each plant .
see planting plan sheets and details for plant anchor and anchoring descriptions .
c. landscape mulching num .
for pit plantings section numvineshrub and tree planting num follow these requirements when mulching for pit plantings a .
where the distance between plants is num ft num m or less spread mulch throughout and num ft num mm beyond the outermost plants .
where plants are more than num ft num m apart apply mulch in a circular fashion around each plant forming a ring num ft num m in the outside diameter .
b .
if plant pits are greater than num ft num m in diameter ensure that the mulch extends out to cover the berm as shown in the planting details on the plans .
c. apply mulch within num days of planting at least num in num mm in depth to obtain a compacted depth of at least num in num mm .
d. compaction occurs naturally .
check compaction at least two months after spreading and exposing the mulch to the elements .
e. if the compacted depth is less than num in num mm apply additional mulch to deficient areas within num month following notification .
f. apply mulch to a uniform depth and remove lumps for a neat appearance .
tuck mulch neatly against all paving edges drainage structures and where planting beds meet grassed areas .
g. leave a num in num mm to num in num mm ring of nonmulched area directly around all tree trunks .
h. do not mulch with cypress mulch .
num .
for plantings using a dibble hoedad or reinforced shovel apply landscape mulch according to subsection num.c.num with the following exceptions a .
apply mulch before planting .
b .
use only wheat straw mulch in restoration areas .
c. ensure that the mulch coverage is open enough to allow seed germination to take place and dense enough to conserve moisture in the seed bed .
num .
for native multitrophic or stream buffer restoration planting areas wheat straw shall be the only types of mulch used .
num .
do not use mulch in a tidal marsh area .
do not mulch wet swale or retention ponds where standing water is present .
d. wrapping do not wrap the trucks of tree unless specified in the plans .
when wrapping is specified tightly wrap the trunks of deciduous trees over num in num mm in caliper .
wrap in strip burlap or waterproof crepe tree wrapping paper or other approved materials .
num .
begin wrapping at the ground and extend spirally up and beyond the first rosette of branches with an overlap of one half the width of the wrapping material .
num .
tie the wrapping material securely with binder twine spaced every num in num mm for the full length of the wrapping .
wrap immediately after planting .
e. staking and guying num .
do not use staking and guying unless specified in the plans or details .
num .
perimeter staking num .
place perimeter stakes num in x num in x num in num mm x num mm x num mm .
stake the perimeter of indicated regenerated areas within specified planting dates according to the plans or as directed by the engineer .
keep staking for tidal marsh areas secured with supports taller than the highest tide with highly visible flagging tape to mark the area as offlimits for vehicles and machinery .
num .
vine shrub and miscellaneous plant staking num .
use stakes to identify isolated vines shrubs and miscellaneous plants outside of solid mulched beds according to plan details .
num .
tree staking and guying section numvineshrub and tree planting num num .
stake trees using a system that will prevent trees from leaning or tilting and keep the root ball stable until the roots become anchored .
the system should allow the top some movement and flexibility without damaging the tree .
f. pruning num .
prune plants on the site before planting and after initial inspection by the engineer as needed for the health of the plant .
never prune severely to get plants to meet specifications .
a .
follow ansi anum part num standards and use approved tools designed for pruning .
b .
lopping topping or shearing trees or shrubs is not permitted .
c. prune back damaged scarred frayed split and skinned branches limbs and roots to live wood nearest to the next sound outside lateral bud branch limb or root .
d. leave the terminal leaders or buds in trees intact .
e. prune roots when necessary as directed by the engineer .
f. prune crape myrtles to maintain natural form only .
severely cutting back or stump pruning crape myrtles is not permitted .
remove sucker growth from crape myrtles .
g. damaged scarred frayed split and skinned branches limbs and roots shall be pruned back to live wood nearest to the next viable outside lateral bud branch limb or root .
g. watering num .
apply water in a manner to prevent erosion .
water plants deeply and thoroughly at the time of planting .
water after applying fertilizer called for in subsection num.h and as necessary to maintain enough moisture to promote plant growth .
use water reservoir bags if specified in plans or details .
a .
apply enough water to wet the soil to a depth slightly below the roots .
direct the water to the ground around the plant not the tops .
b .
do not allow plant foliage to dry out or plants to defoliate from lack of water .
remove plants in such condition from the site immediately .
apply supplemental watering to maintain vigorous growth and to keep plants moist and as directed by the engineer .
c. apply water once per week throughout the planting season in which the plants are installed .
follow subsection num.b and num.c for shrub and tree watering requirements throughout the life of the project .
h. spring application of fertilizer num .
method and rate of application follow these requirements when applying fertilizer in the spring a .
trees apply a slowrelease fertilizer according to soil test results .
assume num with a rate of num cup num l per caliper inch of tree for bidding purposes .
b. shrubs and vines fertilize shrubs according to soil test results with a slow release fertilizer by spreading fertilizer around the base of the plant and working it into the soil by hand .
assume num with a rate of num cup num l per foot of shrub height for bidding purposes .
bed areas spread fertilizer on bed areas defined by method of planting in subsection num.b over the mulch according to soil test results .
assume num lbsnumftnum of num for bidding purposes .
thoroughly water in the plants .
c. native restoration or stream buffer areas the addition of fertilizer or lime is prohibited within the native restoration or stream buffer planting areas .
d. tidal march areas the addition of fertilizer or lime is prohibited within marsh areas .
num .
time of spring fertilizer application section numvineshrub and tree planting num apply fertilizer in the spring in zones num and num with reference to the planting zones specified in subsection num.a between april num and april num .
apply between march num and april num for zones num and num .
for late plantings do not apply fertilizer less than num days after the plantings .
num .
additional fertilizer approximately one month after the spring fertilizer is applied the engineer will inspect planted areas and determine if an additional application of fertilizer is needed for any plant or group of plants .
if the engineer determines additional fertilizer is required apply fertilizer according to soil test results between june num and july numth .
i .
tree guards for stream buffer saplings each planted bare root saplingsized plant shall be fitted with a tree guard to protect the saplings from wildlife browsing .
the tree guards shall be at least num inches tall with appropriately sized wooden stakes or bamboo to securely support the tree guard i.e .
a numfoot num meter stake for a num inch num mm guard .
mesh tubetype tree guards are required .
vexar tubes or equivalent are to be used .
all tree guards shall be removed from the saplings at final inspection .
j .
restoration and cleanup restore areas where existing grass has been damaged or scarred during planting operations at no expense to the department .
restore the disturbed areas to their original conditions as directed by the engineer .
clean up debris spoil piles and containers and leave the project area clean .
clean up and remove all debris spoil piles containers water reservoirs trash etc .
and leave the project area in an acceptable condition .
inspect all installed erosion control devices weekly and clean out or repair as required .
remove all erosion control devices at final acceptance unless otherwise instructed by the engineer .
num quality acceptance preserve the plants in a healthy growing condition and keep plants moist particularly during drought conditions no rain for any two week period .
the acceptability of the plant material planted and maintained as specified will be determined at the end of an establishment period .
the plant establishment period is the period from the last planting specified in subsection num.b until the following october num .
plant all plants in one planting season unless otherwise approved by engineer .
a .
first establishment period at the end of the first planting season the first establishment period begins .
the department will make the first semifinal inspection num days before the end of the first establishment period .
replace dead dying diseased unsatisfactory and missing plants by january num of the next second planting season .
for stream buffer areas all replacement plants shall be tagged with num inch num mm lengths of brightlycolored survey tape .
tree guards shall be placed around all replacement saplings .
all costs for replanting tagging and tree guards for replacement trees shall be included in the contract price bid for the original planting .
b .
second establishment period at the end of the second planting season the second plant establishment period begins .
the department will make the second semifinal inspection num days before the end of the second establishment period .
again replace dead dying diseased unsatisfactory and missing plants by january num of the next third planting season .
for stream buffer areas all replacement plants shall be tagged with num inch num mm lengths of brightlycolored survey tape .
tree guards shall be placed around all replacement saplings .
all costs for replanting tagging and tree guards for replacement trees shall be included in the contract price bid for the original planting .
c. final inspection the department will make the final inspection of the plants during may following any needed replacements during the previous planting season .
assume responsibility for the plants until the final acceptance of the project or a portion of the project .
section numvineshrub and tree planting num num contractor warranty and maintenance project maintenance includes but is not limited to watering cultivating weeding pruning repairing adjusting guys and stakes and performing other work as ordered by the engineer until final acceptance .
promptly remove from the project area dead plants or those that no longer conform to the requirements of subsection num.a.num .
mow the entire rightofway within the limits of the project up to a maximum of four times per calendar year .
do not mow native restoration areas wet swales or riparian mitigation sites .
a .
leaning trees straighten leaning trees as directed by the engineer .
follow staking and guying requirements for replacements or repairs as per subsection num.e .
b. shrub maintenance num .
pruning prune dead or diseased limbs to provide for plant health and appearance as directed by the engineer .
num .
landscape mulching continuously maintain shrub and tree beds with a clean freshly mulched appearance using the mulch originally specified .
see subsection num.c .
do not mulch shrub and tree beds within riparian mitigation sites .
a .
apply a num in num mm loose layer of specified mulch topdressing on top of all areas including tree pits initially mulched at the following times num .
in august during the first plant establishment period .
num .
in april during the second plant establishment period .
num .
in august during the second plant establishment period .
num .
in april prior to the final inspection .
num .
applying fertilizer see subsection num.h .
num .
applying pesticides a .
inspect all planted or seeded vegetation for insects grubs mites diseases etc .
once every two weeks .
apply insecticides fungicides and herbicides according to the manufacturers recommendations to effectively control or eradicate the problem .
b .
perform all pesticide applications under the direct supervision of a trained licensed commercial pesticide operator whose license includes subcategory num right of way pest control .
carry the pesticide licensecertification on the work site during applications .
carry all labeling associated with the chemical being applied at the work site .
c. submit all product information data sheets and epa approval numbers on all pesticides proposed to be used prior to application for approval .
d. notify the engineer a minimum of num hours prior to any and all pesticide applications .
e. add a blue dye to all spray applications unless approved otherwise by the engineer .
f. monitor the weather and spray under proper weather conditions .
spraying shall not occur when the weather is greater than num miles per hour .
g. wear the proper safety attire .
wear long sleeve shirts long pants gloves and safety glasses .
wear or use any additional protective safety attire or gear as recommended by the products manufacturer .
h. repair any damage that is a result of mishandling or misuse of materials at no expense to the department to the satisfaction of the engineer .
i .
for stream buffer and marsh restoration areas pesticides are not to be used unless approved by the department ecology manager .
section numvineshrub and tree planting num num .
edging a .
edge all shrub pits shrub beds and tree pits once a month throughout the life of the project such that the veecut edging detail specified on the plans is maintained .
prevent grass and weeds from growing over or into the shrub beds and tree pits .
b .
use equipment specifically designed for edging .
line trimming equipment shall not be used .
num .
watering a .
check all planted material once a week throughout the contract for dryness by removing the mulch from their base and sampling the soil approximately num in nummm deep .
water if the soil is not moist .
b .
water all planted material if a drought no rain for two weeks occurs .
provide the water required to meet the watering requirements .
c. water each plant thoroughly until the ground is saturated to a depth slightly below the root ball .
apply water in a manner to prevent erosion .
num .
weed control perform weed control throughout the project a minimum of once every two weeks in all areas within the project limits to maintain tree pits shrub beds sidewalks curb and gutter walkways ditch paving concrete medians and other pavement weed free .
meet the following conditions a .
perform weed control to prevent weeds from becoming established setting seed or from becoming visible in the planting beds .
b .
completely remove all undesirable plants weeds by hand pulling .
removal of weeds may be accomplished using herbicides if approved by the engineer .
however the use of herbicides is prohibited in stream buffer areas unless approved by the department ecology manager .
c. apply an approved preemergent herbicide twice each year once in the spring and once in the fall throughout the contract .
the use of preemergent herbicides is prohibited in stream buffer areas .
apply preemergent to all shrub beds and tree pits .
notify the engineer num hours prior to spraying .
use a blue dye in all applications unless approved otherwise by the engineer .
d. eradicate all invasive exotic pest plants found within the project limits throughout the life of the project including stream buffer and marsh areas .
volunteer noninvasive plant material within stream buffer restoration areas is acceptable .
e. dispose off site on a daily basis all weed exotic plants clippings litter and debris generated .
num .
policing remove debris such as paper broken limbs bottles cans etc .
a minimum of the first and third week of each month from all areas within the project limits while maintaining the site .
num .
mitigation areas pruning mulching edging and applying spring fertilizer are not required within wet swales native restoration areas stream buffers and regenerated forest areas .
c. tree maintenance num .
watering see subsection num.b.num num .
landscape mulch see subsection num.b.num num .
fertilizer see subsection num.h .
num .
abnormal conditions periodically once every two weeks observe trees and shrubs for abnormal conditions such as insects borers web worms red spiders etc .
and immediately treat .
num .
sucker growth section numvineshrub and tree planting num remove sucker growth once a month .
sucker growth is the shoots that sprout out around the base of the tree trunk .
num .
pruning and deadwood remove deadwood at least two times a year .
prune dead branches .
paint cuts and wounds or scars with tree paint only when specified in the plans .
do not top crape mrytles .
see subsection num.f .
num .
pesticide control note apply pesticides as necessary to control harmful insects and diseases .
follow the manufacturers instructions .
see subsection num.b.num .
note use chemicals according to federal state and county directives on environmental control that carry an epa approval number .
num .
weed control see subsection num.b num .
staking and guying remove all support guy wires strapping and stakes from plants which have gone through one complete growing season .
num measurement a .
plants plants of the name and size specified are measured for payment according to the number planted that are still living and viable and in an acceptable condition at the time of final acceptance .
a viable plant must have a minimum of num percent of the leafbearing crown with healthy foliage .
b .
fertilizer spring application fertilizer applied to planted and regenerated areas will be the actual number of pounds kilograms placed and accepted .
fertilizer lime and plant topsoil used in prepared plant topsoil or plant bed preparation are not measured for separate payment .
for stream buffer and marsh areas the addition of fertilizer or lime is prohibited .
c. perimeter stakes perimeter stakes is not measured for payment unless such item is shown as a separate pay item in the proposal .
d. clearing and grubbing clearing and grubbing is not measured for payment unless the item is shown as a separate pay item in the proposal .
e. landscape mulch the quantity of landscape mulch and topdressing measured for payment will be the actual number of square yards meters completed as specified and accepted .
the presence of weeds or other growth or foreign material will be cause for rejection .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment a .
plants plants measured for payment will be paid for as follows num .
after planting satisfactorily the department will pay num percent of the contract unit price bid per each on the next estimate .
section numvineshrub and tree planting num num .
until final acceptance perform all required maintenance according to subsection num when necessary or as ordered by the engineer .
if the contractor fails to properly maintain the landscaping daily charges shall be assessed against any money due or that may become due the contractor in accordance with the schedule of deductions shown in subsection num but not less than num per calendar day and will continue until project maintenance is approved by the engineer .
the charges are in addition to those specified for delay or failure in completing the work within the specified time .
num .
after the first semifinal inspection the department will pay num percent of the contract unit price bid per each of the live viable plants .
num .
after the second semifinal inspection the department will pay num percent of the contract unit price bid per each of the live viable plants .
num .
at final acceptance the department will pay the remaining num percent less the full contract unit price bid per each plant not accepted .
payments are full compensation for furnishing planting replanting as required pruning staking guying soil conditioning and preparing plant beds including applying additives digging plant pits preparing plant topsoil and mulch disposing of waste material and maintaining the plants during the plantestablishment period .
b .
fertilizer all grades of fertilizer applied in the spring measured as specified above are paid for at the contract price per pound kilogram or per ton megagram whichever is indicated in the proposal .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and applying and for watering regenerated areas .
for native restoration stream buffer and marsh restoration areas the addition of fertilizer or lime is prohibited .
c. perimeter stakes perimeter stakes will not be measured for payment .
the cost will be included in the overall contract price .
d. landscape mulch landscape mulch measured for payment will be paid for as follows num .
after mulching satisfactorily the department will pay num of the contract unit price bid per square yard meter .
num .
after satisfactorily completing mulch topdressing in august of the first plant establishment period the department will pay num of the contract unit price bid per square yard meter .
num .
after satisfactorily completing mulch topdressing in april of the second plant establishment period the department will pay num of the contract unit price bid per square yard meter .
num .
after satisfactorily completing mulch topdressing in august of the second plant establishment period the department will pay num of the contract unit price bid per square yard meter .
num .
after satisfactorily completing mulch topdressing in april of the final planting season a month before the final inspection the department will pay num of the contract unit price bid per square yard meter .
such payment shall be full compensation for furnishing installing topdressing and maintaining mulch as required .
num .
do not mulch marsh restoration areas .
num .
do not apply additional applications of mulch after the initial application in stream buffer restoration areas .
payment will be made under item no .
num plant name and size per each item no .
num fertilizer spring application per ton megagram item no .
num landscape mulch per square yard meter item no .
num spring application fertilizer per pound kilogram section numvineshrub and tree planting num item no .
num live stakes and planting per each item no .
num perimeter stakes per each item no .
num bare root seedling planting per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numtree wells tree walls and root protection num general description this work includes protecting the root systems of selected trees and shrubs with retaining walls tree wells and porous material .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numrubble masonry section nummasonry materials section numclay pipe section nummiscellaneous planting material b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use materials that meet the requirements of the following specifications material section mortar and grout num masonry stone num clay underdrain pipe num clay drain tile num porous material num tree paint num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section numtree wells tree wall and root protection num num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. excavating and filling foundations avoid unnecessarily injuring root systems when excavating for tree wells and tree walls .
excavate and fill foundations to these requirements to the elevations shown on the plans or as directed to the full widths and lengths of footings shown on the plans where the soil under tree wells or tree walls is unstable backfill the foundation area with broken stone coarse gravel or other approved material and firmly tamp it .
ensure that foundations firmly and uniformly support masonry .
b. constructing masonry build the tree wells and tree walls from rubble masonry according to plan details .
use rubble masonry according to section num .
c. providing drainage provide adequate well drainage using weep holes pipe drains drain tile or porous material as shown on the plans .
d. protecting tree roots where tree root protection is required spread porous material loosely to the extent and depths indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
before spreading porous material clean the tree root protection area of vegetation .
before backfilling over a tree or plant that will be preserved place porous material above its roots .
e. damaging plants avoid cutting roots or damaging trees and shrubs while building tree wells and tree walls and placing the porous material to protect the roots .
when making necessary cuts use sharp tools and cut cleanly according to the best horticultural practices .
immediately cover with tree paint all scarred or cut surfaces num in num mm or more in diameter .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
section numtree wells tree wall and root protection num num measurement a .
tree well and tree wall tree well and tree wall masonry completed and accepted is measured for payment in cubic yards meters .
b. porous material porous material for tree root protection placed and accepted is measured for payment in cubic yards meters as measured loose in the vehicle at the point of dumping .
c. drain pipe or tile drain pipe or drain tile is measured for payment in linear feet meters along the center of each line lateral or riser from endstocenter or centertocenter of junctions and fittings .
d. excavation paint and replacement or disposal of material no measurement or payment is made for excavation tree paint replacement of unsuitable material or disposal of surplus material .
these are considered a part of the pay item to which each pertains .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment rubble masonry for tree wells and walls and porous material for tree root protection will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yards meters .
clay drain pipe or drain tile will be paid for by the linear foot meter .
payment will be made under item no .
num rubble masonry for tree wells and walls per cubic yard meter item no .
num porous material for tree root protection per cubic foot meter item no .
num drain pipe_____ in mm per linear foot meter item no .
num drain tile_____ in mm per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numtransplanting trees num general description this work includes transplanting existing trees at new locations as shown on the plans and as directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numgrassing section numtransplanting trees num section numfertilizers section nummiscellaneous planting material b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use materials that meet the requirements of the following specifications material section plant topsoil num fertilizer num mulch num stakes num staking wire see planting details rubber hose see planting details tree paint num water for plant growth num num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel have skilled workers transplant according to the best horticultural practices .
num equipment have tree transplanting equipment as detailed in the plans and specifications on the project site and in satisfactory condition before construction begins .
excavate trees and tree pits with the vermeertype tree spade or tree mover or equivalent approved mechanized equipment .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. transplanting operations follow these procedures when transplanting trees num .
trunk and branch protection protect trunks and branches from breaks or bruises .
spray trees in leaf with an approved antidesiccant before digging .
section numtransplanting trees num num .
pruning prune trees before transplanting as directed by the engineer .
remove broken or badly bruised branches with a clean cut .
num .
securing roots dig trees to secure as many roots as possible .
maintain a tight firm ball during the moving operations .
num .
excavating excavate trees and tree pits .
use the excavated material to backfill the pits from which the existing trees were removed .
num .
placing trees in pits place transplanted trees into new pits .
backfill voids between the ball and the pit with clean washed sand and tamp .
thoroughly water the sand in with a root feeder or water needle .
num .
applying topsoil and mulch apply plant topsoil to the transplanted tree according to plan details .
mulch a minimum numfoot diameter tree pit with num in num mm of mulching material .
num .
staking and anchoring trees stake or anchor trees according to planting details or as directed by the engineer .
num quality acceptance replace severely damaged or disfigured trees that the engineer determines were damaged by operations .
replace with trees of approximately the same size genus species variety and quality at the contractors expense .
num contractor warranty and maintenance a. watering after the initial watering make four additional waterings at twoweek intervals .
b .
guarantee period a guarantee period is not required for the transplanting work .
num measurement the quantity of transplanted trees paid for under this item is the number transplanted .
size is determined by tree caliper diameter measurement at a point num in num mm above the natural ground surface .
where tree caliper exactly coincides with a break point in the pay item size intervals that tree is classed in the lower size interval .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment transplanting trees will be paid for at the contract unit price .
payment is full compensation for the work and materials including plant topsoil fertilizer mulch stakes staking wire rubber hose tree paint water and incidentals necessary to complete the item .
payment will be made under item no .
num transplanting trees_____ in mm to_____ in mm caliper per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numturf establishment num general description this work includes providing a hardy and permanent ground cover at designated locations .
the cover is subject to the engineers approval .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numgrassing b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials select a viable ground cover according to section num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction general provisions num through num .
num quality acceptance refer to subsection num quality acceptance and subsection num contractor warranty and maintenance for acceptance of a viable ground cover .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
section numturf establishement num num measurement no field measurements are required .
measurement is calculated from known dimensions as follows a .
type agrading and drainage projects project length pl minus bridge and exception length bl times rightofway width or engineerspecified width rw minus roadbed width rbw equals _____ square feet divided by num ft²acre equals pay quantity in acres .
project length pl minus bridge and exception length bl times rightofway width or engineerspecified width rw minus roadbed width rbw equals _____ square meters divided by num m² equals pay quantity in hectares .
pl bl x rw rbw ____ft² num ft²acre pay quantity in acres pl bl x rw rbw ____m² num m² pay quantity in hectares b .
type b base and paving projects project length pl minus bridge and exception length bl times unpaved shoulder width sw plus num ft for each roadway side rs ___ square feet divided by num ft²acre pay quantity in acres .
project length pl minus bridge and exception length bl times unpaved shoulder width sw plus num m for each roadway side rs ___ square meters divided by num m² pay quantity in hectares .
pl bl x sw numrs ___ ft² num ft²acre pay quantity in acres pl bl x sw numrs ___ m² num m² pay quantity in hectares c. type c complete project project length pl minus bridge and exception length bl times rightofway width or engineerspecified width rw minus plan paved surface width ppw equals square feet divided by num ft²acre pay quantity in acres .
project length pl minus bridge and exception length bl times rightofway width or engineerspecified width rw minus plan paved surface width ppw equals square meters divided by num ft²acre pay quantity in hectares .
pl bl x rw ppw ____ft² num ft²acre pay quantity in acres pl bl x rw ppw ____m² num m² pay quantity in hectares exception means major road intersections and plan exceptions not side roads drives etc .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the turf establishment area will be paid for at the contract price per acre hectare .
payment is full compensation for equipment labor seed fertilizer and any other materials necessary to complete the item .
payment will be made under item no .
num turf establishment type_____ per acre hectare num adjustment general provisions num through num .
num section numplant topsoil num general description this work includes furnishing and applying approved plant topsoil at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer and according to these specifications .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numscope of work section numcontrol of materials section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public section nummiscellaneous planting materials b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials a .
plant topsoil materials use plant topsoil that meets the requirements of subsection num .
b .
sources of material except as modified in this section furnish plant topsoil material according to section num .
num .
plant topsoil obtained from the work the requirements of subsection num right in and use of material found on the work are in effect for plant topsoil obtained from the work .
a .
obtain the quantity of plant topsoil called for on the plans .
b .
use plant topsoil material present on the project as long as the topsoil meets the specifications applying to the item .
c. excavate for topsoil only within the construction limits of the project .
obtain topsoil from embankment areas excavation areas or borrow excavation pits .
d. when obtaining plant topsoil from borrow excavation pits or the roadway cross section the excavated areas a second time before beginning regular excavation .
num .
plant topsoil furnished by the contractor when insufficient material is obtainable from the work obtain additional topsoil offsite .
the contract price will include the costs necessary to locate purchase and deliver the required amount of acceptable material to the work .
section numplant topsoil num num delivery storage and handling for the purpose of measurement the contractor may haul plant topsoil in any type of vehicle provided the vehicle when loaded to capacity and traveling over public roads and streets meets the provisions of subsection num load restrictions .
when using pans or scrapers the capacity will be the manufacturers rated capacity .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
general requirements unless otherwise specified in the plans uniformly spread plant topsoil to at least num in num mm loose depth .
num .
erosion control only use plant topsoil on slopes where the gradient is num or flatter .
to reduce loss of plant topsoil by erosion place the soil shortly before and in conjunction with grassing operations .
place topsoil and complete grassing within specified seasonal limits .
num .
spreading procedure before applying plant topsoil scarify the designated areas num in to num in num mm to num mm deep .
mix the plant topsoil lime when required and the first application fertilizer with the underlying soil when preparing the soil for grassing .
spread and smooth the topsoil uniformly .
b .
plant topsoil obtained from the work num .
stockpiling when obtaining topsoil from the work site strip and stockpile the topsoil in suitable locations in advance of grading operations .
just before grassing remove the plant topsoil from the stockpile and spread it over the designated areas .
if grassing is started before grading operations are finished if feasible haul the topsoil from undisturbed areas before grading begins directly to the areas designated for the topsoil eliminating the cost of stockpiling and removing the stockpile .
num .
surplus material when stockpiling more material than specified in the contract use the surplus material as additional plant topsoil material if directed by the engineer .
after constructing the item use the surplus material left in the stockpiles to maintain the item or to fill washes that occur within a reasonable haul distance .
otherwise remove or dress down the remaining material as directed by the engineer without additional compensation .
section numplant topsoil num c. plant topsoil furnished by contractor when locating obtaining and paying for plant topsoil from pits outside the rightofway excavate the topsoil and haul it directly to the designated areas just before the planting begins .
notify the engineer according to subsection num plant topsoil of the source of the material .
the engineer will inspect the topsoil .
if the material is suitable the engineer will specify the permissible excavation depth .
if the permissible excavation depth is exceeded the material obtained from the areas will be rejected .
num quality acceptance after placing the plant topsoil replace material lost by erosion at no expense to the department .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement accepted plant topsoil for this item is measured by the cubic yard meter of material delivered in vehicles to the designated areas for plant topsoil .
only vehicles loaded to full capacity are measured for payment .
no payment will be made for material delivered in partially filled vehicles .
plant topsoil is not measured for payment when it is used for an item that includes the cost of the plant topsoil in the price bid per unit for the item .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment plant topsoil eligible for payment will be paid for at the contract unit price per cubic yard meter .
payment is full compensation for furnishing the material removing objectionable matter from the material loading and unloading stockpiling and removing from the stockpile hauling spreading preparing the ground pulverizing mixing remixing and for all maintenance .
payment will be made under item no .
num .
plant topsoil per cubic yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section num turf reinforcement matting num general description this section includes the requirements for furnishing and placing turf reinforcement matting trm over prepared areas according to the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numgrassing b. referenced documents qpl num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use materials listed on qpl num .
trm is designated types num num num num num and num and ranges in allowable hydraulic shear stress from type num to type num type num being the highest .
use a trm type equal to or higher than the trm type specified by the designer .
all trm types require permanent grass be sown concurrently with installation .
alternatively in special cases dependent upon the soils vegetativesupport quality and the growing season the designer may specify only grass and mulch or grass and a biodegradable rolled erosion control product for num psf num nmnum shear stress conditions .
allowable hydraulic shear stress ranges with vegetationnum type num type num type num type num type num type num num psf num nmnum num psf num nmnum num psf num nmnum num psf num nmnum num psf num nmnum num psf num nmnum numallowable hydraulic shear stress in the unvegetated condition num psf num nmnum .
determine the allowable vegetated and unvegetated hydraulic shear stress for the trm by using either of the independent laboratories of the texas transportation institute tti or the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep .
use the following largescale test methods astm d num num standard test method for determination of rolled erosion control product recp performance in protecting hillslopes from rainfallinduced erosion astm d num num standard test method for determination of rolled erosion control product recp performance in protecting earthen channels from stormwaterinduced erosion ensure materials meet the following requirements .
section numturf reinforcement matting num a. preformed trm use trm with a web of mechanical or meltbonded polymer nettings monofilaments or entangled fibers to form a dimensionally stable matrix .
bond the trm with one of the following polymer welding thermal fusion polymer fusion fibers placed between two highstrength biaxially oriented nets bound by parallellock stitching with polyolefin nylon or polyester threads use trm with enough strength and elongation to limit stretching and maintain its shape before during and after installation under dry or wet conditions .
provide trm with stabilized components that avoid ultraviolet degradation and are inert to chemicals normally encountered in a natural soil environment .
ensure the trm conforms to the following minimumvalue physical properties category grab tensile strength lbft knmnum uv stabilitynum allowable hydraulic shear stressnum lbftnum nmnum astm d num astm d num hec num num type num num num num num num type num num num num num num type num num num num num num type num num num num num num type num num num num num num type num num num num num num nummachine direction astm dnum numin field conditions requiring high loading andor high survivability requirements e.g .
the trm having to bear heavyequipment loading tensile strength of num lbft num knm or greater may be required numpercentage of strength of an unexposed sample retained numas calculated in accordance with the methods detailed in the fhwa hec num num document numexposure in carbon arc light in accordance with astm d num and astm g num is required .
b .
stakes or staples use num in .
by num in .
num mm by num mm wooden stakes made from sound stock cut in a triangular shape .
cut stakes num in .
to num in .
num mm to num mm long depending on soil compaction .
use metal staples with the following characteristics num gauge steel section numturf reinforcement matting num u shape legs at least num in .
num mm long crown num in .
num mm across when the construction plans specify deep anchors be used along with stakes or staples for zones of shear stress greater than num psf num nmnum as an alternative to using riprap follow the trm manufacturers guidelines for anchor selection and installation procedures and provide the engineer with the details of the recommended procedure .
use anchors listed on the qpl num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation a .
site preparation before protecting areas with trm prepare the area according to section num with the following steps num .
bring the area to final grade .
num .
plow the area .
num .
lime the area .
num .
fertilize the area .
num .
grass the area .
provide a smooth firm and stable surface free of rocks clods roots or other obstructions preventing the trm from fully contacting the soil .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
installing trm do not use trm in areas where rock crops out .
install the trm either in ditches or on slopes according to the manufacturers instructions and provide the engineer with the details of the recommended procedure .
in the absence of specific instructions from the manufacturer install the trm according to the following requirements num .
ditches to install the trm in ditches a .
cut a transverse trench num in .
wide by num in .
deep num mm wide by num mm deep at the ends of the trm .
b .
cut longitudinal num in .
num mm deep anchor slots along each side of the trm along the full length of the ditch and bury the trm edges .
the engineer will require additional or deeper anchor slots or deep anchors for large volumes of water that cause high shear stress .
section numturf reinforcement matting num c. roll out the center strip of trm starting at the lower end of the ditch .
d. roll out each adjacent strip of trm to overlap the preceding strip at least num in .
num mm .
e. overlap the ends of each trm roll num ft num m with the upslope mat on top .
stretch the trm to the bottom of the slot folding it back and staking through two layers of material .
f. stake each strip of trm at num ft nummm intervals in each anchor slot with one stake serving the overlapped edges of adjoining strips .
g. backfill and compact the slot .
h. fold the trm back over the slot and continue in the upstream direction closed anchor slot .
i .
stake the trm snugly in the longitudinal slots and at intervals a maximum of num ft num m along the ditch open anchor slot .
j. backfill and dress the longitudinal anchor slots .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement trm completed and accepted is measured for payment by the square yard meter of surface measured .
num limits overlaps and anchor slots are incidental to the work and are not measured for payment .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per square yard meter for trm completed in place and accepted .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing the trm according to this specification .
preparation of the area and grassing will be paid for according to section num .
payment will be made under item no .
num turf reinforcement matting type ___ per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numfiberglass blanket num general description this work includes furnishing and placing fiberglass blankets over previously prepared and grassed areas according to the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numgrassing section numemulsified asphalt b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals submit certification according to subsection num stating that materials conform to the requirements of this section .
num materials a. fiberglass mat or blanket fiberglass mat is a machineproduced blanket consisting of a uniform layer of continuous randomly oriented glass fiber strands .
use a mat that is at least num in num m wide and weighs the following at least num lbsyd² num gm² when used on slopes at least num lbsyd² num gm² when used in waterways b. anchoring staples use staples made of colddrawn wire no smaller than num gauge num mm in diameter formed into a u shape with num in num mm long legs and a num in num mm wide crown .
c. asphalt use asphalt emulsion for tying down the blanket that is grade ssnumh or ssnum conforming to section num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
section numfiberglass blanket num num preparation before placing the fiberglass mat complete grassing smooth the area and clear it of stones lumps roots or other material that would prevent the mat from laying snugly on the underlying soil .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
placing mat place the fiberglass mat or blanket within num hours after the area has been planted but before any rain or watering .
place the mat as follows num .
dig a num in num mm deep anchor slot across the upgrade end of the site .
num .
place the initial num in num mm of blanket in the anchor slot .
num .
backfill and solidly tamp the slot .
num .
unroll the blanket in the direction of water flow keeping the blanket in contact with the soil over the entire area .
num .
overlap adjacent strips at least num in num mm .
overlap adjoining ends at least num in num mm with the upstream section on top .
b. stapling drive staples vertically into the ground approximately num yd num m apart on each side of the blanket .
drive one row in the center alternately spaced between each side staple .
place the edge staples in the num in num mm overlap .
at the end of each mat place staples in a row spaced approximately num in num mm apart .
c. steep slopes the engineer may specify additional staples or check slots in waterways where slopes are steep or large water volumes or velocities are anticipated .
d. asphalt emulsion the contractor may apply an asphalt emulsion instead of staples to anchor the blanket .
apply the bituminous material uniformly over the mat at approximately the following rates num gal to num galyd² num l to num lm² for slopes numgal to num galyd² num l to num lm² or waterways after the emulsified asphalt has broken and becomes tacky apply a light layer of sand or pulverized soil to the treated areas if directed by the engineer .
this application prevents the treated area from sticking to anything that contacts it .
do not apply sand or soil in quantities that would damage the newly planted areas .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance maintain treated areas to the engineers satisfaction until final acceptance .
section numfiberglass blanket num num measurement the quantity of fiberglass blanket being paid for is the number of square yards meters surface measured completed and accepted .
the num in num mm side laps and the blanket in the anchor slot are not included in the measurement but are considered incidental to the work .
treated slopes and treated waterways are measured separately .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will be paid for at the contract price per square yard meter for fiberglass blanket complete in place and accepted .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing the blanket according to this specification and maintaining the blanket .
preparing the area and grassing will be paid for according to section num .
payment will be made under item no .
num fiberglass blanket slopes per square yard meter item no .
num fiberglass blanket waterways per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numorganic and synthetic material fiber blanket num general description this work includes furnishing and placing straw excelsior coconut fiber wood fiber or synthetic blankets over previously prepared and permanently grassed areas as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num definitions straw blanket a machineproduced blanket of clean weedfree consistently thick straw from agricultural crops .
the straw is evenly distributed over the entire area of the blanket .
excelsior blanket a machineproduced mat of curled wood excelsior .
eighty percent consists of num in num mm or longer fiber evenly distributed over the entire blanket .
coconut fiber blanket a machineproduced blanket of num percent coconut fiber evenly distributed over the entire blanket .
wood fiber blanket type ia machineproduced blanket manufactured with reprocessed wood fibers to a consistent thickness .
type iia hydraulically applied bonded fiber matrix which upon drying adheres to the soil in the form of a continuous num percent coverage biodegradeable erosion control blanket synthetic fiber blanketa machine produced uniform blanket of ultraviolet degradable polypropylene staple fibers reinforced with ultraviolet degradable polypropylene netting .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
section numorganic and synthetic material fiber blanket num b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals use approved materials from qpl num without further testing .
otherwise submit materials for testing before use .
num materials use blankets that meet the following requirements for placement on slopes and waterways .
for a list of organic material fiber blankets see qpl num .
a .
straw blanket use blankets at least num in num m wide and at least num in num mm thick with a minimum dry weight of num lbyd² num gm² and a stitch pattern and row spacing of no more than num in num mm .
have the top side covered with a photo degradable plastic mesh having a maximum mesh size of num by num in num mm by num mm .
the mesh will be sewn to the straw with biodegradable thread .
use this blanket on slopes only .
b. excelsior blanket use a smolderresistant blanket with the top side clearly marked .
use a blanket at least num in num m wide and num in num mm thick with a minimum dry weight of num lbyd² num gm² and a stitch pattern and row spacing of no more than num in num mm .
slopes have the top side covered with a photodegradable plastic mesh having a maximum mesh size of num by num in num by num mm .
waterways have the top and bottom sides of the blanket covered with a photodegradable plastic mesh having a maximum mesh size of num ½ x num in num x num mm sewn to the fiber with biodegradable thread or otherwise bonded as approved by the engineer .
c. coconut fiber blanket use a blanket at least num in num m wide and num in num mm thick with a minimum dry weight of num lbyd² num gm² and a stitch pattern and row spacing of no more than num in num mm .
use the blanket in waterways only .
ensure that both sides of the blanket are covered with a photodegradable plastic mesh with a maximum of num by num in num by num mm .
have the mesh sewn to the fiber with a breakdownresistant synthetic yarn .
d. wood fiber blanket type i use a machine produced blanket manufactured to a consistent thickness using reprocessed wood fibers .
use a blanket at least num in num m wide with a minimum dry weight of num lbyd² .
num gm² .
use the blanket on slopes only .
ensure that the top side of the blanket is covered with a photodegradable plastic mesh with a maximum mesh size of num by num in num by num mm securely bonded to the mat .
ensure that the fibers do not contain a growth that inhibits germination .
type ii ensure the bonded fiber matrix is composed of long strand wood fibers or cellulosicbased fibers held together by a bonding agent which upon drying becomes insoluble and nondispersible .
apply the matrix at the following rates section numorganic and synthetic material fiber blanket num application rate slope num lbsacre num mgha num num lbs.acre num mgha num num lbs .
acre num mgha num do not apply the bonded matrix on saturated soils or immediately before during or after rainfall .
allow the matrix to dry for at least num hours after installation .
after drying period ensure that the bonded fiber matrix does not inhibit the germination or growth of plants beneath and through the formed matrix blanket and that it does not form a water insensitive crust .
if bonded fiber matrix is to be used the application of straw mulch for grassing operations is not required .
e. synthetic fiber blanket use a blanket having a minimum net size of num x num inch num x num mm .
ensure the netting is securely bonded to the blanket and that the blanket conforms to the following physical properties property minimum value test method weight num ozsq .
yd num gmnum roll width num inch num m tensile strength length num lbs.in astm d num num num mm strip use synthetic fiber blanket on slopes only .
f. anchoring staples use anchoring staples made from minimum numgauge wire formed into a u shape .
the legs will be at least num in num mm long and the crown at least num in num mm wide .
use staples rigid enough to penetrate the soil without distortion .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation before placing the blanket complete the grassing operations smooth the area and remove stones lumps roots or other material that would prevent the blanket from laying snugly on the soil .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
placing blanket place blankets or mats vertically on slopes beginning at the top of the slope and extending to the bottom of the slope .
horizontal installation of the blankets is not permitted .
section numorganic and synthetic material fiber blanket num place the blanket within num hours after planting and before rain or watering .
place the blanket on slopes and waterways as follows num .
on slopes unroll the blanket with the netting on top and the fibers contacting the soil over the entire slope .
when using two or more blankets to cover an area overlay the joint num in num mm and staple through the joint .
overlap the ends of the blanket at least num in num mm with the upgrade section on top and staple through the overlap .
num .
in waterways in waterways ditches flumes and channels unroll the blanket with netting sewn on both sides and place in contact with the soil beginning at the downstream terminal and progressing upstream of the blanket according to the construction detail for permanent soil reinforcing mat .
allow a longitudinal seam only if the blankets overlap at least num in num mm and are securely stapled .
overlap ends of the blanket at least num in num mm with the upgrade section on top .
insert num in num mm of the upslope end of the first row of blankets into a num in num mm deep anchor slot .
staple the blanket in the slot bottom backfill the slot and solidly tamp .
b. stapling drive staples vertically into the ground to anchor the plastic mesh .
place the staples approximately num yd num m apart on each side of the blanket and add one row in the center alternately spaced between each side staple .
where blankets lay side to side place each staple so that half of the staple anchors mesh from each blanket .
at the beginning of a blanket space staples approximately num in num mm apart in a row .
c. steep slopes the engineer may specify additional staples or check slots in waterways where slopes are steep or large water volumes andor velocities are anticipated .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance maintain the blanket installation throughout the life of the contract .
if before final acceptance any staples become loose or lift up or if the blanket becomes loose torn or undermined then fix the problem by reshaping regrassing refertilizing or replacing damaged areas .
repairs are done without additional compensation .
num measurement straw blanket excelsior blanket coconut fiber blanket wood fiber blanket or synthetic blanket installed and accepted is measured for payment by the square yard meter .
laps and blanket in the anchor slots are not measured .
they are considered incidental to the work .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment the preliminary preparation of the areas on which the blanket is to be placed including seeding or sodding will be paid for under the appropriate contract items .
straw blanket excelsior blanket coconut fiber blanket wood fiber blanket or synthetic fiber blanket will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard meter .
payment is full compensation for the construction of the item including all laps materials equipment tools labor incidentals and maintenance .
section numorganic and synthetic material fiber blanket num payment will be made under item no .
num straw blanket slopes per square yard meter item no .
num excelsior blanket slopes per square yard meter item no .
num excelsior blanket waterways per square yard meter item no .
num coconut fiber blanket waterways per square yard meter item no .
num wood fiber blanket slopes per square yard meter item no .
num synthetic fiber blanket slopes per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numjute mesh erosion control num general description this work includes furnishing and placing jute mesh over previously prepared grassed areas according to the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num definitions jute mat a mesh matting made of jute yarn .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals provide a materials certification according to subsection num that the materials meet the specifications .
num materials ensure that materials conform with subsection num and meet the requirements below .
a. jute mat use jute mat made of unbleached undyed and looselytwisted yarn .
the unit yarn weight shall be from num to num lbyd² num to num gm² .
a num in num m width shall show between num and num warpings and a num in num mm length shall show between num and num weftings .
furnish woven mesh strips of at least num in num m. b. anchoring staples colddrawn wirenum gauge num mm or wider in diameter formed into a u shape from a wire num in num mm or longer .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
section numjute mesh erosion control num num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation before placing jute mesh complete grassing and leave the area in the following condition smooth uniform free of stones lumps or roots free of other material that prevents mesh from snugly contacting the underlying soil if erosion occurs after attaining the required surface area and contour repair the area before placing mesh .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
placing mesh after grassing place jute mesh in an area indicated on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
place mesh according to the plans and the following requirements num .
roll the mesh out in the direction of flow unless the downstream end section connects to a drainage structure or paved ditch .
in this case a. anchor the mesh in a num in num mm deep trench adjacent to the structure .
b .
roll the mesh upstream and use a junction slot to connect it to the mesh that has been rolled downstream .
num .
overlap adjacent strips by at least num in num mm .
num .
overlap adjoining ends by at least num in num mm .
num .
for all overlaps place the upstream section on top .
num .
use a type num check slot at the downstream end of the jute mesh that does not connect to a structure .
num .
apply jute mesh without stretching .
lay it evenly but loosely on the soil surface .
num .
to keep the area smooth do not allow workers to walk directly on the seedbed before or after applying mesh .
num .
bury the upchannel end of each installation in a narrow num in num mm deep trench .
num .
after burying the mesh backfill tamp and staple the trench as shown on the plans .
num .
where one roll of jute mesh ends and a second begins use a junction slot to make the connection as shown on the plans .
num .
space between the check or anchor slots is no more than num ft num m on grades of num percent or less .
on grades of more than num percent ensure that the space between the check or anchor slots is no more than num ft num m. b. stapling hold matting strips firmly in place with one row of staples as follows num .
staple along each edge .
num .
staple each row along the middle .
num .
space staples no more than num ft num m apart in each row .
num .
space the staples in the middle row alternately with those at the edges .
section numjute mesh erosion control num num .
for strips wider than num in num m space staples no more than num ft num m apart .
num .
at the ends of the covered area and at overlapping joints space staples no more than num in num mm apart .
num .
ensure that staples remain flush with the ground .
c. rolling after placing and stapling the jute mesh num .
firmly embed it in the soil by tamping or rolling .
num .
secure mesh that bridges over soil surface irregularities with extra staples to provide overall contact with the soil .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance maintain jute mesh installation during the life of the contract .
before acceptance of the project reshape regrass or refertilize if staples become loose or raised mesh becomes loose torn or undermined repair or replace jute mesh without additional compensation .
num measurement jute mesh complete in place and accepted will be measured for payment by the square yard meter surface measure .
laps will not be measured but will be included in the overall area .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment preparing areas to be meshed including seeding or sodding will be paid for under the appropriate contract items .
jute mesh will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard meter which is full compensation for constructing the item and providing materials equipment tools labor maintenance and incidentals .
payment will be made under item no .
num jute mesh per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numerosion control mats slopes num general description this work includes furnishing and placing erosion control mats blankets made of fiberglass excelsior jute mesh bituminous treated roving and straw synthetic or coconut over grass areas prepared according to section num for permanent grass .
place according to the plans or as directed by the engineer .
this specification is not applicable for waterways .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
section numerosion control mats slopes num num related references a .
standard specifications section numfiberglass blanket section numorganic and synthetic material fiber blanket section numjute mesh erosion control b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction the contractor may elect to use either section num fiberglass blanket section num organic and synthetic material fiber blanket except do not use type ii wood fiber blanket or section num jute mesh erosion control on slopes .
all of the materials construction and measurement portions of the noted sections apply to the type mat blanket selected for use .
place blankets or mats vertically on the slopes beginning at the top of the slope and extending to the bottom of the slope .
horizontal installation of the blankets or mats is not permitted .
the application of mulch is not required for permanent grassing when one of the above noted mats or blankets is placed on the previously prepared and grassed slopes with num hours .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
section numerosion control mats slopes num num measurement erosion control mats slopes are measured according to the specification sections referenced in subsection num .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment erosion control mats slopes measured as specified in section num section num or section num will be paid for at the contract unit price per square yard meter .
this payment is full compensation for constructing the mat blanket and providing materials equipment tools labor and incidentals needed to maintain mats blankets for the life of the contract or until a stand of grass has developed enough to prevent erosion .
payment will be made under item no .
num erosion control mats slopes per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numwood fiber num general description this work includes furnishing and placing wood cellulose fiber or wood pulp fiber in hydroseeding operations according to the plans and specifications and as directed by the engineer .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numgrassing b. referenced documents qpl num num submittals provide a materials certification according to subsection num that the materials meet the specifications .
num material use wood fibers that do not contain germination or growthinhibiting factors and that meet the requirements of subsection num and the following when mixed with water they disperse and suspend evenly after application their color contrasts with the soil color to assist in identifying the area to be seeded when sprayed uniformly on the soil surface they form an absorbent cover to distribute water to the underlying soil section numwood fiber num on an equilibrium airdried basis they contain a maximum of num percent water .
they maintain a ph range of num to num .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
num delivery storage and handling package wood fibers in moistureresistant bags .
plainly mark the net weight of the packaged material on each bag .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction apply enough materials to cover the ground evenly and thoroughly as directed by the engineer .
use hydraulic equipment to apply a homogenous water slurry that includes the proper amounts and kind of seed and fertilizer specified in section num .
mix the slurry during application .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement wood fiber is not measured for separate payment .
num limits general provisions num through num num payment this work will not be paid for separately but will be included in the payment for permanent grassing .
see subsection num .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numsilt filter bag num general description this specification provides the requirements for furnishing and installing a silt filter bag to trap dissolved silt when pumping accumulated water from sediment basins or other areas where water may accumulate .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials ensure that all materials meet the requirements of the following a .
fabric the silt filter bag fabric shall be a nonwoven geotextile conforming to the following properties property minimum value test method weight num ozydnum num gmnum astm d num tensile strength minimum average of num specimens num lb num n astm d num puncture resistance num lb num n astm d num initial flowrate num galminftnum num lmin mnum astm d num bursting strength num psi num kpa astm d num permitivity num secnum astm d num uv stability num of initial tensile strength num lb num n astm d num aos retained num astm d num section numsilt filter bag num b. seams all seams shall be sewn with a double needle machine using a high strength thread .
the seams shall have a minimum average widewidth strength of num lbin num nmm when tested according to astm d num .
c. opening provide a silt filter bag with an opening to accommodate a num num mm hose .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction num .
place the silt filter bag on a num stone gravel bed sloped to ensure that the filtered water will exit at the desired location .
chose the exit location to prevent erosion .
num .
extend the pump hose past the inlet opening to ensure that the siltladen water will discharge in the center of the bag .
ensure that the seal between the inlet and hose is watertight .
num .
when the filter bag is full of silt and can not readily pass any more water use a new filter bag .
if approved by the engineer bury the full filter bag on site or remove the top section of fabric and seed the exposed filtrate .
the size and number of silt filter bags will be shown on the plans or determined by the engineer .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance continue water filtration as directed by the engineer .
num measurement silt filter bags measured for payment will be the actual number of bags used for filtration complete and accepted .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment will be made under item no .
num .
silt filter bag per each num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numtriangular silt barrier num general description the work covered by this section consists of furnishing installing and removing waterpermeable triangular silt barriers used to remove suspended particles from drainage water .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related references a .
standard specifications section num b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials a .
general triangular silt barriers shall have a waterpermeable urethane foam core surrounded by a woven geotextile fabric .
the foam core shall have a triangular crosssection with a minimum height of num in num mm in the center and a minimum base length of num in num mm .
the other two crosssectional sides shall be of equal length .
the fabric shall be wrapped around the foam core and shall extend beyond both sides of the triangle at least num in num mm .
b. filter fabrics filter fabrics shall be composed of strong rotproof synthetic fibers formed into a woven fabric .
the fabric shall be free of treatment or coating that might significantly alter its physical properties after installation .
the fabric shall contain stabilizers or inhibitors to make the filaments resistant to deterioration from exposure to sunlight or heat .
the fabric shall be a pervious sheet of synthetic fibers oriented into a stable network so that the fibers retain their relative position to each other under normal handling installation and service conditions .
edges of the fabric shall be finished to prevent the outer yarn from pulling away from the fabric .
fabrics shall be free of defects or flaws that would significantly affect its physical or filtering properties .
the fabric shall not be exposed to temperatures greater than num f num ºc .
the fabric shall meet the following physical requirements tensile strength pounds newtons min .
astm d num num warp num num fill num num elongation max .
astm dnum num aos apparent opening size max .
sieve size astm dnum num num µm flow rate gal minftnum litersmin.mnum gdt num num num section numtriangular silt barrier num ultraviolet stability num astm dnum after num hours weathering in accordance with astm dnum num bursting strength psi kpa astm dnum diaphragm bursting strength tester num num num minimum roll average of five specimens .
num percent of required initial minimum tensile strength .
c. wire staples fix the triangular silt barriers to the ground with wire staples .
the staples shall be made of numgage wire with legs at least num in num mm long .
num delivery storage and handling during shipment and storage protect the silt barrier with a heavyduty covering that will protect the barrier from sunlight mud dust dirt and debris .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction install triangular silt barriers according to this specification as shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num .
excavate a trench num to num in num to num mm deep using equipment such as a trenching machine or motor grader or if equipment can not be operated on site by hand .
num .
secure the edge of the fabric into the trench with wire staples .
num .
install the fabric in the trench so that num to num in num to num mm of fabric is against the side of the trench with num to num in num to num mm of fabric across the bottom in the upstream direction .
num .
backfill the trench and compact it so that no flow can pass under the barrier .
num .
where the individual sections of triangular silt barrier meet fix the fabric to the ground with wire staples at each joint location and at each end of the barrier .
the location and quantity of triangular silt barrier to be installed will be affected by the conditions that occur during the construction of the project .
the engineer may increase decrease or eliminate the quantity of triangular silt barrier .
do not consider these variations in quantity as alterations in the details of construction or a change in the character of the work .
triangular silt barrier may be substituted for baled straw .
num quality acceptance the engineer will reject the barrier at the time of installation if it has defects rips holes flaws deterioration or damage incurred during manufacture transportation or storage .
section numtriangular silt barrier num num contractor warranty and maintenance maintain the silt barrier until the project is accepted or until the silt barrier is removed and remove and dispose of silt accumulations .
maintenance and sediment removal is covered in section num .
remove and replace triangular silt barrier sections whenever effectiveness is reduced due to deterioration .
remove triangular silt barrier unless the engineer directs that it be retained .
barriers that have been removed will remain contractor property and may be used at other locations if its condition is acceptable to the engineer .
when the silt barrier is removed dress the area to give a pleasing appearance and seed and mulch the area according to section num .
num measurement the quantity of triangular silt barrier to be paid for will be the actual number of linear feet meters of triangular silt barrier measured in place from end to end of each separate installation which has been completed and accepted .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment triangular silt barrier measured as defined above will be paid for at the contract unit price bid per linear foot meter .
payment shall be full compensation for furnishing all materials erecting and maintaining the barrier removing accumulated silt except as described in subsection num for all dressing and grassing and for removing the barrier .
payment for this item will be made as follows num of the contract price bid per linear meter will be paid when each barrier is complete in place .
num will be paid at removal or acceptance .
payment will be made under item no .
num .
triangular silt barrier per linear foot meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numfabric formed concrete rip rap num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numweed control num general description this work includes furnishing and applying a bare ground herbicide under base or paving sites only unless otherwise noted on the plans or directed by the engineer to prevent grass and other objectionable vegetation from growing .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
num related specifications general provisions num through num .
section numweed control num num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials use an herbicide with the active ingredient indaziflam num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction apply the following herbicide with num gallons per acrehectare of water under base or paving sitesonly unless otherwise noted on the plans or directed by the engineer .
indaziflam num oz.acrenummlha active follow all herbicide label recommendations when using this product .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement weed control using bare ground herbicide applied and accepted is measured by the square yard meter .
when weed control is required but not shown on the plans as a pay item the cost is included in the overall contract price .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment payment when applicable will be made under item no .
num weed control per square yard meter num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numrest room building num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numwater supply system num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numpneumatic ejector lift station num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numwaste water treatment plant num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numoutdoor furniture num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numelectrical work num general description only an approved electrical contractor may perform this work .
this specification describes electrician qualifications and does not apply to fiber optic cable or connections .
num definitions qualified electrician either an electrician with a class ii license issued by the georgia state construction industry licensing board or an electrician who has completed an approved fouryear apprenticeship training program and is classified as a journeyman electrician .
section numelectrical work num num related references a .
standard specifications section numnavigation lighting section numpermanent changeable message signs section numportable changeable message signs section numilluminated sign system section numtraffic signal installation section numwater distribution system section numhighway lighting section numlighting standards and luminaires section numelectrical wire cable and conduit section numhigh level lighting systems section numstatic scale system section numweighinmotion scale system section numrest room building section numwater supply system section numpneumatic ejector lift station section numwaste water treatment plant section numelectrical work section numwell pumps section numwater storage tanks section numwelcome station building section numinformation center building section numtruck weighing station building section numirrigation system section numtruck weigh station control signs section numtruck weigh station height checking device section numtruck weigh station length estimating device section nummobile operations office section numcheck point shelter section numtruck weigh station communication system section numvehicle maintenance building section numsewage pumping station section numbuildings section numclosed circuit television cctv b. referenced documents section numelectrical work num general provisions num through num .
num submittals general provisions num through num .
num materials general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling general provisions num through num .
num construction requirements num personnel ensure the qualified electrician carries evidence of classification and presents it to the engineer in charge of the construction .
ensure a qualified electrician is present when any of the sections referred to under subsection num are part of the contract .
ensure electrical connections are being made or wire is being pulled .
num equipment general provisions num through num .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction general provisions num through num .
num quality acceptance general provisions num through num .
num contractor warranty and maintenance general provisions num through num .
num measurement this work is not measured separately for payment .
num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment this work will not be paid for separately .
num adjustments general provisions num through num .
num section numdrilled wells num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numwell pumps num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numtravel trailer sanitary disposal station num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numwater storage tanks num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numwelcome station building num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numinformation center building num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numtruck weighing station building num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numbus pavilion num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numflag pole num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numirrigation system num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numsprinkler system num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numtruck weigh station traffic control signs num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numtruck weigh station height checking device num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numtruck weigh station length estimating device num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section nummobile operations office num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numcheck point shelter num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numtruck weigh station communications system num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numsolar application num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numwater intake structure num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numdisplay and interior furnishings num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numvehicle maintenance building num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numsewage pumping station num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numbuildings num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numbuilding equipment num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numcoarse aggregate num general description this section includes requirements for coarse aggregate .
all aggregate shall be the specified type class and grade and shall meet the requirements for the intended use .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numbituminous surface treatment b. referenced documents aashto astm t num t num t num t num t num c num e num g num section numcoarse aggregate num gdt num gdt num gdt num qpl num sop num num materials num coarse aggregate a .
requirements the contractor shall use the type group class and grade of coarse aggregate specified .
for coarse aggregate sources see qpl num .
num .
coarse aggregate types type characteristics crushed stone sound durable rock particles .
gravel sound durable rock without damaging coatings .
aircooled blast furnace slag sound durable particles with uniform density and quality or other slags that have a good service record .
dry slag shall weigh at least num lbft³ num kgm³ compacted and shall contain less than num glassy particles by weight .
do not use slag as aggregate for portland cement concrete .
synthetic aggregate sound durable expanded clay shale or other manufactured product .
num .
coarse aggregate groups a .
group i limestone dolomite marble or any combination thereof .
ensure group i aggregates meet the abrasion requirement for class a stone when used in portland cement concrete of any type or class .
b .
group ii slag gravel granitic and gneissic rocks quartzite synthetic aggregate or any combination thereof .
num .
classes aggregates are classified by physical properties that determine how they are used .
a .
do not blend aggregates that meet abrasion requirements with aggregates that do not meet requirements .
b .
class a and class b aggregate used in portland cement concrete asphaltic concrete and bituminous surface treatment shall meet these limits percent wear aashto t num b grading class a class b group i aggregates num num group ii aggregates num num section numcoarse aggregate num c. class b aggregates used in all applications other than portland cement concrete asphaltic concrete or bituminous surface treatment shall meet these limits percent wear aashto t num b grading class b group i aggregates num group ii aggregates num num .
soundness test coarse aggregate used in portland cement concrete bituminous surfaces bituminous bases aggregate bases or surface treatment with five alternations of the magnesium sulfate soundness test .
a .
use aggregate with a weight loss of less than num percent .
b .
the num percent soundness loss for a class cs concrete is waived if it has a numyear service record .
c. if the material meets all the requirements except for the num percent soundness requirement the material may be used in zones num and num see subsection num construction requirements under the following conditions num the aggregate in bituminous courses and in all types and classes of portland cement concrete construction except as stated in group i has a satisfactory fiveyear service record under similar service and exposure .
num the engineers investigation shows that it equals or exceeds the quality of approved aggregate in cases where the materials uniformity changes at the source or does not have a fiveyear service record .
num .
grades use coarse aggregate that is well graded within the limits and sizes specified in table num .
num .
detrimental substances a .
detrimental substances include shale weathered or decomposed rock friable particles or any substance that may be detrimental for the use intended .
b .
do not use any aggregate that can cause a deleterious reaction .
c. do not use aggregates that contain chrysotile defined as fibrous serpentinite as a temporary or permanent unbound surfacing for roads nor as stabilizer for soil used as subgrade base or surface course .
d. detrimental substances shall not exceed the following limits num for portland cement concrete substance max allowed mica schistmaterials defined in astm c num as phyllite or schist .
use gdt num to analyze these materials .
num materials that pass the no .
num num µm sieve .
num flat and elongated pieces with lengths more than five times the average thickness .
num sulfur content computed as sulfide sulfur for bridgetype structuresif the sulfur content exceeds num do not use the aggregate unless it passes a petrographic analysis and a weathering test equivalent to num months or more of exposure .
num other local detrimental substances .
any combination num note do not use aggregate in portland cement concrete that is capable of producing a deleterious reaction when combined with portland cement .
num for asphaltic concrete section numcoarse aggregate num substance max .
allowed mica schistmaterials defined in astm c num as phyllite or schist .
use gdt num to analyze these materials .
use this requirement for interstate construction only .
num flat or elongated particles with lengths more than five times the average thickness .
num glassy particles slag .
num other local detrimental substances .
any combination num num for bituminous surface treatment substance max .
allowed mica schistmaterials defined in astm c num as phyllite or schist .
use gdt num to analyze these materials .
num material finer than no .
num num µm sieve .
num stone num stone num stone num stone num num num num flat and elongated particles with lengths more than five times the average thickness .
num glassy particles slag .
num other local detrimental substances .
any combination num num .
ensure that gravel used in asphaltic concrete and bituminous surface treatment meets the following additional requirements consists of siliceous particles .
a minimum of num by count of the material retained on the no .
num num mm sieve has one or more fractured faces .
the fracture is for the approximate average diameter or thickness of the particle .
num .
ensure that no .
num stone used in bituminous surface treatment meets the following gradation ¾ num mm ½ num mm num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm num num num num num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method material that passes the no .
num num µm sieve aashto t num sulfur content astm e num leco method weathering astm g num petrographic analysis astm c num soundness magnesium sulfate aashto t num percent wear aashto t num section numcoarse aggregate num test method aggregate gradation aashto t num reactivity aashto t num schist or phyllite gdt num flat and elongated particles gdt num friable particles gdt num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
table num sizes of coarse aggregates size no nominal size square openings amounts finer than each laboratory sieve square openings .
by weight num mm num ½ num num ½ num ¾ ½ num no .
num no .
num no num no .
num num mm num mm nummm num mm num mm num mm num mm num mm nummm num mm num µm num num num num num num num num num num num num numno .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num ½ num num num num num num num num num num num num ½ no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num numno .
num num num num num num num num num num num num ¾num num num num num num num num num num num num ¾no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num ¾no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num ½no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num ½no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num num num num num num num num num num num num no .
num no .
num num num num num num num num num section numcoarse aggregate num num in inches except where otherwise indicated .
numbered sieves are those of the united states standard sieve series .
section numfine aggregate num general description this section includes the requirements for fine aggregate .
all aggregate shall be the specified type class and grade .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcoarse aggregate section nummiscellaneous concrete b. referenced documents aashto astm t num t num t num t num t num c num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num qpl num sop num num materials num fine aggregate for cushion a .
requirements use the type class and grade of fine aggregate specified .
num .
types use fine aggregate for cushion under granite curb or brick that is natural or manufactured sand with hard strong durable particles .
make manufactured sand from crushed gravel or stone meeting the requirements of section num .
for a list of fine aggregate sources see qpl num .
num .
grades use fine aggregate for cushion with less than num percent total silt and clay .
grade as follows section numfine aggregate num size percent by weight passing no .
num num mm sieve num passing no .
num num mm sieve num passing no .
num num µm sieve num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows sieve analysisaashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num fine aggregate for portland cement concrete of all types and for mortar a .
requirements num .
concrete and mortar use fine aggregate for concrete and mortar that consists of natural sand manufactured sand or blends of natural and manufactured sands having hard clean strong durable uncoated particles meeting the requirements of the specifications .
num .
manufactured sand use manufactured sand made exclusively from crushed stone or gravel that meets section num requirements .
manufactured sand used in concrete for construction of portland cement concrete pavement approach slabs and bridge decks shall be made from group ii aggregates as specified in subsection num.a.num .
num .
miscellaneous concrete sand manufactured from synthetic aggregate meeting the requirements of section num may be blended with natural sands or manufactured sands made from crushed stone or gravel for use in miscellaneous concrete as described in section num .
blend at least num percent natural sand or manufactured sand made from crushed stone or gravel .
num .
concrete sand concrete sand that passes the no .
num num mm sieve shall have these characteristics characteristic requirement durability index num or greater sand equivalent num or greater num .
detrimental substances keep detrimental substances within these limits substance maximum percent by weight clay lumps num maximum in total sample coal and lignite num maximum in total sample all detrimental substances any combination num maximum in total sample section numfine aggregate num note do not use fine aggregate in portland cement concrete that is capable of producing a deleterious reaction with portland cement a .
provided the material passing the no .
num num mm sieve is petrographically determined to be essentially free of detrimental substances test results for coal and lignite and other detrimental substances listed will be based upon a petrographic analysis of material retained on the no .
num num mm sieve .
b .
calculations will be based upon the weighted average for the total sample .
c. other detrimental substances include constituents such as shale weathered or decomposed rock soft or friable particles coated grains or other substances that might be considered detrimental for the use intended .
num .
organic impurities natural sands only ensure all fine aggregate is free from detrimental amounts of organic impurities .
do not use materials that have colorimetric test aashto t num results darker than the reference standard color plate .
num .
grades grade fine aggregates for portland cement concrete and mortar as follows size no .
description total percent by weight passing each sieve num num in num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num mm no .
num num µm no .
num num µm no .
num num µm num ns natural concrete sand num num num num num num num ns natural mortar sand num num num num num num num sm standard manufactured concrete sand num num num num num num num fm fine manufactured concrete sand num num num num num num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method petrographic analysis astm c num material that passes a no .
num num µm sieve aashto t num organic impurities aashto t num sieve analysis aashto t num sand equivalent gdt num reactivity aashto t num durability index gdt num clay lumps aashto t num friable particles gdt num note the percent passing the no .
num sieve num µm for size numfm will be based upon the total percent determined by aashto tnum and aashto tnum .
the percent passing the no .
num sieve num µm for sizes numns numns and numsm will be as determined by aashto tnum only .
section numfine aggregate num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numaggregates for asphaltic concrete num general description this section includes the requirements for fine and coarse aggregates used in asphaltic concrete .
num definitions fine aggregate all aggregate passing a no .
num num mm sieve coarse aggregate all aggregate retained on a no .
num num mm sieve num related references a .
standard specifications section numcoarse aggregate section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num astm c num gdt num sop num num materials num fine aggregate for asphaltic concrete a .
requirements use the appropriate type group class and grade of fine aggregate .
num .
types use fine aggregate made of sharp strong angular material meeting the required performance characteristics when combined into a mixture .
a .
ensure that the aggregate meets the following requirements does not contain any deleterious substances .
natural sand is free of organic matter roots or twigs .
aggregate is manufactured from class a or b crushed stone gravel slag or synthetic aggregate that meets the requirements of section num .
a combination of natural and manufactured sands meets the requirements in subsection num.a.num and subsection num.a.num after being combined .
b .
do not use crushed alluvial gravel as virgin aggregate in any mixture .
num .
groups fine aggregate groups include group ilimestone dolomite marble or combination thereof section numaggregates for asphaltic concrete num group iigravel slag granitic and gneissic rocks quartzite natural sand or a combination thereof num .
sand equivalent use these sand equivalent values material sand equivalent value group i at least num group ii at least num natural sand at least num blended sand natural sand at least num combined blend at least num blended natural sands or natural sand blended with stone screenings that meet the group i or group ii sand equivalent limits .
num .
mica a .
use fine aggregate with no more than num percent free mica in asphaltic concrete surface mixes .
b .
when approved by the engineer use fine aggregate with more than num percent mica if blended with natural sand or sand manufactured from group ii aggregates .
ensure the blend has no more than num percent free mica and meets all other requirements of this section section num and section num .
num .
aggregate for stone matrix asphalt manufactured screenings will be considered as fine aggregate and shall contain no more than num percent by weight coarser than a no .
num num mm sieve .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test the fine aggregate as follows test method aggregate gradation aashto t num sand equivalent gdt num mica content astm c num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num coarse aggregate for asphaltic concrete a .
requirements num .
types ensure coarse aggregate meets the following requirements class a or b crushed stone gravel slag or synthetic aggregate as in subsection num .
have uniform quality throughout without any deleterious substances .
meet the required performance characteristics when combined into a mixture .
note do not use alluvial gravel as virgin aggregate .
section numaggregates for asphaltic concrete num num .
groups coarse aggregate shall be one of either group below as specified in the composition table in subsection num.a.num group ilimestone dolomite marble or combination thereof group iigravel slag granite and gneissic rocks quartzite or combination thereof num .
aggregate for stone matrix asphalt use coarse aggregate that meets requirements of this section and section num except as follows use class a aggregate only with percent wear of each individual size not to exceed num percent based on the b grading of aashto t num use aggregate which contains no more than num percent flat and elongated pieces length greater than three times the average thickness for that portion of the blend of all aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method coarse aggregate subsection num.c d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numstabilizer aggregate num general description this section includes the requirements for stabilizer aggregate types i through iii and type iv stabilizer sand .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcoarse aggregate b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num gdt num sop num num materials num type i stabilizer a .
requirements use the appropriate type class and grade of stabilizer aggregate .
section numstabilizer aggregate num use material of uniform quality that meets the requirements of section num class a or b aggregate and sop num .
crushed concrete may be used provided it meets the requirements of section num that are applicable to group num aggregates .
ensure the material meets the following gradation sieve size passing by weight num in num mm num num in num mm num no .
num num mm num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance use the following test test method sieve analysis aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num type ii stabilizer aggregate a .
requirements use material that meets the requirements of section num class a or b aggregate and sop num .
crushed concrete may be used provided it meets the requirements of section num that are applicable to group num aggregates .
the aggregate shall not contain overburden soil or disintegrated rock have a sand equivalent value of at least num for material passing the no .
num num mm sieve meet these gradation requirements sieve size passing by weight num in num mm num num in num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num µm num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test type ii stabilizer as follows section numstabilizer aggregate num test method sieve analysis aashto t num sand equivalent gdt num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num type iii stabilizer aggregate a .
requirements use material that meets the requirements of section num class a or b aggregate and sop num .
crushed concrete may be used provided it meets the requirements of section num that are applicable to group num aggregates .
ensure the stabilizer aggregate does not contain soil or decomposed rock and that the sand equivalent value of the material passing the no .
num sieve is not less than num .
the aggregate shall meet these gradation requirements sieve size passing by weight num in num mm num num in num mm num no .
num num mm num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test type iii stabilizer as follows test method sieve analysis aashto t num percent wear aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num type iv stabilizer sand a .
requirements make type iv stabilizer sand from either natural sand manufactured sand or any combination of natural and manufactured sands .
num .
if using manufactured sand make the sand from class a or b crushed stone gravel slag or synthetic aggregate that meets section numrequirements and conforms to sop num .
num .
type iv stabilizer sand shall have a sand equivalent of at least num for material passing the no .
num num mm sieve and shall also meet these gradation requirements .
section numstabilizer aggregate num sieve size passing by weight no .
num num mm num no .
num num µm num no .
num num µm num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test type iv stabilizer as follows test method sieve analysis aashto t num sand equivalent gdt num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numabrasives for blast cleaning num general description this section includes the requirements for abrasives used in blast cleaning .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents tclpepa swd num aashto t num aggregate gradation qpl num num materials num abrasives a .
requirements num .
types a .
make the abrasives of low dusting mineral with a minimum of num percent by weight gnum steel grit added and blended homogeneously throughout the abrasive .
b .
use a mineral abrasive listed on qpl num. c. if you propose to use an alternative abrasive mixture submit it to the office of materials for approval before use .
num .
detrimental substances section numabrasives for blast cleaning num use abrasives that contain less than num ppm of any corrosive compound such as sulfate chloride or any epa characteristic compound such as lead chromium or arsenic that can be detected by the epa toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp .
num .
grades ensure that the mineral abrasive used to blend with steel grit meets the grade for the sizes in the following table size a fits coal and copper slag size b fits staurolite abrasive fractional percent by weight retained on each sieve by sieve size size no .
num num mm no .
num num µm no .
num num µm no .
num num µm no .
num num µm no .
num num µm no .
num num µm pan a num num num num num num num b num num num num num num num num .
num .
packaging a. furnish abrasives for blasting in moistureproof and mildewresistant bags .
b .
plainly show the size designation requisition number and purchase order number on the bags or on tags firmly affixed to each bag .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will take representative samples of the material sent to the department and test as follows test method aggregate gradation aashto t num toxicity characteristic leaching procedure tclp tclpepa swd num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numrip rap and curbing stone num general description this section includes the requirements for rip rap and curbing stone .
construction and material will be covered under the special provisions .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num section numrip rap and curbing stone num astm c num astm d num num materials num rip rap a .
requirements num .
aggregate quality all rip rap stone shall be made of sound durable rock pieces that meet these requirements aggregate quality maximum percent abrasion loss b grading num soundness loss num flat and slabby pieces length five times more than the average thickness num weathered andor decomposed pieces and shale num num .
gradation for stonedumped rip rap type num and type num severe drainage conditions or moderate wave action type num size by volume approx .
weight percent smaller than num ft³ num m³ num lbs num kg num num ft³ num m³ num lbs num kg num num num ft³ num m³ num lbs num kg num num between num and num of the type num rip rap shall pass a num in num mm square opening sieve .
general use normal drainage conditions type num size by volume approx .
weight percent smaller than num ft³ num m³ num lbs num kg num num ft³ num m³ num lbs num kg num num between num and num of the type num rip rap shall pass a num in num mm square opening sieve .
num .
stone for plain rip rap the stones shall be clean and free of rock dust and fines .
a .
process the stone so that the largest pieces have a volume of num ft³ num m³ or less .
b .
ten percent or less of the total rip rap weight can consist of spalls that pass a num in num mm sieve .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numrip rap and curbing stone num c. acceptance test as follows test method percent wear aashto t num petrographic analysis astm c num soundness magnesium sulfate aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num curbing stone a .
requirements num .
type a provide type a curb that meets these requirements a .
curb thickness and height as shown on the plans b .
cut in lengths of not less than num ft num m nor more than num ft num m c. tops dressed to an even smooth surface for the full length d. have straight even edges e. top sloped ¼ in num mm from back to front f. have squared ends to permit joints to be constructed not more than ½ in num mm wide for the full depth of the curb .
g. backface hand dressed at least num in num mm below that part of the back that will be exposed h. front face hand dressed to a depth of num in num mm below the indicated elevation of the base course pavement or gutter i .
have ends of circular curb sections cut along radial lines to permit joints to be constructed not more than ½ in num mm wide j. circular curb conforms accurately to the required radius k. dressed surfaces do not contain projections or depressions more than num in num mm from the plane surface of the curb num .
type b provide type b curb that meets these requirements a. dimensions shall be num in num mm thick num in num mm deep and num ft num m long unless otherwise specified .
b .
front face to have a top margin draught with a smooth face num in num mm deep c. have a smooth face note a quarry face may be considered a smooth face if free from holes and all bumps exceeding allowed tolerances are pointed level d. tops of curbs present even smooth faces for the full length e. have squared joints that when abutted with adjacent sections present no crack or joint exceeding ½ in num mm in width f. have ends of circular curb sections cut along radial lines to permit joints to be constructed not more than ½ in num mm wide g. circular curb conforms accurately to the required radius h. the allowable tolerances for type b curb dimensions are as follows section numrip rap and curbing stone num measurement item dimension tolerance thickness num ¼ in num mm ¼ in nummm depth num in num mm num in num mm top surface ¼ in num mm in num ft num m side surface ½ in num mm in num ft num m b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test for percent wear according to aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numaggregate for drainage num general description this section includes the requirements for aggregate used for drainage .
num related references a .
standard specifications section num coarse aggregate b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num gdt num num materials num coarse aggregate for underdrains a .
requirements use class a or b coarse aggregate graded for size no .
num in table num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance section numaggregate for drainage num test the aggregate as follows test method sieve analysis aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num crushed stone drainage material a .
requirements use class a or b coarse aggregate that is graded as follows sieve size percent by weight passing num in num mm num passing num in num mm num passing no .
num num mm num passing no .
num num µm num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test the crushed stone as follows test method sieve analysis aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num drainage blanket a .
requirements use class a or b coarse aggregate that is graded as follows sieve size percent by weight passing no .
num num mm num passing no .
num num µm num passing no .
num num µm num passing no .
num num µm num percent clay num section numaggregate for drainage num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test the aggregate as follows test method sieve analysis aashto t num and aashto t num percent clay num minute elutriation test gdt num d. material warranty general provisions num through num .
section numgeogrid materials num general description this specification includes requirements for geogrid used in reinforced slopes and mechanically stabilized embankment mse wall backfill .
num definitions astmamerican society for testing and materials grigeosynthetic research institute num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining walls section nummechanically stabilized embankment retaining wallcontractor design b. referenced documents aashto task force num guidelines u. s. environmental protection agency method numchemical compatibility association of textile chemists and colorists method numsoil burial american associaltion of textile chemists and colorists method numpreparation of bacterial broth astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num section numgeogrid materials num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num griggnum griggnum griggnuma or ggnumb griggnum num submittals supply certification from the manufacturer showing the physical properties of the material used and conformance with the specifications according to subsection num of the specifications .
provide evidence from the manufacturer that the geogrid has been used successfully in installations with similar environmental and project conditions .
obtain prior approval from the office of materials for all materials before use on construction .
submit product specifications and test results to the engineer for review and approval at least num days prior to intended use .
do not begin placement of geogrid until the test results have been reviewed and approved by the engineer .
num materials a .
requirements use geogrid that is free of defects punctures or flaws .
num .
geogrid for reinforced slopes use geogrid materials for reinforced slope construction that consist of the following either a biaxial or uniaxial grid of polymer tensile elements manufactured into a regular network with apertures of sufficient size to allow for soil interlock .
a commercially prepared material of high tenacity polyester high density polyethylene hdpe or polypropylene that is formed by stretching heat welding chemical welding knitting weaving or combinations of these methods .
adhere to the following additional requirements a .
long term design strengths num .
use geogrid that meets the minimum longterm design strengths tlt in the machine direction as indicated on the plans .
num .
provide to the engineer in writing the ultimate tensile strength of the grid tult to verify the calculation in obtaining the longterm design loads tlt .
these strengths are required for the project and are determined based on the aashto task force num guidelines which incorporates reduction factors to the ultimate strength of the geogrid for creep site damage and durability .
num .
calculate the longterm design strength using the following formula tlt tult x crc fc x fd where tlt longterm design loadlbft kgm section numgeogrid materials num tult geogrid ultimate tensile strengthlbft kgm crc creep reduction coefficient fc factor of safety to account for construction damage fd factor of safety to account for product durability b .
determine tult determine the tult based on wide strip tensile testing as noted in subsection num. c. determine reduction factors determine the reduction factors by the methods described in paragraphs a e as follows num creep a provide evidence from the manufacturer that the geogrid has been tested in laboratory creep tests according to the following criteria conducted for a minimum duration of num hours tests were made for a range of load levels including loads that the geogrid will be subjected to on the project .
b ensure these tests are conducted as specified in subsection num. c extrapolate the results extrapolated to a minimum design life of num years .
d determine the tension level at which the total strain of the geogrid is not expected to exceed num within the design life of num years designated tw .
e calculate the creep reduction factor as follows crc tw tult in the absence of test data use the following creep reduction factors for different polymers polymer type creep reduction coefficient polyester num polypropylene num polyamide num polyethylene num num construction damage a provide evidence from the manufacturer that the geogrid has been subjected to full scale construction damage tests using fill materials and construction procedures which are representative of those on the project .
b excavate and test the grid according to subsection num. c calculate the construction damage factor of safety using the following formula fc tult tc where fc the construction damage factor tc the ultimate strength of the excavated grid that has been subjected to construction damage tests .
tult geogrid ultimate tensile strengthlbft kgm section numgeogrid materials num d if construction damage tests have been made but with fills or construction procedures other than those represented on the project use a minimum value of fc of num .
use a lower value of fc only if substantiated with damage tests using fills and construction procedures specific to the project .
e in the absence of any construction damage tests use a fc value of num .
num product durability a provide evidence from the manufacturer that the geogrid has been subjected to a series of durability tests to examine the effects of chemical and biological exposure on the grid as described in the aashto task force num report .
b include the following in the durability studies effect on shortterm and longterm mechanical properties .
changes to the following reinforcement microstructure dimensions mass oxidation environmental stress cracking hydrolysis temperature plasticization surface micrology variations in the infrared spectrum analysis .
a full investigation into the synergetic effects of different environments particularly temperature .
subject the reinforcement to a working stress during the environmental test .
c ensure that geogrid used in the work has been subjected to the environmental conditioning as outlined by the following as a minimum u.s. environmental protection agency method num chemical compatibility .
association of textile chemists and colorists method num soil burial .
american association of textile chemists and colorists method num preparation of bacterial broth .
d investigate the full range of soil environments to which the reinforcements may be potentially exposed and shall include as a minimum ph in the range of num num num num astmdnum diesel oil astmdnum fungi and bacteria uv exposure num hrs astmdnum solvents and agents that are site specific .
in the performance of this testing the conditioning temperature is laboratory standard plus num times laboratory standard for the ph environments .
when no conditioning time period is given use num days .
extrapolate results from shortterm tests to the required design life of num years .
after the geogrid is subjected to these conditions test the geogrid according to subsection num and calculate the durability factor of safety by the following formula section numgeogrid materials num fd tult td where td the ultimate strength of the geogrid subjected to product durability tests .
the minimum allowable value of fd is num .
in the absence of any geogrid durability tests use a durability factor fd of num .
num .
pullout resistance a provide evidence from the manufacturer that the geogrid has been subjected to fullscale pullout tests using backfill materials representative of those on the project as described in the aashto task force num report .
b base pullout resistance for design on a maximum of elongation of the embedded geogrid of ¾ in num mm as measured at the leading edge of the compressive zone within the soil mass and not the ultimate pullout capacity .
c where insufficient data exists to evaluate the pullout resistance of geogrid as a function of soil type conduct pullout tests on a project specific basis until the engineering behavior of the soilreinforcement system is clearly defined .
d perform pullout using vertical stress variations sv and reinforcement element configurations simulating actual project conditions .
e perform pullout tests according to subsection num on samples with a minimum embedded length of num ft num mm .
perform the tests on samples with a minimum width of num foot num mm or a width equal to a num longitudinal grid element whichever is greater .
conduct the tests at num of num of numºc num c at constant strain rates of num in nummm per minute .
evaluate the pullout resistance by the following relation tp num tan p x sv x ls x fd where tp ultimate pullout capacity of tensile reinforcementlbft kgm sv vertical stresslb ftnum kgmnum ls total length of geogrid beyond failure planeft m p internal angle of friction of select backfill fd equivalent coefficient of direct sliding derived from pullout tests the equivalent coefficient of direct sliding fd may be related to the open area of the grid .
in the absence of product specific data tested with sitespecific granular backfill estimate the from the following preliminary analysis open area of grid direct sliding num more num num to num num num or less num section numgeogrid materials num ensure the pullout resistance tp meets the following minimum strength requirement tp fpo x tlt with a displacement less than or equal to ¾ in num mm where fpo factor of safety against pullout equal to num tlt longterm design loadlbft kgm num .
junction strength a ensure that the summation of the shear strength of the joints occurring in a num in num mm length of the grid sample is greater than the ultimate tensile strength of the element to which they are attached .
b if this condition is not met reduce the allowable reinforcement tension tw by the ratio of the shear strengths to the ultimate strength .
c determine the ultimate tensile strength according to subsection num and translate it into an ultimate strength per element by dividing the number of elements per foot meter of width .
d measure the junction strength according to subsection num .
num .
mse wall backfill stabilizing geogrid use geogrid materials for mse wall construction that meets the following requirements is a biaxial grid of polymer tensile elements manufactured into a regular network with apertures of sufficient size to allow for soil interlock .
is a commercially prepared material of copolymerized high density polyethylene hdpe that is formed by stretching heat welding chemical welding or combinations of these methods .
has the following physical properties physical properties property requirement melt index num num oz.num min .
num num gramsnum min .
density num num pcf num num gramscc tensile strength num ksf num num kpa minimum ultimate elongation num min .
brittleness num o f num o c maximum vicat softening point num of num oc minimum chemical resistance resistant to all natural occurring alkaline and acidic soil conditions biological resistance resistant to attack by bacteria and fungi has the following structural and mechanical properties section numgeogrid materials num mse wall geogridstructural and mechanical properties property requirement roll length num ft.num m roll width num ft. or num ft. num m or num m roll weight num lbnum ft roll num kgnum m roll or num lbnum ft roll num kgnum m roll grid pitch num in .
x num in .
num x nummm color black ultimate tensile strength num kipsft num knm extension ult .
tensile strength num maximum extension design load num ult .
num maximum modulus in tension num ksi num num mpa thermal stability stable over a range of num of to num of num oc to num oc note tests are based on num single rib samples extended at a constant rate of num inch num mmmin .
at a temperature of num num of num num oc .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test geogrid according to the following test property test method reinforced slopes tensile strengthwide width astm d num tensile strengthsingle rib strand gri ggnum junction strength gri ggnum tensile creep testing gri ggnuma or ggnumb geogrid pullout gri ggnum mse wall backfill stabilizing geogrid melt index astm d num density astm d num tensile strength astm d num ultimate elongation astm d num vicat softening point astm d num brittleness astm d num section numgeogrid materials num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num delivery storage and handling during shipment and storage protect the grid from mud dirt dust debris and exposure to ultraviolet light including sunlight .
section numroadway materials num general description this section includes the requirements for the materials used in roadway construction .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num num materials num roadway materials a .
requirements do not use materials containing logs stumps sod weeds or other perishable matter .
num .
classes the materials are divided into six major classes .
classes i ii and iii are further subdivided and identified by description and physical property requirements specified in the table below and in table num .
classes iv v and vi are identified by descriptive requirements .
class i ianum and ianum medium to wellgraded sand or clayey sand .
ianum finegrained silty or clayey sand usually less dense than ianum or ianum .
these soils have an excellent bearing capacity .
class ii iibnum iibnum and iibnum medium to wellgraded sandy clays sandy silts and clays with some mica .
these soils generally have low volume change properties and good densities that serve well as subgrade material .
iibnum similar to iibnum iibnum and iibnum but generally contain more mica and are more sensitive to moisture .
the bearing value of these soils is less predictable .
the soils may or may not be satisfactory for subgrade material .
analyze file data or section numroadway materials num run laboratory andor field tests for class iibnum when considering it for a subgrade material .
class iii iiicnum iiicnum iiicnum and iiicnum medium to finegraded micaceous sandy silts micaceous clayey silts chert clays and shaly clays .
undesirable characteristics are high volume change properties andor low densities .
the bearing values are unpredictable .
the department recommends testing these materials in a laboratory where possible before use .
one exception is district num where chert clay soils are prevalent .
chert clay soils iiicnum with less than num passing the no .
num num mm sieve may be considered suitable for subgrade materials .
these soils are found generally in the northwest corner of the state in dade walker catoosa whitfield murray chattooga gordon and floyd counties .
class iv highly organic soils or peat muck and other unsatisfactory soils generally found in marshy or swampy areas .
class v shaly materials that are not only finely laminated but have detrimental weathering properties and tend to disintegrate .
class vi rock or boulders that can not be readily incorporated into the embankment by layer construction and that contain insufficient material to fill the interstices when they are placed .
table num physical properties material passing no .
num num mm sieve subclass no .
num num µm sieve passing no .
num num µm sieve passing clay volume change maximum dry density lbsftnum kgmnum class i anum num num num num num num anum num num num num num num anum num num num num num num class ii bnum num num num num num bnum num num num num num bnum num num num num num bnum num num num num class iii cnum num num num num cnum num num num cnum num num num cnum num num chert clay soils in district num having less than num passing the no .
num num mm sieve may be considered suitable for subgrade material .
section numroadway materials num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method soil gradation gdt num volume change gdt num maximum density gdt num or gdt num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numrock embankment num general description this section includes the requirements for material used in rock embankment .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num astm c num num materials num rock embankment material a .
requirements num .
use unweathered quarryrun stones smaller than num ft num m in any dimension as rock embankment material .
num .
include all other quarry stone sizes in the embankment .
limit rock fines to a maximum of num percent passing a num in num mm sieve and num percent passing a no .
num num mm sieve .
num .
ensure that the material contains num percent or less shaly or flaky particles and meets abrasion requirements for a class a or b coarse aggregate .
num .
ensure that the material has num percent or less loss in the magnesium sulfate soundness test .
num .
use the material only when approved by a petrographic rock analysis .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numrock embankment num c. acceptance test as follows test method abrasion aashto t num soundness magnesium sulfate aashto t num petrographic analysis astm c num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numbackfill materials num general description this section includes the requirements for four types of material used as backfill foundation backfill types i and ii imperfect trench backfill type iii and mechanically stabilized wall backfill .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numroadway materials b. referenced documents aashto t num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num sop num num materials num foundation backfill type i a .
requirements num .
use natural or artificial mixtures of materials consisting of hard durable particles of sand or stone mixed with silt clay andor humus material for type i backfill .
num .
have the final blend of material meet the requirements of class i or ii soils in subsection num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numbackfill materials num c. acceptance test as follows test method soil gradation gdt num volume change gdt num maximum density gdt num or gdt num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num foundation backfill type ii a .
requirements num .
type use material meeting the requirements of section num class a or b aggregate and sop num .
crushed concrete may be used provided it meets the requirements of section num that are applicable to group num aggregates .
do not use backfill aggregate containing soil or decomposed rock .
num .
gradation use material meeting the following gradation requirements sieve size passing by weight num in num mm num num in num mm num no .
num num mm num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method sieve analysis aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num imperfect trench backfill type iii a .
requirements num .
type use material made from either of the following for type iii backfill a natural soil with a density of less than num lbft³ num kgm³ when tested with gdt num an artificial mixture of soil and organic material such as hay leaves or straw section numbackfill materials num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the laboratory will num .
test the soil density with gdt num .
num. review the mixture and the percentages of each material and approve a mixture suitable for the project .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num mechanically stabilized embankment backfill a .
requirements use material comprised of crushed stone natural sand or a blend of crushed stone and natural sand free of soils organic or any other deleterious substances meeting the following additional requirements num crushed stone use a material manufactured from class a or b stone that is free of soil overburden has a soundness loss of not more than num percent and conforms to the requirements of sop num .
num .
natural sand use only in conjunction with an approved noncorrodible extensible reinforcement .
use nonplastic material consisting of strong hard durable particles having a durability index of at least num .
num .
gradation sieve size passing by weight num in num mm num num in num mm num num no .
num num mm num num no num num m num num natural sand may be num num num .
chemical ensure the material meets the following chemical requirements test method requirement ph num num resistivity num ohmscm chlorides num ppm sulfates num ppm note these chemical requirements are not applicable to mse walls stabilized with an approved noncorrodible extensible reinforcement .
num .
maximum dry density use backfill material with a maximum dry density equal to or greater than the design unit weight shown on the plans .
if no maximum dry density of the backfill material is shown use a weight of num lbftnum num kgmnum .
section numbackfill materials num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test the material as follows d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numpond sand num general description this section includes the requirements for pond sand .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num aashto t num and aashto t num test method requirement percent wear aashto tnum a grading sieve analysis aashto t num material passing no .
num num m sieve aashto t num durability index gdt num maximum dry density gdt num or gdt numa gdt numb soundness magnesium sulfate aashto t num ph gdt num astm d num resistivity gdt num astm d num chlorides epa method num sulfates epa method num section numpond sand num num materials num pond sand a .
requirements make pond sand exclusively of granular crushed stone fines relatively free of silt balls that meet these requirements gradation sieve size percent passing by weight num in num mm num num in num mm num no .
num num µm num other properties maximum dry density num lbft³ num kgm³ minimum volume change num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method gradation aashto t num and aashto t num maximum dry density gdt num or gdt num volume change gdt num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numsoil base materials num general description this section includes the requirements for soil base materials including topsoil or sandclay soilcement sand for bituminous stabilization and chert .
num related references a .
standard specifications section num subgrade construction section num soilcement construction section numcoarse aggregate section numroadway materials section numsoil base materials num section numadmixtures b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num astm d num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num num materials num topsoil or sandclay a .
requirements num .
use topsoil or sandclay that is a natural or artificial mixture of clay or soil binder with sand or other aggregate .
do not use a mixture that contains substances detrimental to the material .
obtain the materials from sources approved by the engineer .
ensure that the aggregate retained on no .
num num mm sieve coarse aggregate is of hard durable particles .
num .
sand and binder use hard sharp durable siliceous particles .
use binder made from quality clay .
num .
oversize remove particles with diameters greater than num in num mm before depositing the topsoil or sandclay on the road .
remove particles with screens or grizzlies or by hand if few oversized pieces exist .
you may crush the oversized pieces and use them .
num .
topsoil use a topsoil that is a natural generally pebbly material occurring in shallow surface deposits on usually elevated areas .
num .
natural sandclay use a natural sandclay that is a mixture of natural material largely sand and clay in proper proportions occurring in deposits of considerable depth .
num .
artificial sandclay use an artificial sandclay that is largely a mixture of artificial sand and clay .
you may make the mixture by combining clay or soil binder and sand or aggregate in the proper proportions .
num .
topsoil and sandclay use topsoil and sand clay with the following properties sieve size amount passing num in num mm num by weight passing num in num mm num by weight section numsoil base materials num passing no .
num num µm liquid limit ll of num or less plasticity index pi of num or less num .
ensure that material passing the no .
num num mm sieve meets the following requirements sieve size percent passing by weight passing no .
num num mm sieve num passing no .
num num µm sieve num passing no .
num num µm sieve num clay num volume change max .
percent num maximum density lbft³ kgm³ num num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department or producer will test as follows test method soil gradation gdt num volume change gdt num maximum density gdt num or gdt num liquid limit aashto t num plastic limit and plasticity index aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num soilcement material a .
requirements num .
ensure that the material for soilcement base will a .
meet the requirements of subsection num for classes ianum ianum ianum or iibnum with the following modifications clay content num to num volume change num maximum liquid limit num maximum plasticity index num maximum maximum dry density num lbft³ num kgm³ minimum sulfates num ppm maximum ph num minimum section numsoil base materials num b .
be friable and not contain large amounts of heavy or plastic clay lumps organic material roots or other substances that would interfere with how the portland cement sets plant production or the finished surface of the base and meet the requirements of subsection num.a.num pulverization or subsection num.b.num soil .
c. produce a laboratory unconfined compressive strength of at least num psi num mpa .
to make the sample mix in a minimum of num to a maximum of num percent type i portland cement moistcure for num days and test with gdt num .
num .
analyze the soilcement design and create a job mix formula for each project where soilcement base or subbase is specified .
have the job mix formula approved by the engineer before starting base or subbase construction .
num .
you may use fly ash or slag that meets the requirements of subsection num as admixtures for poorly reacting soils when the blend of soil and fly ash or slag meets the design requirements in this subsection .
num .
ensure that subgrade material used underneath the soilcement base meets the sulfate and ph requirements of this subsection see subsection num.a.num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method soil gradation gdt num volume change gdt num maximum density gdt num or gdt num soilcement design gdt num ph gdt num sulfates astm d num liquid limit aashto t num plastic limit and plasticity index aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num sand for bituminous stabilization a .
requirements num .
submit the bituminous stabilization sand materials to the laboratory in advance .
if the laboratory approves the material use it in constructing the sand bituminous base course .
num .
use hard durable particles without organic impurities such as roots or trash that may prevent the bituminous material from bonding with the individual particles .
num .
grade the material as follows size percent passing by weight passing num in num mm sieve num passing no .
num num mm sieve num passing no .
num num µm sieve num section numsoil base materials num clay num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method soil gradation gdt num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num chert a .
requirements use materials that are natural mixtures of binder and chert rock with the following characteristics ensure that the aggregate retained on the no .
num num mm sieve coarse aggregate is a hard durable chert rock meeting requirements for class a or b coarse aggregate see subsection num .
use aggregate sizes in the final mix that can be properly placed compacted and finished .
ensure that the portion of material passing the no .
num num mm sieve is sand and clay or another satisfactory bonding material .
num .
gradation grade the material as follows size percent by weight passing num in num mm sieve num passing no .
num num mm sieve num material passing no .
num num mm sieve passing no .
num num mm sieve num passing no .
num num µm sieve num passing no .
num num µm sieve silt less clay num clay num ensure that the material passing the no .
num num µm sieve has a liquid limit ll of num or less and a plasticity index pi of num or less .
num .
stockpiles in all cases stockpile the end product so that the material will be blended before any of it is loaded and delivered to the job .
a .
make a stockpile big enough to uniformly blend the workable strata in the pit .
b .
the engineer will determine the minimum volume of the stockpile .
the engineer will also be the sole authority as to the quality and workability of the various strata occurring in the pit .
c. maintain the minimum volume of the stockpile until the suitable material in the pit has all been stockpiled or until the material remaining in the stockpile is enough to complete the operation as governed by haul limitations .
section numsoil base materials num num .
equipment for delivery use equipment that will mix the material again while the material is being loaded for delivery .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method soil gradation gdt num liquid limit aashto t num plastic limit and plastic index aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numgraded aggregate num general description this section includes the requirements for material to be used for base subbase or shoulder course material and includes graded aggregate unconsolidated limerock base and recycled concrete base .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcoarse aggregate b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num astm c num astm d num fl dot method fmnum sopnum qplnum gdt num epa method num epa method num epa polarized light microscopy method epa transmission electron microscopy method section numgraded aggregate num num materials num graded aggregate a .
requirements num .
type use graded aggregate base subbase or shoulder course material of uniform quality .
a .
obtain the graded aggregate from an approved source or deposit that will yield a satisfactory mixture meeting all requirements of this specification .
b .
use material that is crushed or processed as a part of the mining operations or mix two grades of material so that when combined in the central mix plant the mixture meets the specifications .
num .
retained on the no .
num num mm sieve ensure that the material retained on the no .
num num mm sieve is class a or b aggregate that meets the requirements of section num .
num .
passing the no .
num num mm sieve ensure that any material passing the no .
num num mm sieve is relatively free of detrimental substances such as soil overburden decomposed rock andor swelling silts .
num .
stabilized mixtures ensure that mixtures to be stabilized react satisfactorily when mixed with portland cement .
the engineer will specify the percentage of portland cement to use .
num .
gradation grade the graded aggregate base subbase or shoulder material as follows sieve size percent passing by weight group i aggregates num in num mm num num in num mm num num in num mm num no .
num num mm num note num num and num no .
num num µm num no .
num num µm num group ii aggregates num in num mm num num in num mm num num in num mm num no .
num num mm num note num and num no .
num num µm num no .
num num µm num note num group i aggregates having less than num passing the no .
num num mm sieve shall have at least num percent passing the no .
num num µm sieve .
note num for graded aggregate stabilized with portland cement num percent by weight shall pass the no .
num num mm sieve .
all other requirements remain the same .
note num material passing the no .
num num mm sieve shall have a sand equivalent of at least num for group i aggregates .
section numgraded aggregate num sieve size percent passing by weight note num material passing the no .
num num mm sieve shall have a sand equivalent of at least num for group ii aggregates .
sand equivalent values as low as num will be acceptable provided they are attributed exclusively to rock flour and the percent passing the no .
num num mm sieve does not exceed num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method material that passes a no .
num num µm sieve aashto t num gradation aashto t num sand equivalent gdt num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num unconsolidated limerock base a .
requirements num .
type use limerock base subbase or shoulder course material of uniform quality .
a .
to ensure uniform quality the department may restrict approved sources to specific mining areas mining processes at a specific mining site or both .
b .
use a limerock base that yields a mixture to meet these specifications .
c. use material that is crushed or processed as a part of the mining operations or mix two grades of material so that when combined in the central mix plant the mixture meets the specifications .
d. use limerock base subbase or shoulder material that has the following characteristics num .
gradation grade the limerock base so at least num percent by weight passes the num in num mm sieve .
a. grade the material uniformly to dust .
the fine portion passing the no .
num num mm sieve shall all be dust of fracture .
b. crush or break the limerock base if necessary to meet size requirements before placing the material on the road .
c. ensure that materials having soundness losses of num or less comply with the following gradation requirements limerock bearing ratio at least num .
deleterious substances do not allow chert or other extremely hard pieces that will not pass the num in num mm sieve .
do not allow clay sand organics or other materials in quantities that may damage bonding finishing or strength .
all material passing the no .
num num µm sieve shall be nonplastic .
carbonate content magnesium or calcium at least num .
section numgraded aggregate num gradation requirements sieve size percent passingby weight num num mm num num num mm num num num mm num no .
num num mm num no .
num num m num no .
num num m num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num recycled concrete base a .
requirements num .
sources use recycled concrete materials from sources approved by the office of materials and research and listed on qualified products list num .
the criteria for approval will be as outlined in standard operating procedure no .
num monitoring the quality of coarse and fine aggregates except the raw material will be recyclable concrete as specified herein rather than a geological deposit of aggregate .
type a .
recycled concrete base from known sources use recycled concrete derived exclusively from portland cement concrete pavement or structural concrete as a base subbase or shoulder course .
contaminants ensure the recycled concrete is free of foreign material such as wood steel reinforcement clay balls soils epoxy expansion material delivery unit washout material miscellaneous paving materials and nonconstruction materials .
test method material that passes a no .
num num µm sieve aashto t num gradation aashto t num limerock bearing ratio fl dot method fmnum petrographic analysis astm c num total carbonates insoluble residue astm d num section numgraded aggregate num b .
recycled concrete base from unknown sources use recycled concrete derived from sources of demolition materials that comply with the following requirements as a base subbase or shoulder course .
due to the condition and type of raw material used to produce this base and the resulting difficulty in producing a consistent product refer to sopnum for environmental requirements and preferred production procedures .
ensure the finished product does not exceed the regulatory limit for asbestos of num based on microscopy and the regulatory limit for lead of num ppm .
these determinations must be made prior to shipping .
ensure the california bearing ratio cbr of the finished product is not less than num .
contaminants ensure the recycled concrete is substantially free of foreign materials such as steel reinforcement wood clay balls soils epoxy expansion material and nonconstruction materials .
note substantially free in the context of this specification shall mean concentrations of the above mentioned foreign materials individually shall not exceed numpercent by weight nor shall the total cocentration of these materials exceed num percent by weight .
keep the following ancillary materials within these limits substance maximum percent by weight brick num asphaltic concrete num weathered rock num any combination of brick asphaltic concrete or weathered rock num num .
gradation ensure the finished product meets the quality and gradation requirements of subsection numfor group ii aggregates except the material finer than a num numµm sieve shall be num num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method gradation aashto t num material that passes a num numµm sieve aashto t num sand equivalent gdt num california bearing ratio cbr aashto t num petrographic analysis astm c num total lead epa method num toxicity characteristic leaching procedure epa method num asbestos epa polarized light microscopy method or epa transmission electron microscopy method section numgraded aggregate num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numsoil aggregate bases num general description this section includes the requirements for material to be used as soil aggregate base .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numgraded aggregate b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num num materials num soil aggregate a .
requirements num .
type use a soil aggregate base subbase or shoulder base course material that is of uniform quality .
num .
material retained on no .
num num mm sieve ensure the material retained on the no .
num num mm sieve meets the requirements of subsection num.a .
note you may substitute group i graded aggregate base that meets the requirements of subsection num.a for soil aggregate base .
num .
gradation ensure the soil aggregate base subbase or shoulder material meets the following gradation size percent by weight passing num in num mm sieve num passing num in num mm sieve num passing num in num mm sieve num section numsoil aggregate base num passing no .
num num mm sieve num material passing no .
num num mm sieve passing no .
num num mm sieve num passing no .
num num µm sieve num passing no .
num num µm sieve silt less clay num clay num minutes suspension on elutriation test num a .
ensure that the material passing the no .
num num mm sieve has a total volume change of num or less .
b .
ensure that the material passing the no .
num num µm sieve has a liquid limit ll of num or less and a plasticity index pi of num or less .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method gradation gdt num and gdt num volume change gdt num liquid limit aashto t num plastic limit and plasticity index aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num soil mortar for soil aggregate base a .
requirements use a soil mortar for soil aggregate bases of friable materials meeting these requirements percent passing no .
num num µm sieve num volume change num maximum dry density num lbft³ num kgm³ b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method gradation gdt num volume change gdt num section numsoil aggregate base num maximum dry density gdt num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numshoulder material num general description this section includes the requirements for material used in shoulder construction .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numroadway materials b. referenced materials general provisions num through num .
num materials num select shoulder material a .
requirements unless otherwise shown on the plans or in the special provisions use shoulder material that meets the requirements in subsection num.a.num for class i soil .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance see subsection num.c .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numcrushed aggregate subbase num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numfiber stabilizing additives num general description this section covers the general requirements for fiber stabilizing additives incorporated into asphaltic concrete mixtures .
these fibers are used to stabilize the asphalt film surrounding aggregate particles to reduce draindown of the asphalt cement use cellulose or mineral fiber stabilizer listed on qpl num fiber stabilizing additives .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto t num astm d num astm c num gdt num gdt num qpl num num materials use an approved mineral or cellulose fiber stabilizing additive currently listed in qpl num .
approved additives shall meet the requirements below .
dosage rates below are typical ranges .
use the dosage rate prescribed in the job mix formula as approved by the office of materials .
a .
requirements for all fiber types num .
use a fiber stabilizer of the type and properties appropriate to the plants metering and delivery system .
num .
when tested in a standard mixture according to gdt num the fiber stabilizing additive shall limit draindown to not more the num of the weight of the mixture .
for the purpose of evaluating these additives the following test conditions apply .
the mixture tested shall consist of a standard no .
num stone and num asphalt cement .
mixing and compaction temperatures for the test shall be as prescribed in aashto t num section num .
wet mixing time shall be num num seconds .
unseparated fibers determined by visual inspection of the mixture after the draindown test shall not exceed num of total fiber content .
section numfiber stabilizing additives num b. cellulose fibers add cellulose fibers at a dosage rate between num and num by weight of the total mix according to the approved job mix formula .
fiber properties shall be as follows ash content by astm d num num maximum nonvolatile content ph num to num moisture content num maximum c. cellulose pellets use cellulose fiber stabilizing additive in pellet form that meets the requirements of subsection num.a and subsection num.b .
use pellets that disperse sufficiently at mixing temperature to blend uniformly into the asphalt mixture .
use pellets that do not exceed num in num mm average pellet diameter .
pellets may contain binder ingredients such as asphalt cement wax or polymer .
do not use pellets if the binder ingredient exceeds num of the total weight of the pellets .
use binder that produces no measurable effect on the properties of the asphalt cement .
do not use fiber pellets which soften or clump together when stored at temperatures up to num numf num numc .
add approved palletized fiber stabilizing additive at a dosage rate between num and num by weight of the total mix according to the approved job mix formula established by the office of materials .
note if the binder material constitutes more than num of the pellet weight the dosage rate shall be based upon the net fiber content .
d. mineral fibers use mineral fibers made from virgin basalt diabase slag or other silicate rock .
add the fiber at a dosage rate prescribed in the approved job mix formula between num and num by weight of the total mix .
use approved mineral fiber from qpl num not exceeding num shot content in accordance with astm c num as tested according to gdt num e. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numasphalt cement num general description this section includes the requirements for asphalt cements prepared from crude petroleum .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents standard operating procedure sop num aashto r num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num section numasphalt cement num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto tpnum astm dnum num materials num asphalt cement a .
requirements num .
type use a material homogenous and waterfree and will not foam when heated to num f num c. ensure blend used to produce a specified performance grade meets the following requirements is uniform and homogeneous without separation uses pg num or pg num described below for the base asphalt consists of production materials not being airblown .
contains num acid including polyphosphoric acid ppa modification when approved by the office of materials .
num .
grade use the various grades of asphalt cement meeting the requirements shown in the test requirements for petroleum asphalt cements .
add styrenebutadienestyrene sbs or styrenebutadiene sb to neat asphalt to produce a binder meeting requirements for pg num when roadway adt is equal to or greater than num for stone matrix asphalt and porous european mix pem or open graded friction course ogfc mixtures .
styrene butadiene rubber sbs or crumb rubber modified pg num is an acceptable alternative to sbs or sb modified asphalt cement at contractors discretion when roadway adt is less than num provided the sbr or crumb rubber modified asphalt cement meets the tests requirements of pg num .
for sbr modified pg num or pg num to meet pg num use only sbr currently approved on qplnum georgias list of approved latex suppliers .
for crumb rubber modified pg num or pg num to meet pg num use num mesh size ambient or cryogenic ground tire rubber at minimum num of weight of total asphalt cement content .
ensure trans polyoctenamer is added at num of the weight of the crumb rubber to achieve better particle distribution .
varying percentage blends of crumb rubber and approved additives may be used at the discretion of the office of materials provided the end product meets all specified requirements of pgnum including phase angle .
ensure the end product is homogenous and shows no separation or coagulation .
percentage of ambient or cryogenic ground tire rubber is neat asphalt source dependent to meet specification requirements for pg num .
the maximum phase angle requirement is not applicable to the crumb rubber modified pg num incorporating num crumb rubber with approved additive equivalent to num of crumb rubber see notes f g i and j .
section numasphalt cement num test requirements for petroleum asphalt cements test and method test temperature original binder residue of binder after pg num note e pg num pg num pg num note d rolling thin film oven aashtot num pressure aging aashto r num flash point min .
aashto t num num f num c viscosity max .
aashto t num note a num f num c numpas numcp mass loss max .
aashto t num note b num dynamic shear gsin aashto t num num radsec num f num c num f num c num f num c num f num c num kpa num kpa dissipated energy dynamic shear gsin aashto t num num radsec num f num c num f num c num f num c num f num c num kpa creep stiffness num sec .
aashto t num note c num f num c s num num kpa m num direct tension num mmmin .
aashto tnum failure strain num f num c report multiple stress creep recovery mscr test astm dnum aashto tpnum proposed jnr num kpa notes f g i and j num c num polymer separation test astm dnum aashto tnum softening point ºf ºc h num ºf num ºc difference between top and bottom specimens notes a .
the department may waive this requirement if the supplier warrants the asphalt binder can be adequately pumped and mixed at temperatures meeting all applicable safety standards .
b .
heat loss by aashto t num may be accepted in lieu of mass loss by aashto t num. c. if the creep stiffness is below num kpa the direct tension test is not required .
if the creep stiffness is num kpa report the direct tension failure strain value .
satisfy the mvalue requirement in either case .
d. ensure the maximum phase angle measured by dsr is num degrees .
e. the maximum mass loss shall be num when used in conjunction with bituminous surface treatment section num. f. mscr requirement is applicable to the sbr crumb rubber tor or other omr approved additive combination modified pg num asphalt cement .
additionally ensure the materials meet all pg num requirements except for phase angle as detailed in subsection num.a.num .
g. ensure mscr requirement for average percent recovery at num kpa is num for laboratory or terminally blended pg num or pg num modified using sbr or gtr to meet pg num requirements .
h. polymer separation test is performed by the department for sbr and crumb rubber modified pg num .
section numasphalt cement num i. pg num or pg num modified to meet pg num using crumb rubber via dry method will be evaluated using complete analysis for compliance with pg num requirements prior to mixture production using laboratory blended materials .
pg num or pg num modified to meet pg num using crumb rubber via dry method will be evaluated for compliance with original dsr testing requirements for pg num during mixture production using abson recovery in accordance with gdt num in compliance with ac sampling frequencies established in gsp num subsection a.num .
j. pg num or pg num modified to meet pg num using crumb rubber via the dry method will be evaluated for mscr jnr num kpa requirements in accordance with gdt num on ac samples obtained for project assurance at frequencies established in gsp num subsection a.num .
thoroughly blend the composite materials at the supply facility prior to being loaded into the transport vehicle if modification is required in accordance with num .
ensure all blending procedures formulation and operations are approved by the office of materials .
num .
certification provide certified test results from an approved certified laboratory of blends for proposed pg asphalt for each specification characteristic of the asphalt cement proposed for shipment .
provide the certified results to the state materials engineer as required in standard operating procedure sop num .
the state materials engineer may interrupt production until test results are known in the event there is reason to suspect a sample will be outside specification limits .
mixture placed incorporating modified binders determined to not meet specification requirements may be subject to removal at the recommendation of the state materials engineer .
b .
materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numcutback asphalt num general description this section includes the requirements for asphalt cements that have been fluxed with petroleum distillates .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num num materials num cutback asphalt a .
requirements num .
type use an asphalt cement that is uniformly consistent and shows no separation or curbing .
num .
grade use various grades of cutback asphalts that meet the requirements shown in table num and table num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method water aashto t num flash point aashto t num t num viscosity aashto t num distillation aashto t num ductility aashto t num solubility aashto t num penetration aashto t num section numcutback asphalt num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
table numproperties of medium curing cutback asphalts requirements viscosity grade mcnum mcnum mcnum mcnum mcnum min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
water percent num num num num num flash point cleveland open cup of c num num num num num num num num num num kinematic viscosity at num of centistokes num c mpas num num num num num num num num num num distillation test distillate percentage by volume of total distillate to num of num c to num of num c num num num to num of num c num num num num num num num num to num of num c num num num num num num num num num num residue from distillation to num of num c volume percentages of sample by difference num num num num num tests on residue from distillation penetration numg num sec .
at num of num c dmm num num num num num num num num num ductility at num of num c at num cm per min .
cm num num num num num num solubility in trichloroethylene percent by weight num num num num num num table numproperties of rapid curing cutback asphalts requirements viscosity grade rcnum rcnum rcnum rcnum rcnum min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
water percent num num num num num flash point tagliabue open cup of c num num num num num num kinematic viscosity at num of num c mpas num num num num num num num num num num distillation test distillate percentage by volume of total distillate to num of num c to num of numc num num to num ofnum c num num num num to num of num c num num num num num to num of num c num num num num num residue from distillation to num of numc volume percentages of sample by difference num num num num num tests on residue from distillation penetration numg num sec .
at num of num c dmm num num num num num num num num num num ductility at num of num c at num cm per min .
cm num num num num num num solubility in trichloroethylene percent by weight num num num num num section num emulsified asphalt num general description this section includes the requirements for homogenous emulsions of asphalt water and emulsifying agents .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numasphalt cement b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num section numemulsified asphalt num num materials num emulsified asphalt a .
requirements num .
type use materials not containing lumps and not showing separation during handling or storage of up to num days .
num .
grade use the various grades of emulsified asphalts meeting or exceeding the requirements in table num .
table numrequirements for emulsified asphalt type rapid setting slow setting prime grade rsnumh min .
max .
ssnumh min .
max .
ssnum min .
max .
ntssnumhm min .
max .
eapnum min .
max .
tests on emulsion viscosity saybolt furol at num f num oc sec .
num num num num num num num num viscosity saybolt furol at num f num oc sec .
num num a settlement num days percent num num num num num b storage stability test num day percent num num num num num c demulsibility num ml numn .
caclnum percent num d cement mixing test percent num num sieve test percent num num num num num oil distillate by volume percent num num num residue by distillation percent ac num num num num num tests on residue from distillation test penetration num f num oc num gmnum sec .
dmm num num num num num num num ductility at num f num oc num cmmin .
cm num num num solubility in trichloroethylene percent num num num num num float at num f num oc sec .
num softening point c num original dsr numc gsinδ num rads kpa num section numemulsified asphalt num a the test requirement for settlement may be waived when the emulsified asphalt is used in less than five num days or the engineer may require that the settlement test be run from the time the sample is received until it is used if the elapsed time is less than five num days if there is an issue of quality .
b the numhour num day storage stability test may be used but does not predict that the num day settlement test will pass .
c ensure the demulsibility test is made within num days from date of shipment .
d ensure the cement mixing test will be applicable only if material is used in asphalt slurry seal .
e anionic emulsified asphalt is not compatible with cationic emulsions crs cms css cqs etc ..
ensure all equipment is thouroughly cleaned if cationic emulsion was previously present .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method testing emulsified asphalts aashto t num float test aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numcutback asphalt emulsion num general description this section includes the requirements for cutback asphalt emulsions .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numasphalt cement b. referenced documents aashto t num t num t num t num t num section numcutback asphalt emulsion num t num gdt num num materials num cutback emulsion a .
requirements use the various grades of cutback asphalt emulsions that meet the requirements shown in table num .
table numproperties of cutback asphalt emulsions grade requirements cbaenum cbaenum min .
max .
min .
max .
viscosity furol at num f num oc in seconds num num num num distillation residue asphalt cement percent by weight num num water content percent by weight num num num num naphtha content by difference percent by weight num num num num tests on residue from distillation penetration at num f num oc num g num seconds num num num num ductility at num f num oc num cm per min .
cm num num solubility in trichloroethylene percent by weight num num ash percent by weight num num b .
fabrication num .
prepare the cutback asphalt emulsions by compounding a suitable volatile naphtha emulsifying agent and water with asphalt cement .
num .
mechanically invert num percent of the cutback emulsions before shipping .
section numcutback asphalt emulsion num c. acceptance test as follows test method viscosity aashto t num distillation gdt num water aashto t num penetration aashto t num ductility aashto t num solubility aashto t num ash aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numcationic asphalt emulsion num general description this section includes the requirements for cationic asphalt emulsions .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num astm d num num qpl num gdt num gdt num gdt num section numcationic asphalt emulsion num num materials num cationic asphalt emulsion a .
requirements num .
use a homogenous emulsion .
after thorough mixing the emulsion can not show signs of separation within num days .
num .
use cationic emulsion grades that meet the requirements in table num metric .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method testing emulsified asphalts with the following exception frictional value aashto t num gdt num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
table numrequirements for cationic emulsified asphalt notes num .
the engineer may waive the settlement test requirement if the emulsified asphalt is used in less than num days .
however the department may still require that the settlement test be run from the time the sample is received until it is used .
num .
the numhour storage stability test may be used .
however this test does not predict whether the numday settlement test will pass .
num .
perform the demulsibility test within num days from date of shipment .
num .
the cement mixing test applies only if material is used in asphalt slurry seal .
num .
slurry seal containing cqsnumh must set sufficiently within num hours to allow traffic to resume .
num .
in the laboratory slurry seal containing cqsnumh shall not set while being mixed according to gdt num for a minimum of num seconds .
num .
use ecrnum in cold mix recycling of reclaimed pavements .
section numcationic asphalt emulsion num table numrequirements for cationic emulsified asphalt type rapid setting medium setting slow setting cationic quick set tests crsnumh crsnum cmsnum cssnumh cqsnumh note num ecrnum note num min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
min .
max .
test on emulsions vis .
saybolt furol at num ofnum c sec .
num num num num num num vis .
saybolt furol at num of num c sec .
num num num num num num storage stability test note num num hours percent num num num num num num settlement note num num days percent num num num num num num demulsibility note num num ml num dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate percent num num coating ability and water resistance coating dry aggregate good coating after spraying fair coating wet aggregate fair good coating after spraying fair particle charge test positive positive positive positive positive sieve test percent num num num num num num cement mixing test percent note num num oil distillate by volume of emulsion percent num num num num num num residue percent num num num num num num test on residue from distillation test penetration num of num c num g num sec .
dmm num num num num num num num num num num num num ductility num of num c num cmmin .
cm num num num num num num solubility in trichloroethylene per cent num num num num num num section numcationic asphalt emulsion num num latexmodified cationic asphalt emulsion a .
requirements num .
latex rubber additive lra ensure the lra is a natural latex or an unvulcanized styrenebutadine rubber in an emulsified latex form .
ensure that the lra comes from an approved source listed in the departments current qpl num for use in cationic asphalt emulsion .
num .
latexmodified cationic asphalt emulsion a .
use pgnum as the base asphalt .
b .
add the lra in the necessary proportions to result in a minimum of num polymer by weight of the asphalt residue .
c. comill the lra and asphalt cement while manufacturing the emulsified asphalt to produce a homogeneous mixture .
d. ensure the latexmodified cationic asphalt emulsion when undisturbed for num hours shows no separation of emulsion and lra and no color striations but has a uniform color throughout .
e. use a latexmodified cationic asphalt emulsion that meets the requirements in table num .
table num requirements for latexmodified cationic asphalt emulsion type rapid setting tests crsnuml tests on emulsion min max viscosity saybolt furol num f num c sec .
num num storage stability num hours percent num settlement num days percent num demulsibility num ml num dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate percent num particle charge test positive sieve test percent num residue by distillation percent num num tests on emulsion residue min max penetration num f num c numg num sec .
dmm num num ductility num f num c num cmmin .
cm num elastic recovery num f num c percent num num ring ball softening point f num solubility in toluene by centrifuge percent num polymer solids content percent num num .
aashto tnum modified to include a maximum temperature of numf numf numc numc to be held for a period of num minutes .
num .
gdtnum residue by evaporation .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numcationic asphalt emulsion num c. acceptance test as follows test method penetration of bituminous materials aashto t num ductility aashto t num softening point of bitumen aashto t num testing emulsified asphalts aashto t num viscosity aashto t num elastic recovery aashto t num polymer content of polymermodified emulsions aashto t num solubility of asphalt binders in toluene by centrifuge astm d num num residue by evaporation of latexmodified asphalt emulsions gdtnum d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numasphalt plank num general description this section includes the requirements for premolded asphalt plank .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto m num num materials num premolded asphalt plank a .
requirements use premolded asphalt plank that meets the aashto m num requirements .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numdampproofing or waterproofing material num general description this section includes the requirements for material used as a mopping coat in dampproofing or as mopping cement for a waterproof membrane system .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto m num aashto m num num materials num bituminous material for dampproofing or waterproofing a .
requirements use a bituminous material that contains a primer coat and a sealer or mopping coat .
num .
primer use a primer coat that meets the requirements of aashto m num .
num .
sealer or mopping coat use a coaltar pitch that meets the requirements of aashto m num .
num .
coaltar pitch types unless otherwise specified use pitch type i or type ii as defined below only when required by the contract .
use type i on vertical surfaces and type ii on flat surfaces .
a .
type i pitch a mopping coat for builtup roofs surfaced with slag or gravel .
if the roof has nails use the coat on inclines not exceeding num inft num mmnum mm .
if the roof does not have nails use the coat on inclines not exceeding num inft num mmnum mm .
a mopping coat for dampproofing or a plying cement for building a membrane system of waterproofing above ground level .
do not use this material if it will be exposed to temperatures over num f num c. note this type of coaltar pitch is suitable on railroad bridges tanks retaining walls culverts dams conduit etc .
b .
type ii pitch a mopping coat for dampproofing or a plying cement in building a membrane system of waterproofing below ground level .
use this material for roofs exposed to moderate temperatures during installation and service .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance see the requirements in aashto m num and m num .
section numdampproofing or waterproofing material num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures num general description this specification includes the requirements for hot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures including opengraded surface mixtures ogfc and pem stone matrix asphalt mixtures sma superpave mixtures finegraded num mm mixtures num definitions the nominal maximum sieve size is one standard sieve size larger than the first sieve to retain more than ten percent of the aggregate per aashto rnum .
mixture types in this section are identified according to nominal maximum sieve size .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numhot mix asphaltic concrete construction section numcoarse aggregate section numaggregates for asphaltic concrete section numfiber stabilizing additives section numasphalt cement section numadmixtures section numlime section nummineral filler b. referenced documents aashto rnum aashto rnum aashto tnum aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num aashto tnum aashto tnum sopnum section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures num sopnum gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num num materials a .
requirements use approved hot mix asphalt concrete mixtures that meet the following requirements num .
produce each asphalt mixture according to a department approved job mix formula and asphalt mix design see subsection num for submittal and approval of job mix formulas .
num .
ensure individual acceptance test results meet the mixture control tolerances specified in the appropriate table below subsections num through num .
num .
ensure the engineer approves all materials used to prepare and place the mixtures before incorporating them into the work .
use only the ingredients listed in the approved asphalt mix design and job mix formula .
for virgin aggregates use sources meeting the requirements of section num and are listed in qpl num or qpl num for mixes in which local sand is permitted use the approved sand source identified in the mix design .
for mixtures containing reclaimed asphalt pavement rap use only rap from the approved stockpile identified in the mix design .
use asphalt cement meeting the requirements of section num from a source listed in qpl num .
num .
obtain approved sma mix designs superpave mix designs and num mm mix designs from a mix design laboratory certified by the department .
obtain approved mix designs for types pem and ogfc mixtures from the departments office of materials and research which produces and furnishes these mix designs .
num .
ensure all sma mix designs are designed in accordance with gdtnum determining the design proportions of stone matrix asphalt mixtures .
sma mix designs shall be verified and approved by the department prior to use .
ensure that superpave and num mm mix designs are designed in accordance with sopnum control of superpave bituminous mixture designs and are approved by the department as provided therein .
ensure these mixes are designed by a laboratory and technician certified in accordance with sopnum certification of laboratories and personnel for design of sma and superpave asphalt mixtures .
num .
use only mixtures composed of the aggregate groups and blends indicated in the proposal and plans by their pay item designations defined as follows section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures num pay item designation allowable aggregate groups group i or ii group i group ii or blend i group ii only group ii only blend i either num group ii material or a blend of group i and group ii .
do not use group i material for more than num by weight of the total aggregate nor more than num by weight of the coarse aggregate fraction .
num .
for patching or leveling use group i group ii or blend i .
mix types for patching and leveling are specified in subsection num.b .
num .
include lime hydrated lime from an approved source and meeting the requirements of section num in all paving courses except as otherwise provided in the contract .
for a list of approved sources of lime see qpl num. a .
add lime to each mixture at the rate prescribed in the approved mix design .
b .
ensure mix designs using only virgin aggregate include lime at a minimum rate of num of the total dry aggregate weight .
ensure mix designs using rap include lime at a minimum rate equal to num of the virgin aggregate fraction plus num of the aggregate in the rap fraction .
c. add more lime or add lime plus an approved heatstable antistripping additive that meets the requirements of section num if necessary to meet requirements for mixture properties and pursuant to an approved mix design .
however the department will not make additional payment for these materials .
for a list of sources of heat stable antistripping additives see qpl num. d. where specifically allowed in the contract on larp airport and parking lot projects an approved heatstable antistripping additive that meets the requirements of section num may be substituted for hydrated lime .
ensure the mix gradation is adjusted to replace the lime with an equivalent volume of fines passing the num mm sieve .
add heatstable antistripping additive at a minimum rate of num percent of the asphalt cement portion .
num .
use performance grade pg num or pg num asphalt cement in all mix designs and mixtures except as follows a .
the state bituminous construction engineer will determine the performance grade to be used based on table num binders selection guideline for reclaimed asphalt pavement rap mixtures aashto mnum and laboratory testing results as required in section num.b for mixtures containing num equivalent binder replacement for rapras mixtures .
b .
use only grade pg num excluding shoulder construction in the following mixes all sma num mm pem num mm and num mm ogfc num mm superpave on projects with adt greater than num and in all mixtures for which polymermodified asphalt is specified in the pay item .
num .
use of local sand is restricted as follows a .
do not place mixtures containing local sand on the traveled way of the mainline or ramps of the interstate system .
mixtures with local sand may be used for shoulder construction on these facilities .
b .
ensure local sand will not constitute more than num of the total aggregate weight of any mix design or production mix .
c. subject to the above limits num mm num mm and num mm superpave mix designs and num mm mix designs containing local sand may be used on projects with a current adt not exceeding num. d. num mm superpave mix designs containing not more than num local sand may be used on all facilities except the main line and ramps of the interstate system .
e. obtain local sand for use in asphalt mixtures from a source approved by the department .
f. approval of local sand sources the department will sample test and approve sources of local sand .
local sand shall not contain more than num clay by weight and shall be free of foreign substances roots twigs and other organic matter .
ensure sand is free of clay lumps as determined by aashto t num and shall have a sand equivalent value exceeding num as determined by gdt num .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures num b .
fabrication num .
design procedures for all superpave and num mm mixes ensure conformance with the superpave system for volumetric design aashto t num and aashto rnum as adapted in sopnum .
ensure superpave mixes are designed at a design gyration number ndes of num gyrations and initial gyration number nini of num gyrations .
for num mm mixes ndes shall be num gyrations and nini shall be num gyrations .
opengraded mix designs will be designed in accordance with gdt num by the department .
in all cases the procedure for measuring maximum specific gravity gmm shall be aashto t num .
in addition to gradation and volumetric analysis mix designs shall include the following performance tests as applicable .
num .
performance test a. permeability test superpave and stone matrix mix designs shall include testing according to gdt num measurement of water permeability of compacted asphalt paving mixtures .
specimen air voids for this test shall be num num .
the average permeability of three specimens may not exceed num ft per day num numcm per sec .
b. moisture susceptibility test mix designs of all types except opengraded surface mixes shall include testing for moisture susceptibility according to gdt num .
specimen air voids for this test shall be num num for all mixes excluding stone matrix mixes .
specimen air voids for this test shall be num num for stone matrix mixes .
the minimum tensile splitting ratio is num except that a tensile splitting ratio of no less than num may be acceptable if all individual strength values exceed num psi num kpa .
average splitting strength of the three conditioned and three controlled samples shall be not less than num psi num kpa for either group .
retention of coating as determined by gdt num shall be not less than num. c. rutting susceptibility test mix designs of all types except opengraded surface mixes ogfc and pem and mixtures designed exclusively for trench widening shall include testing according to gdt num or aashto t num .
design limits for this test are as follows specimen air voids for this test shall be num num for all mix types .
testing temperature shall be numc numf for all mix types except num mm and num mm superpave mixes which shall be tested at numc numf .
maximum deformation shall be num mm for all mixes except num mm mix num mm type i and num mm type ii superpave mixes .
maximum deformation for the num mm type ii superpave mix shall be num mm at numc numf and num mm at numc numf for the num mm and num mm type i superpave mix .
d. fatigue testing the department may verify densegraded mix designs by fatigue testing according to aashto t num or other procedure approved by the department .
e. hamburg wheeltracking test the department may verify warm mix asphalt densegraded mix designs or mix designs incorporating polyphosphoric acid ppa modified binders by hamburg wheeltracking testing according to aashto t num .
c. acceptance see subsection num and section num .
ensure individual test results meet the mixture control tolerances listed in subsections num num num num or num whichever applies with the following exception .
field verification results for rutting susceptibility tests performed on laboratory fabricated andor roadway cores obtained from asphalt plant produced mixtures shall meet specified requirements with a tolerance of num mm .
d. materials warranty see general provisions num through num .
num opengraded surface mixtures a .
requirements produce the mixture according to an approved mix design and job mix formula .
ensure opengraded surface mixtures meet the following mixture control tolerances and mix design criteria section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures num sieve size mixture control tolerance design gradation limits passing num mm ogfc num mm ogfc num mm pem num in num mm sieve num num num num in num mm sieve num num num num num in num mm sieve num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num num num no .
num num µm sieve num num num num range for ac num num num num class of stone section num a only a only a only draindown aashto tnum num num num mixture control tolerance is not applicable to this sieve for this mix .
num .
in num mm and num mm ogfc and num mm pem mixes use only pg num asphalt cement specified in section num .
num .
all ogfc and pem mixes shall include a stabilizing fiber of the type cellulose or mineral specified in the mix design and meeting the requirements of section num .
the dosage rate shall be as specified in the mix design and shall be sufficient to prevent draindown exceeding the above tolerance .
b .
fabrication see section num .
num stone matrix asphalt mixtures a .
requirements produce the mixture according to an approved mix design and job mix formula .
ensure that stone matrix asphalt mixtures meet the following mixture control tolerances and mix design criteria sieve size mixture control tolerance design gradation limits percent passing num mm sma num mm sma num mm sma num in num mm sieve num num num in num mm sieve num num num num num in num mm sieve num num num num num in num mm sieve num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num num num no .
num num µm sieve num num num num no .
num num µm sieve num num num num range for ac num num num num section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures num note num note num design optimum air voids num num num num num num aggregate voids filled with ac vfa num num num tensile splitting ratio after freezethaw cycle gdtnum num num num draindown aashto tnum num num num mixture control tolerance is not applicable to this sieve for this mix .
mixture control tolerance shall be num for this sieve for num mm sma mixes placed at spread rates greater than num lbydnum .
for num mm sma mixes placed at spread rates of num lbydnum or less num passing is required on this sieve .
note num range for ac is original optimum ac ooac at num gyrations gyratory compactor or num blows marshall compactor prior to corrected optimum ac coac calculation detailed in gdt num appendix a note num quality acceptance test results for ac content that deviate num from the approved job mix formula jmf consistently over three lots may subject the mix to a revised ac content on project jmf at the discretion of the office of materials and research based on statiscal trend .
num .
ensure sma mixtures are compacted at num gyrations with the superpave gyratory compactor or num blows with the marshall compactor .
num ensure sma mixtures contain mineral filler and fiber stabilizing additives and meet the following requirements a. asphalt cement grade pgnum specified in section num is required in all sma mixtures .
b .
aggregates for sma meet the requirements of subsection num.a.num .
c. use the approved mineral filler specified in the mix design and meeting the requirements of section num approved sources of mineral filler are listed in qpl num .
use the approved fiber stabilizing additive of the type cellulose or mineral specified in the mix design and meeting the requirements of section num .
approved sources of fiber stabilizing additive are listed in qpl num .
the dosage rate will be as specified in the mix design and sufficient to prevent draindown exceeding the above tolerance .
b .
fabrication see section num .
num superpave asphalt concrete mixtures a .
requirements for superpave mixtures except parking lot mixtures produce the mixture according to an approved mix design and job mix formula .
ensure superpave asphalt concrete mixtures meet the following mixture control tolerances and mix design limits num .
gradation limits for superpave mixtures are as follows section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures num sieve size mixture control tolerance design gradation limits percent passing num mm superpave type i num mm superpave type ii num mm superpave note num num mm superpave num mm superpave num½ in num mm sieve num num in num mm num num num num num in num mm sieve num num num num num num num in num mm sieve num num num num num num num in num mm sieve num num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num num num num num no .
num num µm sieve num num num num num num range for ac note num num note num num num num num num mixture control tolerance is not applicable to this sieve for this mix .
mixture control tolerance shall be num for this sieve for num mm superpave .
mixture control tolerance shall be num for this sieve for num mm superpave .
mixture control tolerance shall be num for this sieve for num mm and num mm mixes .
note num use pg num in num mm superpave excluding shoulder construction on all projects with adt greater than num as detailed in the contract pay item .
note num quality acceptance test results for ac content that deviating num from the approved job mix formula jmf consistently over three lots may subject the mix to a revised ac content on the project jmf at the discretion of the office of materials and research based on statistical trend .
note num range for ac is original optimum ac ooac at num gyrations prior to the corrected optimum ac coac calculation detailed in sop num appendix d. num .
volumetric limits are as follows section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures num design parameter mix type limits of max .
specific gravity gmm at design gyrations ndes all num gmm at the initial number of gyrations ni all num maximum voids filled with asphalt vfa at ndes num mm type i min .
num max .
num num type ii and num mm min .
num max .
num num mm min .
num max num num mm min .
num max num fines to effective asphalt binder ratio fpbe num mm type i num to num all other types num to num minimum film thickness microns all num minimum voids in mineral aggregate vma note vma shall be calculated using the effective specific gravity of the aggregate gse .
see sopnumsp .
num mm num num mm num num mm num num type i num num type ii num superpave mixtures approved prior to january num num may be adjusted to meet minimum film thickness requirement by mixture adjustments made by the state bituminous construction engineer .
b .
requirements for superpave parking lot mixes not for standard highwaystreet paving num .
surface layers for parking facilities sieve size mixture control tolerance design gradation limits percent passing num mm mix num mm superpave type i num mm superpave type ii num in num mm sieve num num in num mm sieve num num num num in num mm sieve num num num num num in num mm sieve num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num num num no .
num num µm sieve num num no .
num num µm sieve num num num num range for total ac num num num num num num num mixture control tolerance is not applicable to this sieve for this mix .
section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures num mixture control tolerance shall be num for this sieve for num mm and num mm mixes .
num .
subsurface layers for parking facilities mixture control tolerance is not applicable to this sieve for this mix .
mixture control tolerance shall be num for this sieve for num mm superpave mixes .
mixture control tolerance shall be num for this sieve for num mm superpave mixes .
mixture control tolerance shall be num for this sieve for num mm and num mm superpave mixes .
num .
volumetric limits for parking facilities are as follows design parameter mix type limits of max .
specific gravity gmm at design gyrations ndes all num gmm at the initial number of gyrations ni all num maximum voids filled with asphalt vfa at ndes num mm type i min .
num max .
num num type ii and num mm min .
num max .
num num and num mm min .
num max num fines to effective asphalt binder ration fpbe num mm type i num to num all other types num to num minimum film thickness microns num mm num all other types num minimum voids in mineral aggregate vma note vma shall be calculated using the effective specific gravity of the aggregate gse .
see sopnum num mm num num mm num num mm num num mm types i ii num mixtures approved prior january num num may be adjusted to meet minimum film thickness requirement by mixture adjustments made by the state bituminous construction engineer .
sieve size mixture control tolerance design gradation limits percent passing num mm superpave num mm superpave num mm superpave num num in num mm sieve num num num num num in num mm sieve num num num num num in num mm sieve num num num num num in num mm sieve num num num no .
num num mm sieve num num num num no .
num num µm sieve num num num num range for total ac num num num num num num num section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures num c. fabrication see section num .
num finegraded mixtures a .
requirements produce the mixture according to an approved mix design and job mix formula .
ensure finegraded mixtures meet the following mixture control tolerances and design limits asphaltic concrete num mm mix sieve size mixture control tolerance design gradation limits passing num in num mm sieve num num num in num mm sieve num num no .
num num mm sieve num num no .
num num mm sieve num num no .
num num m sieve num num no .
num num m sieve num num range for ac num num num design optimum air voids num num aggregate voids filled with ac num num minimum film thickness microns num mixture control tolerance is not applicable to this sieve for this mix .
num mm mixtures approved prior january num num may be adjusted to meet minimum film thickness requirement by mixture adjustments made by the state bituminous construction engineer .
b .
fabrication see section num .
c. acceptance see subsection num and section num .
ensure individual test results meet the mixture control tolerances listed in subsections num num num num num whichever applies .
d. materials warranty see general provisions num through num .
section numportland cement num general description this section includes the requirements for portland cement including portland blastfurnace slag cement and portland pozzolan cement .
section numportland cement num num related references a .
standard specifications section numadmixtures b. referenced documents aashto m num aashto m num qpl num num materials num portland cement a .
requirements use only portland cements that are listed in qpl num .
num .
type use portland cement that meets the requirements in aashto m num .
portland cement types include use high early strength concrete remaining portland cement concrete portland cement types i or iii types i or ii portland cement a hydraulic cement produced by pulverizing clinker consisting essentially of hydraulic crystalline calcium silicates and usually containing one or more of the following water calcium sulfate up to num limestone and processing additions .
num .
ensure that the portland cement concrete meets the low alkali and the false set requirements of aashto m num .
num .
do not use cement that is damaged partially set lumpy or caked .
num .
mixing and storing do not mix or store different brands or types of cement in the same bin .
do not mix or store the same brand of cement from different mills in the same bin .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance see the requirements in aashto m num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num portland blastfurnace slag cement a .
requirements use portland blastfurnace slag cement in cement stabilization that meets the requirements of aashto m num type is .
section numportland cement num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance see requirements of aashto m num type is .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num portlandpozzolan cement a .
requirements use portlandpozzolan cement that meets the requirements of aashto m num type ip with the following modifications num .
limit the fly ash content to a maximum of num percent by weight .
num .
limit the pozzolan to fly ash that meets the requirements of subsection num .
num .
if grinding fly ash with portland cement clinker to produce portlandpozzolan cement do the following a .
exclude the fineness and the lossonignition requirements of subsection num. b .
ensure that the final blend of portlandpozzolan cement meets aashto m num type ip requirements .
num .
wherever the standard specifications allow or specify portland cement that meets the requirements of subsection num you may substitute portlandpozzolan cement that meets the requirements of this subsection .
num .
if the substitute cement results in a higher cement factor than required for type i cement the cost of the additional cement will be borne by the contractor .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance see the requirements of aashto m num type ip .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numadmixtures num general description this section includes the requirements for the following portland cement concrete and bituminous concrete admixtures airentraining admixtures chemical admixtures fly ash raw or calcined natural pozzolan slag and microsilica heatstable antistripping additive silicone fluid section numadmixtures num num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures section numhot mix asphaltic concrete mixtures section numportland cement b. referenced documents aashto m num aashto m num aashto m num aashto m num aashto m num federal specification vvdnumb gdt num gdt num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num num materials use only admixtures that are listed on the specific georgia department of transportation qualified products list qpl .
for a list of heat stable antistripping additives sources see qpl num .
num airentraining admixtures a .
requirements num .
use airentraining admixtures listed in qpl num .
num .
use airentraining admixture materials meeting aashto m num performance and uniformity requirements .
num .
test compression and flexure strengths at num and num days .
num .
use airentraining admixtures evaluated by the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep test facility or other approved test facility .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance see requirements of aashto m num .
d. material warranty general provisions num through num .
section numadmixtures num num chemical admixtures for concrete a .
requirements num .
use chemical admixtures listed in qpl num .
num .
use chemical admixture materials meeting aashto m num physical requirements and uniformity and equivalence requirements for types a b c d e f or g unless otherwise specified .
a .
waive the length change requirements .
b .
ensure that the admixtures contain no more than num percent chloride calculated as calcium chloride .
c. ensure that the air content does not exceed num percent when prepared in a standard batch without an added air entraining agent .
num .
use chemical admixtures evaluated by the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep test facility or other approved test facility .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance see the requirements of aashto m num for chemical admixtures .
d. material warranty general provisions num through num .
num fly ash raw or calcined natural pozzolan slag and microsilica a .
requirements num .
fly ash fly ash is finely divided residue from the combustion of ground or powdered coal that is transported from the boiler by flue gases .
use fly ash that meets the requirements of aashto m num class f or c and that are listed in qpl num .
num .
raw or calcined natural pozzolan this is a siliceous or siliceous and aluminous material .
use pozzolan that meets the requirements of aashto m num class n and that are listed in qpl num .
num .
granulated iron blastfurnace slag this is a glassy granular material formed when molten blastfurnace slag is rapidly chilled and then finely ground .
use slag that meets the requirements of aashto m num grade num or num and that are listed in qpl num .
num .
microsilica silica fume this is an amorphous material with high silica content and purity made as a byproduct of high purity quartz that is reduced with other ingredients in an electricarc furnace .
use microsilica that meets the requirements of aashto m num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the engineer will select the laboratory tests for acceptance and project control .
section numadmixtures num d. material warranty general provisions num through num .
num heatstable antistripping additive a .
requirements num .
use heatstable antistripping additives listed in qpl num .
num .
submit samples of the proposed heatstable antistripping additive asphalt cement and aggregates to the laboratory for approval before use .
num .
ensure that materials meet the requirements of section num for retained coating and tensile strength ratio when tested with gdt num and gdt num respectively .
num .
do not use an additive that contains harmful ingredients or adversely alters the specified characteristics of the bituminous material when added in the recommended proportions .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method retained coating gdt num tensile strength ratio gdt num d. material warranty general provisions num through num .
num silicone fluid a .
requirements use silicone fluid that meets federal specification vvdnumb viscosity grade num .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance see federal specification vvdnumb .
d. material warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numcuring agents num general description this section includes the requirements for the following curing agents burlap or cotton fabric sheet materials membrane curing compound num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto m num aashto m num qpl num num materials num burlap or cotton fabric a .
requirements num .
use burlap or cotton fabric meeting these requirements burlap that is num to num oz.yd² num to num gm² or two layers of num or num ozyd² num or num gm² cotton fabric that is white loosely woven and not less than num ozyd² num gm² strips of burlap or cotton fabric that are between num and num ft num and num m wide and num ft num m longer than the width of the slab to be covered num .
use burlap and cotton fabrics that do not contain starch or other material that could stain the concrete .
if the fabric is new soak and dry it before use .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num sheet materials a .
requirements num .
use sheet material for curing concrete that meets aashto m num requirements .
num .
use waterproof paper that is white .
num .
use polyethylene film that is white opaque .
section numcuring agents num num .
for curing bridge decks use sheet material that is either a white burlap polyethylene sheet or a white copolymer material coated over a layer of absorbent nonwoven synthetic fabric .
use sheet material that meets specification reflection and moisture retention requirements .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance see the requirements under aashto m num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num membrane curing compound a .
requirements num .
use membrane curing compounds listed in qpl num num .
use liquid membraneforming compounds meeting aashto m num requirements .
num .
use membrane curing compounds evaluated by the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep test facility or other approved test facility .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance see the requirements under aashto m num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numjoint fillers and sealers num general description this section includes the requirements for joint fillers and sealers as follows joint sealers joint fillers hotpoured preformed elastic silicone sealant and bond breaker for bridge decks neoprene ethylene propylene diene monomer for inductive loops polyurethane sealant preformed preformed foam waterblown urethane elastomeric polymer type joint compound section numjoint fillers and sealers num num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numsealing roadway and bridge joints and cracks b. referenced documents aashto astm m num m num m num t num c num c num c num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num gdt num qpl num qpl num qpl num num materials num preformed joint filler a .
requirements general provisions num through num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance use preformed joint filler that meets either aashto m num or aashto m num requirements .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
ensure that cellulose fiber types meet the requirements of aashto m num except for the asphalt content and contain minimums of num percent zinc borate as a preservative and num percent waterproofing wax .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num hotpoured joint sealers a .
requirements num .
type section numjoint fillers and sealers num use a hotpoured joint sealer that is a mixture of materials compatible with asphalt with or without rubber .
the sealer shall have the following characteristics forms a resilient and adhesive compound effectively seals joints and cracks in pavements against moisture during repeated cycles of expansion and contraction does not flow from the joint and can not be picked up by vehicle tires at an ambient temperature of num f num c num .
compound characteristics use a compound that has a uniform pouring consistency capable of completely filling joints without forming large air holes or discontinuities .
a .
do not pour if the compound temperature is above num f num c. b .
follow the pouring temperature and safe heating temperature set by the compound manufacturer for each lot or batch .
c. be sure the temperatures are shown on the label .
the safe heating temperature is defined as the highest temperature to which the sealing compound can be heated and still meet all the requirements .
num .
physical characteristics use a hotpoured joint sealer that has the following properties property required measurement penetration less than num in num mm .
flow less than num in num mm .
resilience minimum recovery of num .
bond to concrete num f num f num c num c the compound does not separate or have gaps within or between the compound and the blocks .
compatibility with asphaltic concrete adhesion does not fail .
oily exudate does not form at the interface between the sealing compound and the asphaltic concrete .
the sealant does not soften or have deleterious effects on the asphaltic concrete .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will test as follows test method hotpoured joint sealers gdt num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num elastomeric polymer type joint compound a .
requirements num .
type section numjoint fillers and sealers num furnish elastomeric polymertype joint sealing compound in two componentsa base compound and a curing agent .
a .
base compound a gasolineresistant elastometric polymer modified with plasticizers activators and inert fillers .
b. curing agent a blend of accelerators and extenders .
num .
compound characteristics use a sealing compound that can be mixed to a homogenous consistency at the site and applied by an approved mechanical device or poured and troweled manually .
a .
if a compound is to be machinemixed and applied it shall have a minimum work life of num minutes at num ºf num ºf num ºc num ºc .
b .
if a compound is to be manually mixed and applied it shall have a minimum work life of num minutes at num ºf num ºf num ºc num ºc .
c. use a mixture that completely fills the joints without forming air holes or discontinuities when mixed according to the manufacturers instructions .
d. use a compound that is selfleveling when placed in the joint but that does not show appreciable flow or movement along a superelevated joint .
e. use material that does not soften or show any apparent defect after being immersed in water for num days .
f. use a material that forms a tackfree rubberlike compound that seals pavement or bridge joints within num hours of application .
num .
physical properties use material that has the following physical properties property required measurement cone penetration between num in num mm and num in num mm flow no appreciable flow resilience air and ovencured samples minimum recovery of num bond no cracks separation or other opening over num num in .
num mm deep in the sealer or between the sealer and block solubility not to exceed num percent no apparent defects that affect the material as a sealant b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will test as follows test method elastomeric joint compound gdt num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num preformed elastic joint sealer a .
requirements this section also covers adhesives and lubricants for the sealers .
num .
type section numjoint fillers and sealers num use a preformed elastic joint sealer that is a vulcanized elastomeric compound using polymerized chloroprene as the only basic elastomer .
the joint sealers include both open and closed cell sealers .
num .
certification a .
submit certified test results of each lot of the joint sealer materials furnished to each project either from your tests or from the manufacturer of the preformed joint sealer .
b .
the department will conduct the joint sealer recovery test on random samples from each shipment received or each manufacturers lot .
c. submit certified test results of each lot of the lubricant furnished to each project either from your tests or from the manufacturer of the joint sealer lubricantadhesive or adhesive .
num .
preformed open cell joint sealer a. bridge and roadway seals use sealer that meets the following physical requirements b. bridge seals use a sealer that meets the following compressiondeflection requirements nominal size in mm movement capability in mm min .
force num lb .
per linear inch num n per num mm width in mm min .
forcenumlb per linear inch num n per num mm max .
forcenum lb per linear inch num n per num mm width in mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num movement capability is the movement allowed within the widths of the specified maximum and minimum forces .
the design maximum and minimum joint width is based on these widths .
the installation width depends on the temperature at the time of installation .
physical property requirement tensile strength min .
num psi num mpa elongation at break min .
num hardness type a durometer num oven aging num hours num f num c tensile strength change elongation change hardness change max .
num max .
num num points oil swell astm oil no .
num volume change num hrs .
num f num c max .
num ozone resistance num strain num ppm in air num hrs .
num f num c wipe with solvent to remove surface contaminants no cracks joint sealer recovery under num deflection recovery after num hrs .
num ºf num ºc recovery after num hrs .
num ºf num ºc recovery after num hrs .
num ºf num ºc min .
num min .
num min .
num section numjoint fillers and sealers num c. roadway seals use a compressiondeflection sealer that accommodates the movement specified on the plans with a minimum force of num lbs per linear inch num n per linear num mm not exceeding num lbs per linear inch num n per linear num mm exerted on the joint faces .
num .
preformed closed cell joint sealer for roadways a .
use a preclosed cell polychloroprene joint sealer that meets the following physical requirements physical property requirement dimensions meet plan requirements for movement and depth surfaces smooth and clean compressiondeflection allow movement specified on the plans with a minimum force of num lbs per linear inch num n per linear num mm exerted on the joint faces and maximum deflection equal to num of the original width joint sealer recovery under num deflection num recovery compressed to half original thickness for num hours num ºf num ºc then compression removed for num hours at room temperature num recovery after num hours at num ºf num ºc water absorption maximum num weight increase ozone resistance no cracking after exposure of sample at num strain to num ppm ozone for num hours at num ºf num ºc num .
joint sealer lubricantsadhesives a. lubricantadhesive for preformed roadway seals use a lubricantadhesive with the joint sealer that is a one component polychloroprene compound containing only soluble phenolic resins blended with antioxidants and acid acceptors in an aromatic hydrocarbon solvent mixture .
the lubricant shall have the following physical properties physical property requirement average net weight per gallon liter min .
num lbs num grams solid content num by weight film strength tensile strength min .
num psi num mpa elongation before breaking min .
num b. adhesive for preformed bridge or roadway seals use an adhesive that is a onepart moisture curing polyurethane and hydrocarbon solvent mixture with the following physical properties physical property requirement average net weight per gallon liter min .
num lbs num grams solids content min .
num by weight film strength astm d num min .
num psi num mpa elongation before breaking min .
num viscosity perform suitably with the installation equipment remain fluid from num to num ºf num to num ºc num .
product delivery deliver each lot of the lubricantadhesive in containers plainly marked with the manufacturers name or trademark lot number and date of manufacture .
section numjoint fillers and sealers num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows num .
preformed open cell joint sealer test method tensile strength and elongation astm d num hardness astm d num ovenaging astm d num oil swell astm d num ozone resistance astm d num joint sealer recovery gdt num compressiondeflection gdt num num .
preformed closed cell joint seals for roadway test method compressiondeflection gdt num joint sealer recovery run the hot recovery at num ºf num ºc instead of num ºf num ºc .
allow seals to recover for num hours at room temperature before measuring .
gdt num water absorption astm d num ozone resistance astm d num num .
joint sealer lubricantsadhesives test method film strength astm d num d. materials warranty for joint sealer lubricantsadhesives num .
store the lubricantadhesive at num º to num ºf num º to num ºc .
num .
retest any lubricantadhesive not used within num days of its manufacture .
num waterblown urethane joint filler a .
requirements num .
type furnish waterblown urethane joint filler in two components .
a .
mix according to the manufacturers recommendations and use in pressure relief joints and regular expansion joints .
b .
mix the material at the site and foam it in the joint .
use closedcell material .
num .
physical requirements a .
use the material that meets the following requirements after mixing section numjoint fillers and sealers num times at num ºf num ºf num ºc num ºc minimum maximum cream time interval after mixing the two components and before the material begins to expand .
num minute num minutes expansion time interval between when the material starts and stops expanding .
num minutes tack free time determine whether the material is tack free by touching lightly .
begin the time requirement for tack free time when the expansion time ends .
num minutes b .
use material that meets the following requirements after curing physical property requirement weight per cubic foot meter numlbs num lbs num kg num kg compression to num thickness num to num psi num to num kpa recovery compressed to num thickness released then tested num minutes later min .
num extrusion when compressed num max .
num in num mm moisture absorption max .
num lbft.² num gm² of exposed area b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method weight per cubic foot meter aashto t num omit drying at num ºf num ºc compression to num thickness aashto t num recovery after compression aashto m num extrusion aashto t num moisture absorption aashto t num calculate absorption based on exposed area d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num silicone sealants and bond breakers prepare and install silicone and bond breakers according to section num .
a .
requirements num .
silicone furnish silicone sealant in a onepart or two part silicone formulation .
use sealant that is compatible with the surface to which it is applied .
do not use acidcure sealants on portland cement concrete .
a .
use silicone that meets the physical requirements in table num .
for a list of silicone joint sealant sources please see qpl num .
identify silicones as the following types num type aa one part low modulus nonsag silicone .
used to seal horizontal and vertical joints in portland cement concrete pavements and bridges .
tooling is required .
num type ba one part very low modulus selfleveling silicone .
used to seal horizontal joints in portland cement concrete pavements and bridges .
tooling is not normally required .
section numjoint fillers and sealers num num type ca one part ultralow modulus selfleveling silicone .
used to seal horizontal joints in portland cement concrete pavements and bridges and joints between portland cement concrete pavement and asphaltic concrete shoulders .
tooling is not normally required .
num type da two part ultralow modulus selfleveling rapid cure silicone .
used to seal horizontal joints in portland cement concrete pavements and bridges and joints between portland cement concrete pavement and asphaltic concrete shoulders .
tooling is not required .
b .
use silicone sealant evaluated by the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep .
c. use sealant that is compatible with the surface to which it is applied .
do not use acidcure sealants on portland cement concrete .
d. use silicone that meets the following physical requirements table numphysical requirements for silicone sealants type silicone a b c d tensile stress at num strain max .
psi kpa note num num num num num num num num num durometer hardness shore num of and num of num of num oc and num oc num oc note num a num num num num num num num bond to concrete mortar min .
psi kpa note num note num num num num num num num num num tack free time skinover max .
minutes note num num num num num extrusion rate min .
gramsminute note num num num num num nonvolatile min .
num num num num specific gravity num num num num num num num num shelf life from date of shipment num months num months num months num months movement capability adhesion note num no adhesive or cohesive failure after num cycles at num of num oc .
ozone and u.v .
resistance note num no chalking cracking or bond loss after num hours .
note num the cure time for these specimens shall be num days for type a and num days for type b c and d. specimens shall be cured at num of num of num oc num oc and num relative humidity .
note num at conditions of num of num of num oc num oc and num relative humidity .
note num type c and d silicone shall also meet its bond strength requirement to asphalt concrete .
note num type d extrusion rate shall be within the range specified .
num .
bond breakers bond breakers shall be chemically inert and resistant to oils gasoline solvents and primer if one is required .
install silicone sealants over a bond breaker to prevent the sealant from bonding to the bottom of the joint .
a .
use bond breakers that are chemically inert and resistant to oils gasoline solvents and primer if one is required .
b .
do not use bond breaker that will stain or adhere to the sealant .
c. use either a backer rod or tape bond breaker .
num backer rods type l closedcell expanded polyethylene foam type m closedcell polyolefin foam with a closedcell skin over an opencell core use backer rods that meet the following physical requirements section numjoint fillers and sealers num physical property requirement density num lbft³ num kgm³min .
tensile strength num psi num kpa min .
water absorption num gcm³ max .
num bond breaking tapes type n bond breaking tapes are made from extruded polyethylene with a pressuresensitive adhesive on one side .
bond breaking tapes may be used with all four types of silicone but is suitable for bridge joints only .
bond breaking tapes shall have a minimum thickness of .num in num mm .. num .
joint sealant certification submit at no cost to the department a minimum of num gal num l of material and certified test results on each lot of joint sealant furnished to a project .
submit a certification that verifies the sealant meets all the test requirements of this specification except the bond to concrete mortar and shore durometer hardness at num ºf num ºc .
b .
fabrication prepare and install silicone and bond breakers according to section num .
c. acceptance num .
silicone test the silicone as follows test method tensile stress astm d num die c durometer hardness astm d num bond to concrete mortar gdt num tack free time skinover gdt num extrusion rate gdt num nonvolatile gdt num specific gravity astm d num method a movement capability and adhesion gdt num ozone and uv resistance astm c num in cases of dispute use astm c num as a referee test .
num .
bond breakers test the bond breaker backer rods as follows test method density astm d num tensile strength astm d num water absorption astm c num num .
department responsibility section numjoint fillers and sealers num the department will a .
evaluate the sealant in the field before accepting any silicone sealants that meet the requirements of this specification .
b .
install the material submitted by the contractor in roadway andor bridge joints .
the material shall be in place for two winters without failure before being accepted .
c. reject any sealant or bond breaker that is evaluated and approved yet fails in actual use .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num neoprene for bridge deck joint seals a .
requirements num .
type use a neoprene material for bridge deck joint seals that is a vulcanized elastomeric compound with polymerized chloroprene as the only basic elastomer .
a .
ensure the neoprene meets the physical requirements in table num .
table numphysical requirements for neoprene test requirements test method tensile strength before aging num psi num mpa min .
astm d num after ovenaging for num hrs .
num ºf num ºc num max .
loss astm d num elongation at breaks before aging num min .
astm d num after oven aging for num hrs .
num ºf num ºc num max .
astm d num hardness type a durometer before aging num num points astm d num after ovenaging for num hrs .
num ºf num ºc num to num points change astm d num after aging for num hrs .
num ºf num ºc num to num points change astm d num ozone resistance after num hrs .
num ºf num ºc under num strain in num ppm in air wipe specimens with toluene before test to remove surface contaminants no cracks astm d num weight change in oil after num hrs .
in oil no .
num astm d num num max .
aashto m num recover under num deflection type ii only after num hrs .
num ºf num ºc num min .
aashto m num after num hrs .
num ºf num ºc num min .
aashto m num after num hrs .
num ºf num ºc num min .
aashto m num num .
certification submit certified test results on the joint seal system according to subsection num materials certification .
section numjoint fillers and sealers num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test according to the methods indicated in table num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num ethylene propylene diene monomer for bridge deck joint seals a. submittals num .
type use an ethylene propylene diene monomer epdm material for bridge deck joint seals that is num percent epdm compound .
ensure the compound shall meet the following physical requirements physical property requirement hardness type a durometer num num tensile strength min .
num psi num mpa elongation at break min .
num low temperature not brittle at num ºf num ºc weather resistance no cracks ozone resistance num hours num ºf num ºc under num strain num ppm in air no cracks num .
certification submit certified test results of the joint seal system according to subsection num materials certification .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test the epdm as follows test method hardness type a durometer astm d num tensile strength astm d num elongation at break astm d num low temperature astm d num weather resistance astm d num ozone resistance num hours num ºf num ºc under num strain num ppm in air astm d num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numjoint fillers and sealers num num polyurethane sealant for inductive loops a .
requirements num .
type use polyurethane sealant that is a one component moisturecuring flexible sealant formulated to encapsulate inductive detector loop wires and leads embedded in asphaltic or portland cement concrete .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
num .
submit at no cost to the department at least num num oz .
num ml cartridges of the material .
num .
physical characteristics use a sealant that will remain flexible to num ºf num ºc necessary to protect the wire from the stress of pavement movement .
fully encapsulate the wire but resist flowing out on inclined or crowned roads .
be compatible with asphaltic concrete .
not soften the asphaltic concrete to a degree that would cause widening of the joint when installed in a simulated joint in the laboratory .
num .
use a cured polyurethane sealant that meets the following physical requirements physical property requirement hardness type a durometer num tensile strength min .
num psi num kpa elongation at break min .
num flexibility num ºf num ºc no cracks weathering resistance slight chalking num .
furnish certified test results of the loop sealant according to subsection num materials certification .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance num .
test the polyurethane sealant for inductive loops as follows test method hardness type a durometer astm d num tensile strength astm d num die c pulled at num in num mmmin elongation at break astm d num die c pulled at num in num mmmin flexibility num ºf num ºc num mil num mm free film bend num over a num in num mm mandrel weathering resistance astm d num weatherometer num hrs .
cured num days num ºf num ºc num relative humidity num .
department responsibility the department will a .
evaluate the polyurethane sealant for inductive loops in the field before approving it for use .
the material also must meet the requirements of this specification .
b .
install the material in asphaltic inductive loops .
the material shall be in place for one winter without failure before being accepted .
section numjoint fillers and sealers num c. reject any sealant that is evaluated and approved yet fails in actual use .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num preformed foam joint filler a .
requirements num .
type use a preformed foam joint filler consisting of polyethylene polyurethane neoprene natural rubber or isomeric polymer closedcell foam and ultraviolet stable resistant to oils chemicals ozone and weathering .
ensure the joint filler conforms to the following physical requirements test requirement cell structure compressiondeflection to num of original thickness closed cell num num psi num num kpa recovery after num compression of original thickness num min .
water absorption num volume max .
extrusion at num compression of original thickness num in num mm max .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test according to astm d num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section nummasonry materials num general description this section includes the requirements for masonry materials including brick clay or shale brick masonry stone and mortar and grout .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numfine aggregate section numportland cement b. referenced documents aashto m num aashto m num aashto t num aashto t num astm c num astm c num astm c num astm c numm num materials num brick a .
requirements num .
use bricks of the following sizes for masonry catch basins inlets and manholes .
use other sizes only if approved by the office of materials and research .
num x num½ x num¼ in num x num x num mm num½ x num½ x num½ in num x num x num mm num½ x num½ x num½ in num x num x num mm num .
use bricks that are relatively straight sound and uniform in quality .
num .
clay or shale brick use clay or shale bricks that meet the requirements of aashto m num. a .
ensure that the maximum absorption of any individual clay or shale brick is less than num percent when submersed in cold water for num hours .
b .
use only clay bricks that give a clear ringing sound when struck together .
num .
concrete brick use concrete bricks that meet the requirements of astm c num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
section nummasonry materials num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num masonry stone a .
requirements num .
type use stone for rubble masonry that is sound durable and does not contain segregations seams cracks pyrite intrusions or other structural defects or imperfections that affect weather resistance .
a .
do not use stone with rounded worn or weathered surfaces .
exposed faces can not show scars caused by quarrying .
weathered stone will be rejected .
b .
ensure that the stone has no more than num percent wear and no more than num percent loss after the magnesium sulfate soundness test .
c. use stone that can be wrought truly to lines and surfaces curved or plain .
d. ensure that each stone is at least num in num mm thick and num ft num mm wide except for fill stones used in wall interiors .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method percent wear aashto t num soundness aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num mortar and grout a .
requirements num .
use mortar and grout that consists of fresh mixtures of one part portland or masonry cement and three parts mortar sand and water .
you may add hydrated lime when using portland cement in amounts not exceeding num percent of the weight of cement .
a .
cement use portland cement that meets the requirements of subsection num or masonry cement that meets the requirements of astm c num. b. mortar sand use mortar sand that meets the requirements of subsection num. c. mixing mix dry in a mixer or in a clean tight box until a uniform mixture is produced .
then add enough water to produce the desired consistency .
do not use mortar and grout that has been mixed for more than num minutes .
retempering of mortar is not permitted .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section nummasonry materials num c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numaluminum powder num general description this section includes the requirements for aluminum powder .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents astm d num num materials num aluminum powder a .
requirements num .
type use an aluminum powder for expanded mortar that is commercially pure nonleafing unpolished and has a low grease content .
num .
gradation ensure the gradation of the coarse particles meets the following not more than num percent retained on the no .
num num µm sieve not more than num percent retained on the no .
num num µm sieve b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method fineness astm d num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numspecial surface coating for concrete num general description this section includes the requirements for products used to produce a decorative protective waterrepellent masonrylike textured finish on specified surfaces .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents interim federal specification ttpnum federal specification ttcnumb gdt num qpl num num materials num surface coatings a .
requirements num .
type use a surface coating material that is fine to heavytextured and forms a tough adhesive bond to the concrete .
for a list of sources see qpl num. a .
use material that has the following characteristics application rate num num ft²gal num num m²l without run or sag on vertical surfaces dry film thickness minimum num mils num mm at application rate of num ft²gal num m²l color lusterless gray that matches federal standard color no .
num unless specified otherwise on the plans b .
use grouttype coatings that meet the requirements of interim federal specification ttpnum .
c. use painttype coatings that meet the requirements of federal specification ttcnumb .
num .
classification classify special surface coatings as either class a or b with these compositional characteristics .
a .
class aacrylic polymer modified portland cement grout an adhesive grout of portland cement acrylic polymer modifiers masonry sand and water .
add acrylic polymer modifiers to the cement grout in the form of an emulsion .
b .
class borganic resin bindertype coating pigmented organic binders with suitable texturing agents .
further classify the coatings by solventthinner type and resin type .
num type numacrylic emulsion a pigmented num percent acrylic polymer with suitable texturing aggregate additions .
do not use polyvinyl acetate and styrene butadiene polymers as modifying agents .
num type numorganic solvent thinned vinyl tolueneacrylate copolymer pigmented binder in compatible organic solvents with suitable texturing aggregate additions .
use an emulsion polymerization process to form the resinous binder .
section numspecial surface coating for concrete num num .
submit certified test reports of coating materials from an approved independent laboratory .
submit the results of tests required in this section and in the referenced federal specification .
a .
if the manufacturer that produces the coating changes the formula submit new certified test reports .
b. certify to the following quantitative characteristics total solids percent by weight of the paint vehicle percent by weight of the paint vehicle solids percent by weight of the vehicle unit weight b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance submit to the engineer the manufacturers certified test results meeting the applicable federal specification and the following requirements when tested according to gdt num num .
freezethaw resistance no evidence of cracking checking pitting or adhesion loss after num freezethaw cycles .
num .
accelerated weathering no evidence of cracking checking or adhesion loss no more than slight discoloration after num hours of exposure in a twin arc weatherometer .
use the weatherometer procedure in gdt num .
in addition to the previous requirements no coating will be approved before it completes a twoyear field test installation .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numpolymer concrete num general description this section includes the requirements for polymer concrete .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto t num astm c num or c num astm c num astm c num astm c num section numpolymer concrete num num materials num polymer concrete a .
requirements num .
type use a methyl methacrylate mma or polyester polymer concrete that bonds to the substrate with the manufacturers recommended primer .
a .
use a polymer concrete that combines a twocomponent solventfree resin and selected clean dry aggregate .
b .
use a primer that is a twocomponent system recommended by the polymer concrete manufacturer .
after mixing apply it with brushes or another suitable method .
c. use a primer that is tackfree within one hour of mixing .
d. before adding dry aggregate at the job site to increase yield get approval from the office of materials and research .
num .
physical characteristics use a polymer concrete similar in color to portland cement concrete .
a .
use a polymer that can be mixed and placed like portland cement concrete .
b .
ensure that the polymer concrete meets the following requirements characteristic requirement initial setting time final setting time num minutes minimum num minutes maximum flexural strength num psi num mpa minimum in numhours minimum compressive strength num f num f num c num c at compressive strengthpsi mpa num hours num hours num days air cure num days moist cure num psi num mpa num psi num mpa num psi num mpa num psi num mpa water absorption num maximum shrinkage num maximum shear bond strength num psi num mpa in num hrs .
minimum b .
fabrication num .
packaging and storage a .
package polymer concrete in strong moistureproof paper bags or other suitable containers capable of withstanding shipping normal handling and storage without breakage .
b .
clearly label each container of the components of the polymer concrete system with the following information component designation manufacturers batch number mixing instructions c. display potential hazards and precautions according to the federal hazardous products labeling act .
c. acceptance the tests below include procedures to create specimens for the shear bond strength test .
section numpolymer concrete num num .
when performing acceptance tests follow the mixing instructions of the manufacturer .
num .
aircure all test specimens except for the numday moistcure compressive strength cubes .
num .
test as follows test method setting time astm c num flexural strength aashto t num num x num x num in num x num x num mm specimens compressive strength astm c num or c num whichever is applicable shear bond strength see procedures below absorption astm c num shrinkage astm c num num .
shear bond strength procedures the shear bond strength in psi mpa equals the load in pounds newtons divided by the interfacial area of the patch in square inches square millimeters .
test as follows a .
cast a num x num x ½ in num x num x num mm polymer patch on an aircured num x num x num in num x num x num mm concrete mortar base .
b .
saw the base and polymer patch into num in num mm segments for testing .
c. use a holding device and plunger to apply a load at a rate of num in num mm per minute to the patch until failure occurs .
d. materials warranty use a polymer concrete with a minimum storage life of num months under storage conditions of num to num f num to num c and a maximum relative humidity of num percent .
section numgraffiti proof coating for concrete num general description this section includes the requirements for products that make graffitiproof coatings and an effective graffiti removal system over specified surfaces .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numspecial surface coating for concrete b. referenced documents qpl num num materials num graffiti proof coating a .
requirements num .
type section numgraffiti proof coating for conrete num select an approved graffiti guard from qpl num .
when using special surface coatings as base coats ensure the special surface coatings meet section num requirements and the two coatings are compatible .
num .
certification submit a sample and an annual warranty for evaluation each year or whenever product formulation changes whichever comes first .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance num .
the department will evaluate the compatibility of the graffitiproof coating and the special surface coating as a graffiti guard system .
num .
the manufacturer will submit test results from an independent laboratory showing that the coating meets the following requirements a. freezethaw resistance num no evidence of cracking or adhesive loss after num freezethaw cycles num easy to remove dried paint using a cleaner supplied by the producer or a commercial paint stripper b .
accelerated weathering no evidence of cracking or adhesive loss and no discoloration after num hours of exposure in a twin arc weatherometer .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numcorrugated polyethylene underdrain pipe num general description this section includes the requirements for corrugated polyethylene underdrain pipe and fittings used primarily as highway underdrain and temporary slope drains .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto m num num materials num corrugated polyethylene underdrain pipe a .
requirements num .
type use corrugated polyethylene underdrain pipe and fittings that meet the requirements of aashto m num with the following exceptions section numcorrugated polyethylene underdrain pipe num a maximum elongation of num percent a gage length to determine percent elongation of num ft num in num mm num mm num .
obtain pipe from an approved source or follow the acceptance process described in subsection num.c acceptance below .
num .
unless specified otherwise pipe must be supplied in individual lengths not shorter than num ft. num m coils are not permitted for pipe num in num mm or larger in diameter .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance num .
you may use pipe in construction supplied from plants operating on certified acceptance status without prior evaluation by lots .
num .
test any approved or untested material prior to use that has been directly exposed to sunlight for more than num months .
num .
pipe lengths that have developed bends that can not be sufficiently straightened will be rejected .
a. straightening of individual pipe lengths by force will be permitted provided that no stress cracking occurs in the process .
b .
any pipe length that develops stress cracks will be rejected .
num .
certification process a .
to qualify as an approved source the manufacturer must present the following num evidence that the manufacturer has an acceptable quality control procedure for raw materials and manufacturing processes num a yearly notarized certification stating that all pipe furnished is manufactured to meet this specification b .
the department will conduct random plant inspections and take random samples at the plant or at the project site for testing .
c. the department will remove plants from certified acceptance status when at any time they demonstrate inadequate quality control or noncompliance of the pipe material specifications .
d. materials warranty num .
store and use polyethylene tubing properly .
it will melt and burn when exposed to flame .
num .
this product is flexible thinwalled and will temporarily weaken when heated .
be careful to avoid crushing or stretching the pipe on hot days with bright sunlight .
section numcorrugated aluminum alloy pipe num general description this section includes the requirements for the following types of corrugated aluminum alloy pipe culvert underdrain slope drain structural plate for pipe pipe arches and arches section numcorrugated aluminum alloy pipe num num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto m numm aashto m numm aashto m numm gdt num num materials num corrugated aluminum alloy culvert and underdrain pipe a .
requirements use corrugated aluminum alloy pipe that meets the requirements of aashto m numm .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will inspect corrugated aluminum alloy pipe according to gdt num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num corrugated aluminum alloy slope drain pipe a .
requirements use corrugated aluminum alloy slope drain pipe that meets aashto m numm requirements with the exception that the pipe is not perforated .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will inspect the pipe according to gdt num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num bituminous coated corrugated aluminum alloy culvert pipe a .
requirements num .
use bituminouscoated corrugated aluminum culvert pipe that meets aashto m numm requirements .
num .
use pipe that has a bituminous coat that meets the requirements of aashto m numm for the type of coating specified .
section numcorrugated aluminum alloy pipe num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will inspect the pipe according to gdt num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num corrugated aluminum alloy structural plate for pipe pipe arches and arches a .
requirements use corrugated aluminum alloy structural plate for pipe pipe arches and arches that meet the requirements of aashto m numm .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numiron pipe num general description this section includes the requirements for iron pipe including cast iron soil pipe and fittings and ductile iron pipe and appurtenances .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numpipe appurtenances b. referenced documents astm a num astm b num astm c num ansiawwa a num ansiawwa a num ansiawwa a num ansiawwa a num ansiawwa a num ansiawwa a num num materials for each item in this section submit a certification from the manufacturer as per the requirements in subsection num materials certification .
include the chemical and physical properties of the materials and their conformance with this specification on the certification .
num cast iron soil pipe and fittings a .
requirements num .
type use cast iron soil pipe and fittings that meet the requirements of astm a num including the inside and outside coatings .
a .
rubber gasket joints use rubber gasket joints for cast iron soil pipes that meet the requirements of astm c num. b .
lead joints use refined lead that meets the requirements of astm b num .
do not use reclaimed lead .
c. plain end cast iron soil pipe plain end cast iron soil pipe may be joined with steel bolted couplings if they meet the requirements of subsection num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section num iron pipe num c. acceptance the department accepts material that is properly certified by the manufacturer .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num ductile iron pipe and appurtenances a .
requirements use ductile iron pipe that meets the requirements of ansiawwa a num and a num for the class and joint specified .
num .
fittings use fittings that meet the requirements of ansiawwa a num or a num for the class and joint specified .
num .
rubber gasket joints use rubber gasket joints that meet the requirements of ansiawwa a num .
num .
flanges use flanges that meet the requirements of ansiawwa a num .
num .
plain end ductile iron pipe plain end ductile iron pipe may be joined with steelbolted couplings if they meet the requirements of subsection num .
num .
cement mortar linings use cement mortal linings that meet the requirements of ansiawwa a num .
line all ductile iron pipe and fittings with cement mortar unless specified otherwise .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department accepts material that is properly certified by the manufacturer .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numclay pipe num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numconcrete pipe num general description this section includes the requirements for reinforced concrete pipe nonreinforced concrete pipe and concrete underdrain pipe .
section numconcrete pipe num num related references a .
standard specifications section numcoarse aggregate section numfine aggregate section numadmixtures section numwater b. referenced documents aashto m num m numm class ii aashto m num m numm aashto m num m numm or aashto m num m numm qpl num sopnum num materials num reinforced concrete pipe a .
requirements num .
type use reinforced concrete pipe that meets the requirements of aashto m num m numm with the changes described in the following table .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
material requirements other modifications coarse aggregate subsection num gradation requirements do not apply fine aggregate subsection num gradation requirements do not apply fly ash subsection num.a none water subsection num none note before manufacture you may request approval of modified designs that differ from the specifications .
num .
certification a .
file a certificate with the engineer stating that the concrete pipe manufactured for department use meets the requirements of reinforcement steel specified in this section .
a bonded legal authority of the manufacturing company shall endorse the requirements certification .
b .
submit a guarantee with the certificate stating that concrete pipe will be replaced without cost to the purchaser if the reinforcement steel does not meet these specifications .
c. ensure that the guarantee remains in effect as long as the manufacturer furnishes concrete pipe for department use .
d. this guarantee does not limit the right of the department to inspect and check the materials in manufactured concrete pipe prior to and during pipeline construction .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numconcrete pipe num c. acceptance the department will test and inspect using sopnum .
d. materials warranty see the certification requirements under subsection num.a.num .
num nonreinforced concrete pipe a .
requirements num .
type use nonreinforced concrete pipe to convey sewage industrial waste and storm water that meets the requirements of aashto m num m numm class ii with the following changes material requirements other modifications coarse aggregate subsection num gradation requirements do not apply fine aggregate subsection num gradation requirements do not apply fly ash subsection num.a none water subsection num none b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will test and inspect using sopnum .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num concrete underdrain pipe a .
requirements num .
type use concrete underdrain pipe that meets the requirements of aashto m num m numm or aashto m num m numm with the following changes unless the plans state otherwise material requirements other modifications coarse aggregate subsection num gradation requirements do not apply fine aggregate subsection num gradation requirements do not apply fly ash subsection num.a none water subsection num none use fine aggregate in standard strength perforated nonreinforced concrete underdrain pipe .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numconcrete pipe num c. acceptance the department will test and inspect using sopnum .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numsteel pipe num general description this section includes the requirements for the following types of steel pipe and related materials corrugated steel culvert pipe and pipe arches bituminouscoated corrugated steel culvert steel structural plate for pipe arches and arches corrugated steel underdrain precoated galvanized steel culvert aluminumcoated type num corrugated steel num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto m numm aashto m numm aashto m numm aashto m numm aashto m numm aashto m numm astm anum astm anumanumm num materials repair any damaged coatings on the steel pipe according to aashto m numm .
num corrugated steel culvert pipe and pipe arches a .
requirements num .
type use corrugated steel culvert pipe and pipe arches that meet the requirements of aashto m numm type i or ii culvert pipe for dimensions and thicknesses except as follows a .
modify aashto m numm section num to connect all slope drain pipe except temporary slope drain pipe with standard one or twopiece bands .
use bands that completely engage at least one corrugation on each side of the joint or elbow section .
section numsteel pipe num b .
use connecting bands with projections as described in aashto m numm section num for temporary slope drain storm drain and side drain pipe .
c. use special sections for these conduits such as elbows and flared ends that are of the same plate thickness as the conduit to which they are joined and meet the applicable requirements of aashto m numm as modified .
b .
fabrication furnish shopformed elliptical pipe and shopstrutted pipe where specified .
c. acceptance see the requirements of aashto m numm .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num bituminous coated corrugated steel culvert pipe a .
requirements num .
type use bituminouscoated corrugated steel pipe that meets the requirements of aashto m numm astm anum and astm anumanumm for the sectional dimensions plate thickness and type of bituminous coating .
a .
use special sections for these conduits such as elbows and flared ends that are the same plate thickness as the conduit to which they are joined and meet the applicable requirements of aashto m numm astm anum and astm anumanumm .
d. provide paved inverts when required that conform to the listed specifications .
e. aashto mnumm and astm anum both contain bituminous material specifications coating types and coating thickness requirements .
use the requirements of aashto mnumm when there are discrepancies between the specification requirements .
f. use the astm numanumm requirements for post application of coatings .
b .
fabrication num .
fully coat coupling bands and special sections such as elbows flared end sections and safety end sections with bituminous material .
num .
furnish shopformed elliptical pipe and shopstrutted pipe where specified .
c. acceptance see the requirements of aashto m numm .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num steel structural plate for pipe arches and arches a .
requirements num .
type use structural plates and galvanized corrugated steel for the corrugated steel plate pipe pipe arches and arches that meet the requirements of aashto m numm aashto m numm and the following requirements when applicable a. bituminous coating when bituminous coating is specified use a coating that meets the requirements of aashto m numm for the type specified .
section numsteel pipe num b. galvanized corrugated plates for pipe pipe pipe arch and arches may be constructed from corrugated galvanized sheets or plates .
b .
fabrication num .
bituminous coating after erecting the structure but before placing any backfill replace any coating that was removed or damaged during erection either inside or outside with bituminous material meeting subsection num .
num .
galvanized corrugated plates for pipe no further galvanizing is required after fabrication if the spelter coating was not injured during shipping or erection .
c. acceptance see the requirements of aashto m numm and m numm .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num corrugated steel underdrain pipe a .
requirements num .
type for underdrains use fullcircle galvanized corrugated steel pipe that meets the requirements of aashto m numm type iii or iiia for the specified diameters .
determine the metal thickness according to the following table nominal inside diameter inches mm thickness inches mm num num .num num num num .num num num num .num num num num .num num num num .num num num num .num num num num .num num num num .num num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance see the requirements of aashto m numm .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numsteel pipe num num precoated galvanized steel culvert pipe a .
requirements num .
type use precoated galvanized steel pipe that meets the requirements of aashto m numm for the specified sectional dimensions plate thickness and type of coating .
a .
use special sections for these conduits such as elbows and flared ends that are the same plate thickness as the conduit to which they are joined and that meet the applicable requirements of aashto m numm .
b .
use the specified coating and invert paving .
b .
fabrication num .
fully precoat or coat the coupling bands with bituminous material according to subsection num .
num .
furnish shopformed elliptical pipe and shopstrutted pipe where specified .
c. acceptance see the requirements of aashto m numm .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num aluminumcoated type num corrugated steel pipe a .
requirements use steel sheet for corrugated steel pipe that meets aashto m numm requirements .
b .
fabrication fabricate corrugated steel pipe to the requirements of aashto m numm .
c. acceptance see the requirements of aashto m numm .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numsmooth lined corrugated polyethylene pe culvert pipe num general description this section includes the requirements for smoothlined corrugated polyethylene culvert pipe .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto m num section numsmooth lined corrugated polyethylene pe culvert pipe num aashto standard specifications for highway bridges division ii qpl num sopnum num materials num smoothlined corrugated polyethylene pe culvert pipe a .
requirements num .
use pipe meeting the requirements of aashto m num type s. num .
use pipe evaluated by the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep test facility or other approved test facility .
num .
ensure pipe is produced from an approved source listed on qpl num .
num .
use fittings and couplings as recommended by the manufacturer and approved by the office of materials and research .
the fittings and couplings shall comply with the joint performance criteria of aashto standard specifications for highway bridges division ii .
ensure that the joints are soiltight per the aashto bridge specifications .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will test and inspect using sopnum .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numpolyvinyl chloride pvc drain pipe num general description this section includes the requirements for polyvinyl chloride pvc drain pipe .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials b. referenced documents aashto m num astm f num astm f num astm d num qpl num section numpolyvinyl choride pvc drain pipe num sopnum num materials num polyvinyl chloride pvc profile wall drain pipe a .
requirements use pipe that meets the requirements of aashto m num .
ensure pipe is produced from an approved source listed on qpl num .
ensure joints are watertight and have elastomeric seals that meet the requirements of astm f num .
assemble the joints according to the manufacturers recommendations .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will test and inspect using sopnum .
have the manufacturer test the joint tightness according to astm d num and certify the results according to subsection num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num polyvinyl chloride pvc corrugated smooth interior drain pipe a .
requirements use pipe that meets the requirements of astm f num .
ensure pipe is produced from an approved source listed on qpl num .
ensure joints are watertight and have elastomeric seals that meet the requirements of astm f num .
assemble the joints according to the manufacturers recommendations .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will test and inspect using sopnum .
have the manufacturer test the joint tightness according to astm d num and certify the results according to subsection num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
num section nummiscellaneous pipe num general description this section includes the requirements for water storm drain and sewer pipes .
the pipe types are galvanized steel pipe and fittings steel water pipe copper pipe tubing steel sewer pipe and casing pipe plastic water pipe plastic truss sewer pipe polyvinyl chloride pvc sewer pipe and fittings num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numpipe appurtenances b. referenced documents ansi b num astm awwa c num c num c num c num c num c num a numanumm a num b num b numm d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num f num f num f num f num f num num materials each item under this section requires a certification from the manufacturer according to subsection num materials certification .
num galvanized steel pipe and fittings a .
requirements num .
type use galvanized steel pipe that meets the requirements of astm a numa numm .
use standard weight pipe unless otherwise specified .
num .
use fittings of malleable iron that meets the requirements of ansi b num except the nipples and couplings shall be the same material as the pipe .
b .
fabrication hotdip galvanize all fittings nipples and couplings according to astm a numa numm .
section nummiscellaneous pipe num c. acceptance the department will accept the pipe and fittings based on the certification or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num steel water pipe a .
requirements num .
type use materials and requirements indicated in the table material meet requirements of other requirements pipe and fittings awwa c num or c num use grade b steel plate .
designate the pipe by operating pressure class .
bell and spigot joints awwa c num rubber gasket material awwa c num steelbolted couplings subsection num you may join plainend steel pipe with steelbolted couplings .
cement mortar linings awwa c num coaltar enamel lining and coating awwa c num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the pipe based on the certification .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num copper pipe tubing a .
requirements use pipe or tubing that meets the requirements of astm b num b numm type k. b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the tubing based on the certification .
section nummiscellaneous pipe num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num steel sewer pipe and casing pipe a .
requirements type use the material and requirements indicated in the table material meet requirements of other requirements steel sewer pipe and casing pipe astm a numa numm or astm a num the hydrostatic test is not required .
bell and spigot joints awwa c num rubber gasket material awwa c num steelbolted couplings subsection num you may join plainend steel pipe with steelbolted couplings .
cement mortar linings awwa c num coaltar enamel lining and coating awwa c num unless the plans specify otherwise use standard weight pipe .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the pipe based on the certification or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num plastic water pipe a .
requirements type use polyethylene pe pipe and tubing that meet the requirements of astm d num and astm f num as they apply to penum .
use the following pipe sizes and standards pipe size pressure rating other requirements num to num in num to num mm meets astm d num num psi num mpa or as specified by engineer sidr standard thermoplastic pipe dimension ratio num num to num in num to num mm meets astm f num as specified by engineer sdr standard dimension ratio as specified by engineer .
use the iron pipe size system .
use num to num in num to num mm pipe for new construction and for replacing old piping systems used to transport water municipal sewage industrial process liquids effluents slurries etc .
in both pressure and nonpressure systems .
section nummiscellaneous pipe num num .
water service line pipe use polyvinyl chloride pvc pipe that meets the requirements of astm d num sdr num astm d num schedule num or astm f num class num pvco .
use a pvc compound that meets or exceeds the requirements of astm d num class num b .
num .
water main pipe use num to num in num to num mm diameter pvc pipe that meets the requirements of awwa c num .
see the plans for the designated dimension ratio dr. b .
fabrication extrude the pipe from resin that meets the requirements of astm d num with a cell classification of penum c and astm d num pipegrade resin type iii class c category num grade p num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the pipe based on the certification or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num plastic truss sewer pipe a .
requirements type use plastic truss sewer pipe couplings and fittings that meet the requirements of astm d num acrylonitrile butadienestyrene abs and polyvinyl chloride pvc composite sewer piping .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the pipe based on the certification .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num polyvinyl chloride pvc sewer pipe and fittings a .
requirements num .
type use pvc sewer pipe couplings and fittings that meet the requirements of astm d num sdr num astm f num or astm f num min .
pipe stiffness series num .
ensure that the joints have elastomeric seals that meet the requirements of astm f num .
num .
certification certify the joint tightness according to astm d num and submit a certification according to subsection num materials certification .
b .
fabrication assemble the pipe according to the manufacturers recommendations .
c. acceptance the department will accept the pipe based on the certification .
section nummiscellaneous pipe num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numpipe appurtenances num general description this section includes the requirements for all pipe appurtenances such as rubber gaskets steelbolted couplings gate valves sterilizing agents bituminous plastic cement num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numconcrete pipe b. referenced documents aashto m num aashto m num astm c num astm d num numaanumzbnum awwa b num awwa c num awwa m num qpl num num materials num rubber gaskets for concrete pipe a .
requirements num .
type use rubbertype gaskets and orings meeting the requirements of aashto m num and astm c num class c. however pipe used in culvert construction does not need a hydrostatic pressure test .
use approved gaskets and orings listed in qpl num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept gaskets from approved qpl sources only .
section numpipe appurtenances num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num steelbolted couplings a .
requirements num .
coupling types use steelbolted couplings for joining all types of plain end pipe .
ensure the couplings have the following characteristics wedge gasket and flared sleeve one steel middle ring two steel followers two wedgeshaped rubbercompounded gaskets and steel bolts dimensions and type for the size and kind of pipe to be joined including reducers if required num .
middle rings a .
ensure middle rings size num in num mm through num in num mm are fabricated from tubing and coldformed to provide proper flare at each end and to receive the wedge portion of the gasket .
b .
ensure middle rings size num in num mm and larger are made from either bar or plateflashwelded coldformed coldexpanded beyond the yield point of the steel to size the ring and prooftest the weld .
c. airtest all welded rings to ensure the weld is porousfree .
d. use middle rings that have a bellowed portion between the flares provided for the gaskets to accommodate pipe deflection .
num .
followers a .
ensure the followers meet these requirements size fabrication num in num mm through num in num mm one piece steel forgings .
above num in num mm through num ¼ innum mm coldformed twopiece construction .
num ¼ innum mm through num in num mm hot forged from a single piece circular plate water quenched after forging for maximum strength .
above num in num mm use a special contoured mill section circlerolled flashwelded and coldexpanded beyond the yield point of the steel to size the ring and prooftest the weld .
all followers have solid formed gasket recess free of seams or breaks to confine the gasket .
num .
gaskets use gaskets meeting the requirements of astm d num numaanumzbnum with the following exceptions color jet black surface nonblooming shore a durometer hardness num num tensile strength num psi num mpa minimum elongation num minimum section numpipe appurtenances num a .
use a rubber compound that will not deteriorate from age or exposure to air under normal storage or use conditions .
use natural or synthetic rubber that does not contain reclaimed rubber .
b .
use gaskets immune to impurities such as odorants liquid hydrocarbons carbon dioxide and water normally found in natural gas .
c. to electrically bond the pipe ends to the center ring make a permanent bond from material that can not corrode or deteriorate and is molded into the tip of the gasket .
num .
bolts use bolts that have elliptical necks and track heads .
align the elliptical neck and the elliptical hole in the follower so the bolt will not turn .
a .
ensure the shanks of the bolts have enough threads to compress the gasket .
b .
submit to the engineer the manufacturers recommended torque for tightening the bolts .
num .
coating a .
unless otherwise specified coat all metal parts in the shop to protect them during shipping and storage .
b .
after installation apply a coat of coaltar enamel to the coupling and uncoated ends of the pipe according to awwa m num .
num .
certification submit a certification from the pipe gasket or joint manufacturer to the engineer according to subsection num materials certification .
the certificate shall describe the physical properties of the rubber gasket and show the results on hydrostatic tests of the gasket and pipe used in the work .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on the certification .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num gate valves a .
requirements use gate valves meeting the requirements of awwa c num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on the certification .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num sterilizing agents a .
requirements use hypochlorites meeting the requirements of awwa b num for sterilizing water systems .
section numpipe appurtenances num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num bituminous plastic cement a .
requirements num .
type use a bituminous compound composed of steamrefined petroleum asphalt or refined coal tar that is dissolved in a suitable solvent and stiffened with a mineral filler with short mineral fibers .
a .
ensure the material is smooth and uniform not thick livered or separating to a degree that it can not be remixed by stirring .
b .
ensure the material can be applied with a trowel putty knife or caulking gun without pulling or drawing and has good adhesive and cohesive properties when applied to joint surfaces .
c. you may apply the material cold to seal the joints of bellandspigot or tongueandgroove storm or culvert pipe .
d. ensure the bituminous plastic cement sets to a tough plastic coating without blistering when applied num to num in num to num mm thick on a tinned metal panel and cured at room temperature for num hours .
e. use bituminous plastic cement with these characteristics minimum maximum grease cone penetration num num weight lbsgal kgl num num nonvolatile percent num ash by ignition percent by weight num num num .
use approved materials from those listed on qpl num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test as follows test method grease cone penetration aashto t num nonvolatile astm d num ash astm d num section numpipe appurtenances num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num preformed plastic gaskets a .
requirements num .
use coldapplied plastic gaskets meeting the requirements of aashto m num to seal tongueandgroove concrete culverts precast manhole and sewer pipes .
however do not perform the flash point coc and fire point coc tests .
num .
use approved materials from those listed in qpl num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept materials only from facilities listed in qpl num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numaluminum alloy metals num general description this section includes the requirements for all types of aluminum alloy materials including sheet and plate bars rods shapes and wire bolts nuts and set screws washers rivets shims extruded tubing pipe num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials b. referenced documents num .
astm b numb numm alloy num temper num b numb numm alloy num temper t num b numb numm alclad alloy num temper t num b numb numm alloy num temper t num section numaluminum alloy metals num b numb numm alloy num temper t num b numb numm alloy num temper num b numb numm alloy num temper t num b numb numm alloy num temper num num .
ansi b num b numm num materials submit a certification from the manufacturer for each item in this section according to subsection num materials certification .
num aluminum alloy sheet and plate a .
requirements use aluminum alloy sheet and plate that meets the requirements of astm b numb numm alloy num temper t num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based either on the certification or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num aluminum alloy bars rods shapes and wire a .
requirements use aluminum alloy extruded bars rods shapes and wire that meet the requirements of astm b numb numm alloy num temper t num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based either on the certification or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num aluminum alloy bolts nuts and set screws a .
requirements use aluminum alloy bolts nuts and set screws made from rod that meets the requirements of astm b numb numm alloy num temper t num .
section numaluminum alloy metals num num .
use bolt heads and nuts of heavy hexagon that meet the requirements of ansi b num .
num .
use coarse series class num fit threads that meet the requirements of ansi b numm .
b .
fabrication num .
heattreat the finished bolts nuts and set screws to the t num temper .
num .
coat each bolt nut or set screw with an anodic coating of at least num in num µm .
num .
seal the anodic coating with chromate .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based either on the certification or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num aluminum alloy washers a .
requirements use aluminum alloy washers made from aluminum alloy sheet or plate that meet the requirements of astm b num b numm alclad alloy num temper t num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based either on the certification or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num aluminum alloy rivets a .
requirements use aluminum alloy rivets that meet the requirements of astm b numb numm alloy num temper num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based either on the certification or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numaluminum alloy metals num num aluminum alloy shims a .
requirements use aluminum alloy shims made from aluminum alloy sheet or plate that meets the requirements of astm b numbnumm alloy num temper num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based either on the certification or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num aluminum alloy extruded tubing a .
requirements use aluminum alloy extruded tubes that meet the requirements of astm b numb numm alloy num temper num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based either on the certification or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num aluminum alloy pipe a .
requirements use aluminum alloy pipe that meets the requirements of astm b numb numm alloy num temper t num unless otherwise specified .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based either on the certification or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numstructural steel num general description this section includes the requirements for the grade and toughness of structural steel .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials b. referenced documents astm a numa numm astm a num astm a numm astm e num num materials num structural steel a .
requirements num .
type use the structural steel grade specified in the plans .
ensure the steel meets all requirements of the governing astm or aashto specification this specification and plan requirements .
ensure that all steel submitted as main loadcarrying member components subject to tensile stress meets either snum or snum of astm a num astm a numm .
num .
certification certify that the steel meets the requirements according to subsection num materials certification .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance num .
toughness tests charpy vnotch tests are mandatory for materials designated on the plans as main loadcarrying member components subject to tensile stress .
a .
sample the steel according to astm a numa numm .
b .
perform the charpy vnotch test according to astm e num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section nummiscellaneous steel materials num general description this section includes the requirements for miscellaneous materials such as steel bolts nuts and washers section nummiscellaneous steel materials num anchor bolts nuts and washers high tensile strength bolts nuts and washers corrugated steel plank for bridges steel grid for bridge floors num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials b. referenced documents astm a numa numm a numma numm a numa numm a numa numm a numa numm a numa numm a numa numm a numa numm a numa numm b num e num f num f numm f num f numm f num recommended practice enum ansi b numm aashto m num num materials num steel bolts nuts and washers a .
requirements num .
bolts and nuts a .
use bolts and nuts hex or heavy hex as required that meet the applicable requirements of astm f numm .
b .
ensure all threads meet the requirements of the latest issue of ansi b numb numm .
c. use bolts that have class numa numh threads .
d. use nuts that have class num b numg threads .
e. ensure bolts that transmit shear are threaded so that no more than one thread will be within the grip of the metal .
f. use bolts long enough to extend entirely through the nut but no more than num in num mm beyond them .
num .
washers use washers that meet the requirements of astm f num unless otherwise specified .
b .
fabrication galvanizing when galvanized materials are specified galvanize all bolts nuts and washers by either the hotdip method in astm a numa numm class c or the mechanical deposit method in astm b num class num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
section nummiscellaneous steel materials num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num anchor bolts nuts and washers a .
requirements num .
use anchor bolts nuts and washers for structural supports that meet the requirements of aashto m num grade num num unless otherwise shown on the plans .
supports include those for highway signs street lighting traffic signals bridge bearing plates and other similar applications .
apply supplementary requirement snum of aashto m num to these materials .
num .
use the grade shape and dimensions designated on the plans .
note the department will not accept grade num num .
b .
fabrication galvanizing where galvanized materials are specified galvanize all bolts nuts and washers by the hotdip method in astm a numa numm and according to the plans .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num high tensile strength bolts a .
requirements num .
bolt type use high tensile strength bolts that meet the requirements of astm anum a numm or astm a num a numm as specified on the plans .
num .
nut type apply these changes to astm a num a numm andor astm a num a numm a .
use only the following nuts for the listed high tensilestrength bolts bolt spec .
type and finish nut spec .
grade and finish a num a numm num or num plain a numdh or dh num plain anum numh plain a nummnums or numsnum plain a num a numm numor num zinc coated a numdh zinc coated anum numh zinc coated a nummnums zinc coated a num a numm num plain a numdh num plain a nummnumsnum plain a num a numm num or num plain a numdh or dhnum plain a num num h plain a nummnums or numsnum plain a num a numm num plain a numdh num plain a nummnumsnum plain b .
ensure all galvanized nuts meet the supplementary requirements of astm a num a numm .
num .
washer type apply these changes to astm a num a numm andor astm a num a numm section nummiscellaneous steel materials num a .
for bolts that meet astm a num a numm or astm a num a numm use washers that meet the requirements of astm f num. b .
use washers that have the same coating or surface finish as the bolts and nuts .
num .
fastener assemblies provide the office of materials and research at least three samples per lot of each material type furnished to project .
num .
certification test reports supply certifications on each item according to subsection num materials certification .
include on all certifications the item specification number type or grade finish and manufacturers productmarking symbol .
also supply the required mill test reports manufacturer certified test reports and distributor certified test reports with each shipment as follows a .
mill test reports mtr provide an mtr for all mill steel used to manufacture bolts nuts and washers .
indicate where the material was melted and manufactured .
b .
manufacturer certified test reports mctr supply the mctr to the department from the manufacturer of the bolts nuts or washers .
each mctr shall num show relevant information required by astm a num a numm or astm a num a numm and this specification including test results for any required coating .
num include the lot number and location where the bolts nuts or washers were manufactured .
num if the manufacturer furnished the entire assembly bolts nuts and washers have the manufacturer perform the rotational capacity tests .
num furnish the results and when and where all testing was performed .
c. distributor certified test reports dctr if a distributor purchases the various assembly components from different manufacturers the distributor may run the rotationalcapacity test in lieu of a manufacturer .
in this case show test results manufacturers component lot numbers and assigned rotational capacity lot numbers for each combination on the dctr .
d. the distributor is responsible for furnishing the required mtr mctr and dctr with each shipment .
b .
fabrication num .
bolts a .
if coating astm a num a numm bolts with zinc use either the hotdip or mechanically deposited process .
b .
do not hotdip or electroplate astm a num a numm bolts with any metallic coating .
the bolts become brittle in hydrogen and subsequently crack due to stress corrosion and delayed brittle failure .
c. apply these changes to astm a num a numm andor astm a num a numm for bolts num test astm a num a numm galvanized bolts for embrittlement according to astm f numf numm section num .
num perform proof load tests astm f numf num method num for all astm a num a numm and astm a num a numm bolts .
num .
nuts a. lubricate galvanized nuts with a lubricant that is clean and dry to the touch .
use a lubricant that has a color that contrasts with the zinc coating so that you can obviously see the coating at the job site .
b .
perform proof load tests for all nuts plain and zinc coated using the method described in astm f numf numm section num. c. if you use the nuts with galvanized bolts run the proof load test after the nut is galvanized overtapped and lubricated .
num .
fastener assemblies bolt nut and washer a .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer coat the assemblies with a zinc coating according to astm a numa numm .
b .
take coating thickness measurements on the wrench flats .
section nummiscellaneous steel materials num c. no single spot coating thickness measurement shall be less than the required individual specimen value shown on table num of astm a numa numm when taken according to astm recommended practice e num .
c. acceptance num .
fastener assemblies bolt nut and washer a .
take coating thickness measurements on the wrench flats according to astm recommended practice e num. b .
ensure no single coating thickness measurement is less than the required individual specimen value shown on table num of astm a numa numm .
num .
hardness test perform hardness tests on galvanized components after galvanizing the item and removing the coating .
num .
rotational capacity test rotational capacity tests are required on all black or galvanized after galvanizing assemblies prior to shipping .
the following directions are for department personnel a .
test each combination of bolt production lot nut lot and washer lot as an assembly .
b .
the project engineer may require additional rotationalcapacity tests on assemblies covered by subsections num.c.num.b.num and num.c.num.b.num .
num .
rotational capacity test bolts too short to fit in tension calibrator a .
equipment required calibrated manual torque wrench and a numft num mm long wrench .
spacers andor washers with holes that do not exceed the bolt diameter by num in num mm for bolts equal to or less than num inch num mm in diameter .
the hole size for larger bolts shall not exceed the bolt diameter by num in num mm .
steel section with holes to match bolt sizes .
note use a plate thick enough to accomplish step num in the procedure without spacers .
however spacers are acceptable .
b .
procedure num mark off a vertical line and lines onethird of a turn num degrees half of a turn num degrees and twothirds of a turn num degrees from vertical in a clockwise direction on the plate .
num measure the bolt length the distance from the underside of the bolt head to the end of the bolt .
num install a nut on the bolt and measure the stickout of the bolt when three to five full threads of the bolt are located between the bearing face of the nut and the bolt head .
num install the bolt in the appropriate size hole and if necessary install the required number of spacers to produce the thread stickout measured in step num always use at least one washer under the nut .
num snug the nut with the hand wrench .
snug should be the normal effort applied to a num in num mm long wrench .
do not exceed num percent of the torque determined in step num .
num align the nut with the vertical num degree stripe on the test frame plate .
this is for reference after you rotate the nut during testing .
num tighten the bolt by turning the nut with the torque wrench to the rotation in the table .
bolt length step num num bolt dia .
or less num to num bolt dia .
more than num bolt dia .
required rotation num num num use a second wrench to prevent the bolt from turning .
num measure and record the torque required to reach this rotation .
measure torque with the nut in motion .
ensure the torque in footpounds newtonmeters does not exceed the values in the table .
reject any assemblies that exceed the listed torques .
section nummiscellaneous steel materials num torque footpounds newtonmeters nominal bolt dia .
in mm astm a numa numm astm a num a numm num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num num num num num num num continue tightening the nut as follows bolt length step num num bolt dia .
or less num to num bolt dia .
more than num bolt dia .
required rotation num num num num measure the rotation from the initial marking in step num .
num loosen and remove the nut and examine the bolt and nut threads .
reject any assembly that shows evidence of thread shear stripping or torsional failure .
note reject any assemblies that fracture or are stripped before reaching the required rotation .
num .
rotational capacity test long bolts in tension calibrator a .
equipment required calibrated measuring device to measure tension for the bolts .
mark off a vertical line and lines onethird of a turn num degrees and twothirds of a turn num degrees from vertical in a clockwise direction on the face plate of the calibrator .
calibrated manual torque wrench .
spacers andor washers meeting the requirements of subsection num.c.num.a bullet num .
steel section to mount the bolt calibrator .
b .
procedure num measure the bolt length the distance from the underside of the bolt head to the end of the bolt .
num put the nut on the bolt and measure the stickout of the bolt when three to five full threads of the bolt show between the bearing face of the nut and the bolt head .
num install the bolt in the tension calibrator .
if necessary install the required number of spacers to produce the thread stickout measured in step num always use at least one washer under the nut .
num tighten the bolt by turning the nut with a hand wrench to the snug tensions listed below num num kips num num kn .
section nummiscellaneous steel materials num nominal bolt dia .
in mm tension kips kn astm a num a numm astm a num a numm num mnum num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num num num num num num num align the nut to the vertical num degree stripe on the face plate of the bolt calibrator .
num use the calibrated manual torque wrench to turn the nut to at least the tension in kips kn listed below .
tension kips kn nominal bolt dia .
in mm astm a num a numm astm a num a numm num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num num num num num num num record both the torque required to reach the tension and the bolt tension value from the calibrator .
measure torque with the nut in motion .
the torque can not be greater than num x the developed tension in lbf newtons x the bolt diameter in feet meters .
num reject assemblies with torque values that exceed the calculated value .
num further tighten the nut as follows .
bolt length step num num bolt dia .
or less num to num bolt dia .
more than num bolt dia .
required rotation num num num num measure the rotation from the initial marking in step num .
num record the bolt tension .
reject assemblies that fail prior to this rotation either by stripping or fracture .
num after the required rotation the bolt tension in kips kn must equal or exceed the values shown in the table .
reject assemblies that do not meet the tension .
section nummiscellaneous steel materials num nominal bolt dia .
in mm tension kips kn astm a num a numm astm a num a numm num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num num mnum num num num num mnum num num num num num num num num num num num loosen and remove nut and examine the bolt and nut threads .
reject any assembly with any evidence of thread shear stripping or torsional failure .
d. materials warranty num .
ship bolts nuts and washers from each rotationalcapacity lot in the same container .
a .
if shipping only one production lot number for each size nut and washer you may ship the nuts and washers in the same container .
b .
permanently mark each container with the rotationalcapacity lot number so that identification will be possible at any stage before installation .
num .
black bolts nuts and washers must be oily to the touch when installed .
clean and relubricate weathered or rusted bolts nuts and washers before installing them .
num .
improperly stored galvanized assemblies will develop white rust .
clean and relubricate as in subsection num.b.num.a any bolts nuts and washers that show evidence of white rust .
num corrugated steel plank for bridges a .
requirements num .
type use steel that meets astm a numa numm grade num or astm a numa numm grade num and astm a numa numm .
num .
furnish copper steel when specified .
num .
submit a certification according to subsection num materials certification .
b .
fabrication num .
make corrugated steel bridge plank of shopfabricated steel plate .
use the gauge shown on the plans .
num .
form the steel into plank at least num in num mm wide and between num to num in num and num mm deep with at least two complete corrugations .
num .
galvanizing when galvanized plank is specified galvanize the plank as in astm a numa numm or astm a numa numm class gnum .
c. acceptance acceptance is based on the certification .
section nummiscellaneous steel materials num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num steel grid for bridge floors a .
requirements num .
use steel that meets astm a numa numm grade num and has the specified copper content .
num .
submit a certification according to subsection num materials certification .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance acceptance is based on the certification .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numreinforcement and tensioning steel num general description this section includes the requirements for reinforcement and tensioning steel including steel bars pretensioning steel wire strand posttensioning steel wire posttensioning steel bars plain steel bars with threaded ends steel wire steel welded wire reinforcement dowel bars dowel tie bars bar supports epoxy coating num related references a .
standard specifications section numepoxy coated steel reinforcement section numreinforcement and tensioning steel num b. referenced documents qpl num qpl num qpl num crsi manual of standard practices num materials a .
requirements note notify the office of materials and research at least two weeks before blast cleaning the steel reinforcement bars and applying the epoxy coating .
this time will allow the department to schedule an inspection .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
num steel bars for concrete reinforcement a .
requirements num .
type a .
use deformed billet steel bars from rolling mills listed on qpl numand from fabricators listed on qpl num b .
use deformed billet steel bars that meet the requirements of astm a num a numm for bar reinforcement in concrete unless otherwise designated .
c. use deformed billet steel for longitudinal bars in continuously reinforced concrete pavement that meet the requirements of astm a num a numm grade num num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on either qpl approval or on tests conducted by the department .
the department will not accept bent bars that have been straightened and rebent .
aashto astm m num m numm m num mnumm m num m numm m numm numm m num mnumm a num a num m a num a numm a num a numm a num anumm a num a numm a num a numm d num section numreinforcement and tensioning steel num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num pretensioning steel wire strand a .
requirements num .
type use steel wire that meets all the requirements of astm a numa numm .
use grade num for prestressed concrete bridge members .
a .
if you plan to use strands that differ in size from those covered in astm a numa numm submit to the engineer complete data on the proposed strands as stated below .
num .
certification submit a certification from the manufacturer that shows the results of the required tests including stressstrain curves and conformance to these specifications .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the steel based on the results of tests made by the department and the certification from the manufacturer .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num posttensioning steel wire a .
requirements num .
type use steel cable for posttensioning that meets astm a num a numm type ba or wa as specified .
num .
certification submit a certification from the manufacturer that shows the results of the required tests including stressstrain curves and conformance to these specifications .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the steel based on the results of tests made by the department and the certification from the manufacturer .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num posttensioning steel bars a .
requirements num .
type use highstrength steel bars for posttensioning that meet the requirements of astm a num a numm type ii .
section numreinforcement and tensioning steel num num .
drawings a .
show all appurtenances to be used with the bars on shop drawings .
b .
show all dimensions and steel requirements on the drawings .
c. use the appropriate astm designation for the steel if possible .
num .
certification submit a certification that shows the results of the required tests including stressstrain curves and conformance to this specification .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the steel based on the results of the tests made by the department and on the certification from the manufacturer .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num plain steel barsthreaded ends a .
requirements use plain steel bars with threaded ends that meet the requirements of astm a num a numm grade num num num or numwnumw .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the steel based on the certification from the manufacturer .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num steel wire for concrete reinforcement a .
requirements use steel wire that meets the requirements of aashto m num m numm and aashto m num m numm and is the size shown on the plans .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the steel based on the results of the tests made by the department or on the certification from the manufacturer .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numreinforcement and tensioning steel num num steel welded wire fabric reinforcement a .
requirements num .
use steel welded wire reinforcement of the size and dimension shown on the plans and that meets the requirements of aashto m num m numm and aashto m num m numm .
num .
use a vendor listed on qpl num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the steel based on the results of the tests made by the department or on a certification from the manufacturer .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num dowel bars a .
requirements type use dowel bars for concrete pavement that are plain round steel bars that meet or exceed the tensile requirements of table numtensile requirements for deformed bars astm a num a numm grade num num .
b .
fabrication coat dowel bars with either high density polyethylene or epoxy as follows num .
high density polyethylene use polyethylene with the following characteristics thickness num to num mils num to num mm texture smooth and dense enough to provide adequate bond breaking characteristics undercoating adhesive modified rubber blend num to num mils num to num mm thick ensure that the undercoating retains its elasticity and effectively seals small cuts or abrasions from moisture migrating under the polyethylene plastic outer coating .
num .
epoxy prepare the dowels for coating select the epoxy material apply the epoxy and sample and test the properties of coated bars according to the requirements of section num. a .
apply a uniform smooth coating to the bars that results in a film num mils num mils nummm num mm thick after curing .
b .
do not coat the cut ends .
c. handle the coated dowels carefully to prevent damage to the coating or bar .
however bars can be welded through the epoxy to one side of the supportive basket .
section numreinforcement and tensioning steel num c. acceptance the department will accept the steel based on the results of the tests made by the department or on the certification of the manufacturer .
the department will reject dowel bars with burred or deformed ends .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num dowel tie bars a .
requirements use uncoated plain or deformed billetsteel bars that meet the requirements of astm a num m grade num numfor dowel bars or tie bars in curbs concrete medians and other areas specified on the plans .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the steel based on the results of the tests made by the department or on the certification of the manufacturer .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numcastings and forgings num general description this section includes the requirements for the following castings and forgings gray iron drainage castings cast aluminum alloy railing posts aluminum alloy sand mold castings steel castings steel forgings coldfinished carbon shafting steel castings for bridges num related references a .
standard specifications section numsteel structures b. referenced documents aashto astm m num m numm m num m num astm a num a numm astm b num b num m alloy uns anum astm b num qpl num ansi num temper t num num materials num gray iron drainage castings a .
requirements each foundry shall conform to standard operating procedure num sop num inspection of gray iron drainage castings .
num .
type use gray iron drainage castings that meet the requirements of aashto m num class numb .
use foundries listed on qpl num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the castings based on the following quality of work and conformance to dimension and shape requirements including acceptable proof load tests and drawings on file with the office of materials and researchinspection services branch for each casting design supplied .
tension bar test results section numcastings and forgings num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num cast aluminum alloy railing posts a .
requirements num .
type use permanent mold types of castaluminum alloy roadway railing post that meet astm b num requirements .
ensure that the finish on the castings meets the specifications on the plans .
num .
certification submit a report with each shipment of castings that includes test results and certifies compliance with this specification .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the castings based on the following quality of work and conformance to dimension and shape requirements certification that the physical and chemical properties of the material meet these specifications d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num aluminum alloy sand mold castings a .
requirements num .
type use aluminum base alloy and castings that meet the requirements of astm b num b numm alloy uns anum or ansi num temper t num .
num .
certification submit a report with each shipment of castings that includes test results and certifies compliance with this specification .
b .
fabrication sandblast or otherwise clean the scale and sand off the castings to produce a smooth and uniform surface .
c. acceptance the department will accept the castings based on the following quality of work and conformance to the dimension and shape requirements as inspected when received certification that the physical and chemical properties of the material meet these specifications d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numcastings and forgings num num steel castings a .
requirements num .
type use carbon steel castings that meet the requirements of astm a num a numm grade num num .
ensure that the form and dimensions of the steel castings are true to pattern .
num .
certification submit a report with each castings shipment that includes test results and certifies compliance with this specification .
b .
fabrication num .
if the plans require large castings suspend and hammer them all over .
ensure that no cracks flaws or other defects appear after this treatment .
the department will not accept sharp unfilleted angles or corners .
num .
coat surfaces marked finished as soon as practical after finishing with a corrosionresistant grease before removing them from the shop .
num .
apply a shop coat of paint to casting surfaces milled for removing scale scabs fins blisters or other surface deformations .
ensure that the shop coat of paint meets the requirements of subsection num.d.num shop painting .
c. acceptance the department will accept the castings based on the following quality of work and conformance to the dimension and shape requirements as inspected when received certification that the physical and chemical properties of the material meet these specifications d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num steel forgings a .
requirements num .
type use steel forgings that meet the requirements of aashto m numm numm for the class shown on the plans .
num .
certifications a .
submit a record to the engineer of the annealing charges that show the forgings in each charge the melt or melts from which they were secured and the treatment they received .
b .
submit a report with each castings shipment that includes test results and certifies compliance with this specification .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the castings based on the following num .
quality of work and conformance to the dimension and shape requirements as inspected when received num .
certification that the physical and chemical properties of the material meet these specifications d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numcastings and forgings num num coldfinished carbon shafting a .
requirements num .
type use coldfinished carbon steel bars that meet the requirements of aashto m num for the grade shown on plans .
num .
certification submit a certification to the engineer that shows the chemical properties of the material and conformance to the specifications .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on favorable review of the certification .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num steel castings for bridges a .
requirements num .
type use steel castings for bridge components that meet the requirements of astm a num a numm for the class shown on the plans .
num .
certification submit a certification to the engineer that shows the physical and chemical properties of the material and conformance to the specifications .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on favorable review of the certification .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numsteel pile num general description this section includes the requirements for the following types of steel pile welded and seamless steel pile fluted steel shell pile steel hpile section numsteel pile num num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents astm a num a numm astm a num astm a num a numm qpl num qpl num num materials num welded and seamless steel pile a .
requirements num .
type use welded and seamless steel pile of the specified dimensions that meets astm a num requirements .
however use a minimum wall thickness of num in num mm .
a .
ensure that the pile can be driven to the capacity shown on the plans without crimping buckling or otherwise distorting .
b .
mark each pile with the heat number or a lot number corresponding to a heat .
num .
certification furnish all certified mill test reports or inspection reports done by an approved testing laboratory to the engineer .
the reports must certify that the pile conforms to these specifications and show the physical and chemical properties of each heat or lot of materials .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on the certifications or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num fluted steel shell pile a .
requirements num .
type use fluted steel shells made of basic open hearth steel that meets the specified dimensions .
use one of the suppliers listed on qpl num. a .
use steel with a minimum tensile yield strength of num psi num mpa .
b .
use shells with a uniformly tapered lower section with or without extensions of the same diameter .
section numsteel pile num c. reinforce the driving ends of the shells with a collar big enough to withstand being driven without injuring the shell .
d. weld cast steel driving points to the tips of the shells .
num .
certification furnish all certified mill test reports or inspection reports done by an approved testing laboratory to the engineer .
the reports must certify that the pile conforms to these specifications and show the physical and chemical properties of each heat or lot of materials .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on the certifications or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num steel hpile a .
requirements num .
type use steel for hpile that meets the requirements of astm a numa numm grade num .
use one of the suppliers listed on qpl num .
num .
cast steel hpile points for each shipment of cast steel hpile points submit to the engineer a report that includes results of tests to certify compliance with astm a num a numm .
use only the hpile points shown on qpl num .
num .
certification submit certified mill test reports to the engineer that show the physical and chemical properties of each heat or lot of materials and compliance with these specifications .
b .
fabrication num .
make cast steel hpile points from cast steel that meets astm a num a numm grade num num .
num .
ensure that the points give the maximum protection to the outer corners of the hpile and have a wide surface area to support the pile flanges .
num .
ensure that the manufacturers name or identification mark pattern number and heat number are cast or stamped on all castings .
c. acceptance num .
the department will accept the material based on the certifications or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
num .
the geotechnical bureau of the office of materials and research will evaluate cast steel pile points .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numbronze bushings bearings and expansion plates num general description this section includes the requirements for the following bronze bearings and expansion plates bronze bushings selflubricating bronze bearings expansion plates and bushings num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents ansi b num astm b num alloy unsnum astm b num alloy uns num astm b num alloy uns cnum num materials num bronze bearings and expansion plates a .
requirements num .
type use bearings and expansion plates that meet the following requirements a .
cast bronze astm b num alloy unsnum .
b .
rolled bronze astm b num alloy uns num .
num .
certification furnish certification to the engineer showing physical and chemical properties of the material and conformance to these specifications .
b .
fabrication finish contact surfaces of plates in the direction of motion specified by ansi b num no .
num no .
num µm .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on the certifications .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num bronze bushings a .
requirements num .
type use bronze bushings that meet astm b num alloy uns cnum requirements .
section numbronze bushings bearings and expansion plates num num .
certification furnish a certification to the engineer showing physical and chemical properties of the material and conformance to these specifications .
b .
fabrication finish contact surfaces of bushings in the direction of motion specified by ansi b num nos .
num to num num to num µm .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on the certifications .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num selflubricating bronze bearings expansion plates and bushings a .
requirements num .
type use selflubricating bronze bearings expansion plates and bushings that meet subsection num or num. a .
ensure that the surfaces of selflubricating bronze bearings expansion plates and bushings are bored in a geometric recessed pattern .
use a lubricating material in the bearing areas that has a long service life .
b. lubricate approximately num percent of the bearing face .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on the certifications .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section nummiscellaneous metals num general description this section includes the requirements for miscellaneous metals such as lead for plates pipes and other uses and miscellaneous bridge hardware .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents astm a num a numm astm a num a numm astm b num section nummiscellaneous metals num astm f numm num materials num lead for plates pipe and other uses a .
requirements num .
use lead for plates sheet pipe and other uses that meets the requirements of astm b num pig lead .
num .
use common desilverized lead .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num miscellaneous bridge hardware a .
requirements for miscellaneous hardware use the design size and kind shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer .
num .
bolts and dowels use machine bolts drift bolts and dowels that meet the requirements of astm f numm class num .
ensure that machine bolts have square heads and nuts and that the screw threads fit closely .
num .
nails and spikes use steel wire nails and circular crosssection spikes without taper .
use steel boat spikes with forged heads and wedgeshaped shanks and points .
b .
fabrication galvanize hardware according to astm a num a numm or astm a num a numm as applicable if the plans specify galvanized hardware .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numguard rail num general description this section includes the requirements for guardrail components such as guardrail elements terminal sections and fittings cable end anchor assemblies section numguard rail num steel guardrail posts and offset blocks wood guardrail posts and offset blocks num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numpreservative treatment of timber products b. referenced documents astm aashto a num a numm a num a num m a num a num a num a numa numm a num a numa numm b num b numm b num b numm f num m num num spib rules paragraph num qpl num num materials num guardrail elements terminal sections and fittings a .
requirements num .
steel guardrail use guardrail parts that meet aashto m num requirements and are composed of the following elements bridge railing class b type ii beams roadway guardrail class a type ii beams use guardrail from suppliers found on qpl num .
num .
aluminum guardrail use rail elements made from aluminum alloy alclad numtnum sheet that meets astm b num b numm requirements .
use the following fittings fittings material requirements aluminum bolts alloy numtnum astm b numb numm with numminute anodize and numminute seal hex nuts aluminum alloy numtnum not anodized washers may meet astm b num b numm alclad numtnum not anodized num .
certification submit a certification as in subsection num materials certification .
section numguard rail num b .
fabrication num .
general a .
make highway guardrail elements according to the plans .
b .
ensure that all guardrail elements terminal sections and fittings are interchangeable with similar parts regardless of the source or manufacturer .
c. if constructing guardrail on curves with a radius of num ft num m or less curve the rail elements in the shop to the radius on the road side of the rail either concave or convex as required .
num .
aluminum guardrail elements a .
form the rail elements into beams at least num ft num mm wide and num in num mm deep and at least num in num mm thick .
b .
form the terminal ends from the same material as the beams or from alclad numtnum .
c. acceptance num .
steel guardrail the department will accept the material based on the provisions of aashto m num or astm b num b numm .
num .
aluminum guardrail the department will accept the material based on the manufacturers qpl status or on tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty steel guardrail ensure that the manufacturers logo and heat numbers remain legible for at least num years after galvanizing .
num cable and anchor assembly a .
requirements num .
type ensure that the cable and anchor materials meet the following requirements unless shown otherwise on the plans material requirements anchor and metal plates steel astm a num a numm grade num num anchor rod steel astm a num or a num grade num anchor cable preformed galvanized wire rope astm a num type ii num in num mm num x num with right regular lay cable clips and cable thimble commercial quality galvanized dropforged steel bolts and nuts astm f num swaged fittings steel astm a num grade num annealed galvanized suitable for cold swaging ensure the swaged fittings and stud assembly develop at least num of the breaking strength of the cable .
galvanized stud steel astm a num concrete deadman precast class a concrete according to the plans num .
certification submit a certification for these materials according to subsection num materials certification .
section numguard rail num b .
fabrication fabricate and assemble according to the plans .
num .
anchormetal plates build up anchor plates and other metal plates as shown on the plans or form them on a press with or without welded seams .
num .
anchor rod dropforge or form the eye of the anchor rod with a full penetration weld that develops num percent of the rod strength .
num .
metal components a .
galvanize all metal components of the assembly except the anchor cable according to astm a numa numm .
b .
galvanize bolts washers etc .
as stated in astm a numa numm .
c. acceptance the department will accept material based on the certification .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num steel guardrail posts and offset blocks a .
requirements num .
type use steel posts of the dimensions and shapes shown on the plans for guardrails .
unless the plans show otherwise use posts that meet the requirements of astm a num a numm grade num num or astm a num a numm class i grade num num and found in qpl num .
num .
certification submit a certification according to subsection num materials certification .
b .
fabrication galvanize steel posts and offset blocks according to astm a num a numm .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on the certification .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num wood guardrail posts and offset blocks a .
requirements num .
grade use posts and offset blocks that meet the requirements for no .
num timbers paragraph num of the num spib rules .
do not use offset blocks with splits longer than num in num mm .
b .
fabrication num .
tolerances section numguard rail num ensure that the posts do not vary from the specified length by more than num in num mm .
if the plans specify a slope for the top ensure that the slope does not vary more than num in num mm .
num .
seasoning and preservative treatment bore and frame posts then treat the posts and offset blocks according to the requirements of section num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on tests conducted by the department or on the manufacturers qpl status .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num plastic offset blocks a .
requirements num .
type use only plastic offset blocks that are listed on qpl num .
use plastic offset blocks that consist of num percent low density polyethylene and approximately num percent high density polyethylene with a trace of other plastic .
other compositions may be used if approved by the office of materials and research .
num .
certification submit a certification according to subsection num materials certification .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on the manufacturers certification .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numlumber and timber num general description this section includes the requirements for lumber and timber .
num related references a .
standard specifications section num timber structures section numpreservative treatment of timber products b. referenced documents american softwood lumber standard ps num us department of commerce or the national hardwood association section numlumber and timber num astm d num num materials for the definition and limitations of defects use the current manufacturing association grade rules applicable for the species specified .
num lumber and timber a .
requirements num .
saw or finish all lumber and timber as specified from the plants listed in qpl num .
num .
grades use grade rules from an agency that follows the basic provisions of american softwood lumber standard ps num us department of commerce or the national hardwood association .
a. furnish all structural timber in the grades sizes and finish shown in the plans and these specifications or as directed by the engineer .
b .
unless otherwise specified use no .
num or higher grade southern pine to construct buildings shelving and forms .
c. mark the grade on the lumber or timber according to the current manufacturing grade rules for the species .
num .
uses refer to table num below for the working stress requirements for various structural uses of lumber and timber .
a .
the numerical stress values in the table are based upon stressgraded material meeting the requirements of grading rules for the indicated stress developed from the astm d num methods for establishing structural grades of lumber .
b .
you may use commercial stress grades of lumber and timber with grade descriptions if the materials will meet the stress requirements under rules developed from astm d num .
b .
fabrication num .
seasoning and preservation season and treat according to the requirements of section num except use an assay zone for marine lumber timber of .num to num in num to num mm c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on inspection certification or on the results of tests conducted by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num table num working stress requirements based on structural uses of timber structural purpose sizes of members extreme fiber in bending f and tension parallel to grain t compression across grain c horizontal shear h compression parallel to grain c truss members tensionfloor beams and stringersother floor members .
numxnum in num x num mmand larger num num num num num num num capsposts bridge and guardrail sillsmud sills nailing stripstruss members compressiontimbers culvertfender waleshub guards .
num x num in num x num mm and larger num num num num num num num joistsdecking wearingother floor membersrailsrail posts nailing stripstruss members compression and tensionguard rail .
num in num mm and thinner num num num num num num num subdecking flatsubdecking laminatedbracing sway sash and longitudinalgirtsbulkhead plank scupper blockscleats grillage .
num in num mm and thinner num num num num num num num cross bridgesidewalksfire stops .
num in and num in num mm and num mm thick num num num num num num num num note stresses are given in psi mpa section numpiling and round timber num general description this section includes the requirements for timber piles and timber poles .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numpreservative treatment of timber products b. referenced documents ansi num national electrical safety code national institute of standards and technology qpl num section numpiling and round timber num num materials a .
definition and limitation of defects decay disintegration of the wood substance due to wooddestroying fungi .
the words dote and rot mean the same as decay .
red heart is a form of decay .
compression wood an abnormal dense hard growth frequently occurring on the underside of limbs and leaning trunks of coniferous trees .
it is characterized by very wide and eccentric annual growth rings and includes what appears to be an exceptional proportion of summerwood growth .
the contrast in color between springwood and summerwood however is usually less in compression wood than in normal wood .
turpentine butt a scar caused from bleeding the trees to obtain turpentine .
scar a damaged surface caused from injury to the tree during growth .
sweep deviation of a piece or stick from a straight line measured from the center of one end to the center of the other end .
a straight line from the center of the butt to the center of the tip shall lie entirely within the body of the pile .
short crook a crook in which the direction of the piece or stick changes in a very short distance measured lengthwise .
burst check a crack approximately at right angles to the annual rings usually radial cracks in sticks from the center or from near the center to the outside or a combination of this crack and a ring shake caused through either seasoning exposure to high temperature or the process of preservative treatment .
unsound knot a knot solid across the face but containing incipient decay .
cluster knot two or more knots grouped together the fibers of the wood being deflected around the entire unit .
a group of single knots with fibers deflected around each knot separately is not a cluster even though the knots may be close together .
punk knot a fungus decay that extends from the interior of the piece of pile to the outside which when prodded is usually found to contain a snufflike substance .
ring knots three or more knots appearing in the same line of circumference or any foot of length .
num timber piles a .
requirements num .
use round timber piles of any species of wood that will withstand driving and support the load specified .
use plants listed on qpl num .
num .
soundness use piles of sound wood free from decay red heart or insect attack .
a. cedar and cypress the butt ends may have a pipe or stump rot hole not more than num in num mm in diameter .
cypress piles may have peck aggregating not more than num in num mm in diameter .
b .
southern pine piles may have unsound knots less than half the permitted size of a sound knot providing that the unsoundness does not extend more than num in num mm deep and that the adjacent areas of the trunk are not affected .
num .
density a .
all piles shall be dense with at least num annual rings per num in num mm and num in num mm or more of summerwood the darker harder portion of the annual ring as measured over the outer num in num mm of butt diameter on a radial line from the pith .
the contrast in color between summerwood and springwood shall be sharp and the summerwood shall be darker in color .
section numpiling and round timber num b. piles excluded by the above rule may be accepted provided they have at least four annual rings per num in num mm and num or more summerwood as measured over the outer num in num mm of butt diameter on a radial line from the pith .
num .
knots a .
sound knots for piles num ft num m long or less and in num of the length of piles over num ft num m measured from the butt sound knots less than num in num mm or num the diameter of the pile whichever is smaller .
for the top num length of piles over num ft num m long sound knots less than num in num mm or num the diameter of the pile whichever is smaller the size of a knot shall be its diameter measured at right angles to the length of the pile .
b. unsound knots are not permitted except in southern pine piles as specified in subsection num.a.num.b .
c. the sum of sizes of all knots in any num in num mm of the pile shall not exceed twice the size of the largest permitted single knot .
num .
holes allow holes that average less than num inch num mm in diameter if the sum of the average diameter of all holes in any num ft² numm² of pile surface is less than num in num mm .
num .
splits and shakes splits shall not be longer than the butt diameter of the pile .
the length of any shake or combination of shakes in the outer half of the radius of butt of the pile when measured along the curve of the annual ring shall not exceed num the circumference of the butt of the pile .
num .
sapwood piles to be treated with preservative shall have at least num in num mm of sapwood at the butt end .
num .
heartwood a .
in untreated piles for use in exposed work the diameter of the heartwood at the butt shall be at least num of the diameter of the pile at the butt .
b .
if high heartwood content is required for untreated foundation piles the plans will specify the ratio of heartwood to total diameter .
num .
peeling a. peel piles by removing all of the outer bark and at least num percent of the inner bark well distributed over the surface of the pile .
b .
if piles will be treated with preservative do not leave inner bark wider than num in num mm .
c. do not remove more than three annual rings of the solid wood .
num .
cutting and trimming a .
saw butts and tips square with the axis of the pile .
b .
trim or smoothly cut all knots and limbs flush with the surface of the pile or the surface of the swell surrounding the knot .
num .
straightness in general a straight line from the center of the butt to the center of the tip shall lie entirely within the body of the pile .
if specified the department can accept long piles for foundations but not for trestles if the straight line lies partly outside the body of the pile .
the maximum distance between the line and the pile shall not exceed num percent of the length of the pile or num in num mm whichever is smaller .
num .
taper cut piles above the butt swell so it has a continuous taper from the point of butt measurement to the tip .
section numpiling and round timber num num .
twist of grain do not allow spiral grain to exceed num degrees of twist when measured over any num ft num m section of the pile .
num .
limits of defects a. piles shall not have short crooks that deviate more than num in num mm from straightness in any num ft num m length .
b .
burst checks in piles shall be less than num in num mm wide measured at the outside and shall not extend over num in num mm long .
num .
circumferences diameters and lengths a .
the circumferences of piles measured under the bark shall have the minimum and maximum values in table num metric table num for the class specified .
no more than num percent of the piles in any shipment may have circumferences num in num mm less than the tabulated minimum values .
note requirements for tip circumference of piles that are longer than the required length may be applied at the tip end of the required length .
b .
the ratio of the maximum to the minimum diameter at the butt of any pile shall not exceed num. c. individual piles may vary from the length specified by num in num mm in piles shorter than num ft num m and num ft num mm in piles num ft num m or longer .
d. the average length of all piles of a specified length in each lot shall not be less than the length specified .
table num circumferences and diameters of timber piles num ft num mm from butt at tip minimum minimum maximum length circumference dia .
approx .
circumference dia .
approx .
circumference dia .
approx .
feet meter in mm in mm in mm in mm in mm in mm douglas fir hemlock larch pine spruce or tamarack under num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num to num num to num num num num num num num num num num num num num num to num num to num num num num num num num num num num num num num num to num num to num num num num num num num num num num num num num over num num num num num num num num num num num num num num oak and other hardwoods cypress under num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num to num num to num num num num num num num num num num num num num over num num num num num num num num num num num num num num cedars under num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num to num num to num num num num num num num num num num num num num over num num num num num num num num num num num num num num section numpiling and round timber num note if the pile length is num feet num m or less a minimum circumference of num in num mm and minimum diameter of num in num mm at a point num ft num mm from the butt are required .
num .
branding and inspection a .
ensure the pile length and the diameter of the butt and tip are branded in the butts of the piles .
b. legibly brand the preliminary inspection date in the tips .
b .
fabrication seasoning and preservative treatment where required season and treat according to section num .
c. acceptance the department will reject the pile based on any of the following defects decay deep scars unsound knots punk knots ring knots cluster knots compression wood if readily identifiable based on ordinary visual inspection the department may accept piles with sound turpentine scars undamaged by insects provided they meet all other requirements .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num timber poles a .
requirements num .
select timber poles from plants listed on qpl num .
num .
ensure that the poles that meet the requirements of the latest revision of ansi num in the national electrical safety code published by the national institute of standards and technology with the following exceptions a .
section num definitionsmodify the short crook definition as follows any localized deviation from straightness within any section num ft num m or less in length shall not be more than num in num mm when measured with a straightedge parallel to the long axis of the pole .
b .
section num material requirements num shape num ashall read as follows for poles num ft num m and shorter of all species except northern white cedar a straight line joining the edge of the pole at the butt and the edge of the pole at the top in num percent or more of those poles supplied shall not be distant from the surface of the pole at any point by more than num in num mm for each num ft num m of length between these points .
in the remainder of those poles supplied num percent the poles may have a deviation of num in num mm for each num ft num m of length when measured as above .
c. section num material requirements num shape numshall read as follows sweep in two planes double sweep not permitted .
num .
use the class and length specified on the plans .
num .
you may peel poles by machine except that poles more than num ft num m long may be debarked and trimmed by hand in lieu of machine peeling .
trim so that you preserve the buttressing effects of all overgrown knots .
num .
unless otherwise specified or indicated on the plans frame poles with flat roofs and slab grains .
section numpiling and round timber num num .
frame drill and machine poles as necessary before preservative treatment .
b .
fabrication seasoning and preservative treatment where required season and treat according to section num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numwood posts and bracing num general description this section includes the requirements for wood fence posts and bracing and wood sign posts .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numguard rail components section numpreservative treatment of timber products b. referenced documents astm a numm qpl num num materials num wood fence posts and bracing a .
requirements num .
type use southern pine for wood posts and bracing .
use the dimensions specified on the plans .
num .
physical characteristics use posts and bracing that have the following characteristics be round or sawed but all posts on a single project shall be the same .
be cut from sound and solid trees and contain no unsound knots .
accept sound knots if the diameter of the knot does not exceed num of the diameter of the piece at the point where it occurs .
be free from decayed wood rot and red heart and a ring shake and season checks that penetrate at any point more than num the diameter of the piece or are greater than num in num mm wide .
show at least four annual rings per num in num mm and at least num summerwood unless using southern pine veneer cores .
have no short or reverse bends .
num .
draw a line from the center of the top to the center of the butt .
the line shall not fall outside the body of the post nor be more than num in num mm from the geometric center of the post at any point .
section numwood posts and bracing num num .
the maximum allowable change in diameter of the post shall not exceed num in num mm in num ft num m. num .
accessories use metal caps to cover the tops of the posts .
use caps that are at least num in num mm thick .
use material that is aluminum or galvanized steel with num ozft² num gm² coating according to astm a numm .
use caps only when required by the plans .
b .
fabrication num .
peel all posts and bracing for their full length .
remove all bark and inner skin .
num .
trim knots close to the body of the post before treatment .
num .
saw all butts and tips square .
for posts that will be driven you may make the butt end pointed before treatment .
num .
seasoning and preservative treatment treat all posts according to the requirements of section num .
c. acceptance check qpl num for preapproved manufacturers that supply materials compliant with this specification .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num wood sign posts a .
requirements num .
unless otherwise specified surface wood sign posts on all four sides to the dimensions specified .
a .
ensure wood sign posts meet the same quality requirements as wood guard rail posts in subsection num wood guard rail posts and offset blocks .
b .
ensure posts do not vary from the specified length by more than num in num mm .
c. trim both ends of the posts .
num .
accessories use metal caps to cover the tops of the posts .
use caps that are at least num in num mm thick .
use material that is aluminum or galvanized steel with num ozft² num gm² coating according to astm a numm .
use caps only when required by the plans .
b .
fabrication num .
seasoning and preservative treatment bore and frame posts before treating them .
treat the posts according to the requirements of section num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numpreservative treatment of timber products num general description this section includes the requirements for applying preservatives conditioning treating inspecting marking testing and documenting the necessary information for treated timber used in department work .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents american wood preservers association awpa cnum wood for highway construction preservative treatment by pressure method awpa cnum awpa mnum awpa mnum awpa pnum aashto m num qpl num num materials num conditioning and preservative treatment a .
requirements num .
condition and preservative treat all timber products to meet the requirements of american wood preservers association awpa standard cnum wood for highway constructionpreservative treatment by pressure method except as described in this section .
num .
treatment plants ensure treatment plants comply with quality control procedures in awpa mnum .
a .
to expedite the work a commercial inspection agency approved by the department will inspect and test all treated timber products including any preservative treatment at the treatment plant before it is delivered to the project .
the treament plant shall bear all the cost associated with the inspection and test .
b .
before requesting an inspection the authorities of the treatment plant shall acquaint themselves with the timber specification requirements and shall segregate the material to be inspected for department work from other stock .
num .
preservatives use preservatives that meet the requirements in the awpa standard unless otherwise specified in the plans or the specifications .
a .
you may select one of three preservatives creosote pentachlorophenol chromated copper arsenate cca from the materials and usage table in awpa cnum .
b .
ensure pentachlorophenol solutions have at least num percent pentachlorophenol by weight dissolved in the petroleum solvents specified or pentachlorophenol in awpa pnum type a .
section numpreservative treatment of timber products num b .
fabrication num .
as practicable cut frame and bore timber before treatment .
num .
condition the timber first .
for southern pine species use the following treatment pentapetroleum dry in kiln to num average moisture content or less or condition in steam chromated copper arsenate cca dry in kiln to num average moisture content or less note do not heat the wood in the preservative and do not use boulton drying .
num .
preservative penetration ensure the preservative penetrates at least num in num mm or num percent of the sapwood for all lumber timber wood fence posts and ties in contact with the ground .
a .
ensure lumber timber and ties that do not contact the ground meet awpa cnum requirements .
b .
ensure preservative penetrates all other materials piles and poles according to applicable awpa requirements .
num .
preservative retention treat guard rail posts and offset blocks with pentachlorophenol or cca with a minimum num lbft³ num kg m³ retained in the outer num in num mm as required in awpa cnum and cnum .
num .
retreatment you may retreat a charge of material or a portion of it if the initial treatment does not meet requirements for retention penetration or appearance .
the department will allow only one retreatment .
note the department will reject any damage due to retreatment .
num .
conditioning after treatment a .
condition material that is dustfree .
b .
for lumber or timber that is treated with waterborne preservative and is to be painted dry by air kiln or some method of artificial conditioning to a moisture content of not more than num percent of the weight of the ovendry wood .
c. protect the treated lumber from the elements with a prime coat of paint or other approved means .
d. ensure the moisture content does not rise above num percent before applying the first coat of paint .
e. dry material treated with waterborne preservative that will not be painted to surface dryness in air or otherwise before installing it .
c. acceptance num .
inspection the department will sample and test preservatives according to the requirements of aashto m num .
note check qpl num for preapproved manufacturers that supply material compliant with this specification .
a .
the department will determine the level of preservative retention by testing the num to num in num to num mm assay zone .
b .
unless otherwise provided an approved commercial inspection agency will inspect treated timber products according to awpa mnum .
c. the inspector will test before during and after treating .
num .
marking section numpreservative treatment of timber products num the inspector will mark each acceptable piece with a hammer stamp before and after treatment .
a .
stamp only num percent of the offset blocks after treatment .
b .
ensure that both inspection stamps identify the inspector .
ensure that the beforetreatment stamp is clearly distinguished from the aftertreatment stamp .
num .
reporting the inspector from an approved commercial inspection agency shall a .
prepare reports of the treating process and results of the inspection that confirm treatment was completed according to these specifications .
b. furnish these reports to the office of materials and research .
c. report according to awpa mnum .
d. get a shipping report from the treatment plant showing the project number purchaser sizes and amounts of materials and preservative type for each shipment for department work .
e. furnish the shipment report and the treatment report to the office of materials and research .
d. materials warranty num .
retest treated material that has been in stock for two years before using .
num .
the department will reject any materials that fail to meet specifications unless they are retreated to meet all applicable requirements .
section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num general description this section includes the following requirements for precastprestressed concrete bridge members and piling manufacturing inspecting testing marking painting rubbing as specified plant handling storing shipping the term precastprestressed concrete is referred to as prestressed concrete in the rest of this section .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numfield laboratory building section numconcrete structures section numreinforcement steel section numepoxy coated steel reinforcement section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num section numfine aggregates section numportland cement section numadmixtures section numreinforcement and tensioning steel section numbronze bushings bearings and expansion plates section numpaint section numelastomeric bearing pads section numepoxy resin adhesives b. referenced documents aashto m num aashto m num aashto m num aashto t num aashto t num astm a numa numm astm a numa numm astm a num astm a num astm a num aashto specification for highway bridges laboratory sopnum standard operating procedures for precastprestressed concrete qpl num gdt num num materials use materials that meet the specifications as follows material section concrete class aaa except as noted num steel bars for reinforcement num pretensioning steel wire strand num posttensioning steel wire num posttensioning steel bars num plain steel barsthreaded ends num portland cement num fine aggregate for mortar num aluminum powder num section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num selflubricating bronze bearing and expansion plates and bushings num primer coats num elastomeric pads num epoxy resin adhesive num microsilica silica fume num note do not use accelerators numhour accelerated strength concrete that contain chlorides in any prestressed concrete .
num prestressed concrete bridge members a .
requirements num .
portland cement use type i type ii or type iii cement that meets requirements of aashto m num for low alkali cement .
a .
use type ii cement in concrete to cast pile for specific locations noted on the plans .
num .
coarse aggregate a .
use the size specified and approved for prestressed concrete products .
b .
do not use unconsolidated limerock coarse aggregate in prestressed concrete piling or in any structure that has direct contact with water .
num .
microsilica silica fume the department may approve silica fume as an additive to concrete .
if approved add the silica fume at a rate not to exceed num percent of the cement content .
num .
epoxycoated reinforcement steel and wire if top steel mat of the bridge deck is epoxycoated the shear steel in the prestressed concrete beams will be epoxy coated in accordance with section num .
num .
welded wire fabric use welded wire fabric that meets the following requirements a .
use smooth wire fabric that meets the material requirements of aashto m num astm a num and this section .
b .
use deformed wire fabric that meets the requirements of aashto m num astm a num and this section .
num .
pretensioning steel wire strand use strands that meet all the requirements of astm a num grade num .
num .
slump limitation ensure the slump meets subsection num.a table num concrete mix table except when type f high range water reducers hrwr are added .
with hrwr you may increase the slump value from num in to num in num mm to num mm with a maximum slump value not to exceed num in num mm provided the concrete mix does not segregate .
num .
facilities and equipment plans facilities are approved according to laboratory sopnum standard operating procedures for precastprestressed concrete .
see qpl num for a list of approved facilities .
submit a complete set of plans and an itemized equipment list of the prestressing facilities to the engineer .
a .
for established plants already approved by the department the department will send a written notice about approval .
the plant need not comply with the requirements concerning plans and equipment listing .
b .
the department may withdraw the waiver at its discretion if the plant changes the facilities equipment production methods types of products or for any other reason .
section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num b .
fabrication num .
general plant requirements furnish erection drawings to the engineer that show the placement of superstructure units especially when the units are not interchangeable with respect to transverse placement within a span or with respect to the reversal of ends within a span .
num .
manufacturing facilities and equipment ensure that the prestressed concrete bridge members are made at a plant that has as a minimum the facilities and equipment specified as follows a .
do not start manufacturing until the engineer approves the facilities and equipment .
note regardless of approval the contractor is responsible for the facilities performance and obtaining additional equipment as needed .
b .
beds construct beds for casting prestressed concrete of concrete these shall be level or on a grade acceptable to the engineer .
c. anchorages design and construct anchorages so they will not yield under num percent of the maximum design load .
d. forms construct steel side and bottom forms unless the department allows other materials .
num design the forms so the bridge members will be well within the tolerances specified in subsection num.b.num .
num anchor the forms to prevent movement .
e. stressing equipment num jacks use jacks in good repair that do not leak .
calibrate them with the actual gauge or gauges that you will be using .
you may use pressure gauges load cells or dynamometers .
ensure all jack systems have devices that prevent the gauge pointer from fluctuating .
num calibration calibrate all devices to a reading accuracy of num percent within the proposed stressing range .
use an approved testing laboratory to calibrate the devices .
have the laboratory furnish at least five copies of the calibration chart for each device to the engineer .
recalibrate all stressing systems at least every num months and as required by the engineer .
use gauges that you can read from num ft num m and have a capacity of twice the maximum load .
f. elongation measurement use a system approved by the engineer and isolated from any movement in the bed or anchorages .
g. curing systems equipment use one of the curing methods listed below .
do not use curing compounds on prestressed concrete units unless the engineer gives written permission .
num water curing use equipment that consists of a clean nondeleterious water source a method of application and enough burlap or other means of moisture retention that will keep all surfaces of the concrete wet during the curing cycle except those in contact with the forms .
num steam curing use the following minimum basic equipment an enclosure tight enough to maintain a uniform atmospheric temperature around the concrete units .
a steam system that distributes live steam uniformly through nozzles capable of maintaining a temperature of at least num ºf num ºc in all weather .
do not eject steam directly against concrete or forms .
a controlling device installed in the steam line that helps maintain a constant temperature .
a recording thermometer for each num ft num m of bed length .
num heated forms uniformly heat the forms with a recirculating system that distributes the heat evenly .
use a system that includes a means of retaining moisture on concrete surfaces except those in contact with the forms .
section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num a recording thermometer for each num ft num m of bed length .
a weathertight covering for each bed to ensure uniform heating throughout the bed .
h. vibrators use internal vibrators with at least num impulses per minute .
ensure the vibrator heads are small enough to reach through the prestressing and reinforcing steel to all portions of the form .
num use enough vibrators to properly compact the concrete .
have an additional standby vibrator in good operating condition for each concrete placing operation .
num get the engineers approval of the vibration procedure and of the number and types of vibrators before pouring .
num you may use external vibration in conjunction with internal vibration when the engineer so approves .
i. grout pump use grout pumps that can pump the fluid grout and maintain a uniform pressure of num lbsin² num kpa for at least num seconds .
j .
storage areas use plant storage areas that have surfaces capable of supporting the prestressed concrete bridge members without settlement .
ensure the storage area has blocks to support the units properly at the required points .
num .
substitution of reinforcement you may substitute welded wire fabric for the bar reinforcement shown on the plans .
the department will not pay extra for the substitution .
the substitution is subject to the following a .
design notes submit detailed shop drawings and design notes including any changes to the engineer for approval before using welded wire fabric .
b .
indicate on the design notes that the welded wire fabric will provide the same or greater strength as that provided by the bar reinforcing shown on the plans .
c. design fabric use according to the latest aashto specification for highway bridges .
prepare the drawings on num x numin num x num mm sheets .
d. have an engineer registered in the state of georgia stamp both drawings and notes .
e. design the yield strength for the wire fabric not to exceed num psi num mpa but not be less than num psi num mpa .
do not splice by welding or mechanical coupling .
f. if using welded wire fabric for stirrups of bar reinforcement embed the wires perpendicular to the axis of the beam at least num in num mm into the slab .
leave at most a clearance of num in num mm from the top of slab to the welded wire fabric .
g. embed at least two cross wires wires parallel to the longitudinal axis of the beam in the slab with the closer cross wire clearing the top of the beam by at least num in num mm .
h. you may use welded wire fabric in the anchorage zone at the ends of the beam to replace the stirrups that enclose the prestressing steel in the bottom flange and the vertical stirrups that do not protrude beyond the top of the beam .
i .
ensure that the wires perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the beam have the same steel area as that of the bar reinforcing .
j .
use either smooth or deformed wires for welded wire fabric .
use the aashto specification for highway bridges for the proper methods to embed and splice the fabric .
num .
substitution of strands you may use strands of different arrangement size or arrangement and size .
the department will not pay extra for the substitution .
the substitution is subject to the following structural and physical requirements a .
ensure that the net prestressed force of the strands after losses equals that shown on the plans .
b .
ensure that the ultimate strength of the member meets the applicable requirements of aashto specification for highway bridges .
c. ensure that the eccentricity pattern of the substituted strands is about the same as the pattern shown on the plans .
section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num d. before substituting strands submit to the engineer all changes and detailed shop drawings with design notes .
ensure that the design notes indicate compliance with the requirements .
prepare drawings on num x numin num x num mm sheets .
note if you propose to use strands that differ in size from those covered in astm a num submit complete data on the strands to the engineer for approval .
do not use individual strand couplings .
e. have an engineer registered in the state of georgia stamp both drawings and notes .
num .
concrete manufacture and mixing a .
manufacture and place concrete according to the requirements of section num. b .
mix the concrete according to subsection num.e and subsection num.d.num except when adding hrwr .
num when adding hrwr dose the hrwr at the casting yard under the direct supervision of the producers quality control .
do not exceed the hrwr manufacturers recommended dosage .
num after dosing mix the concrete at mixing speed for at least num revolutions .
note do not exceed num total revolutions at mixing and agitating speeds .
num after adding the plasticizer no additional mixing water will be permitted .
num .
concrete pouring fabricate the ends of all beams and girders to be vertical in the final erected position .
a. roughfloat the tops of beams at approximately the initial set .
b .
all nominal lengths shown on the plans are horizontal dimensions .
c. ensure that the fabricator adjusts the lengths as necessary to account for the final erected position of the member .
d. slope bearing assemblies to accommodate the erected position of the member .
num .
methods of prestressing you may either pretension posttension or combine these methods to prestress concrete bridge members .
a. pretensioning you may pretension with either the singlestrand or the multistrand jacking method .
note do not use strands from more than one source in any one tensioning operation .
ensure the method used meets these requirements num strand splices get approval from the engineer for splicing methods and devices .
jacking method action singlestrand use only one splice per strand .
multistrand splice all strands or no more than num of the strands .
ensure that the spliced strands have similar physical properties are from the same source and have the same twist or lay .
locate splices outside the prestressed units .
num wire failures the engineer may accept wire failures if the area of broken wires does not exceed num percent of the total area of the strands .
num stressing preparations prepare the members as follows a carefully place and thread all strands in the bed .
b avoid contaminating the strand with oil grease or other bond breaking material .
if any strand is contaminated clean the strand with a suitable solvent or replace the strand .
section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num c after final stressing position all strands within the location tolerances specified in subsection num.b.num .
d use strand vises designed for the size of pretensioning strand to anchor the strand .
e after anchoring ensure that the vises sustain the pretensioning force without slipping until the release of stress .
ensure that the vise grips seat no more than num in num mm each .
f to prevent strands from bonding together encase the strand in a conduit that can resist the pressure exerted by the concrete .
g use conduit with an id allowing free movement of the encased strand but no greater than the diameter of the strand plus num in num mm .
h secure the conduit to prevent both longitudinal movement along the strand and bonding at the location shown on the plans num in num mm .
i tape the conduit to keep concrete out .
use tape and conduit manufactured from a noncorrosive material compatible with both the concrete and steel .
do not debond the strand for the full length of members .
num pretensioning operation use elongation to control this operation .
ensure that the hydraulic pressure gauge readings at the time of the measured net elongation are within num percent of the calculated gauge reading for that particular elongation .
ensure that the net elongation and final gauge measurements agree within num percent of their computed theoretical values .
the measurements of force and elongation shall algebraically agree with each other within a num tolerance .
if any measurement varies by more than num percent the department will stop all work .
correct the defect before proceeding .
pretension the members as follows a initial tension after threading the strand in the bed apply an initial tensioning force to each strand .
do not use elongation to measure the amount of initial tension but use a dynamometer hydraulic jack gauge or dead weight .
b final tension calculate the final stress from the final elongation measured between established reference points .
use points that are independent of any movement in the bed or anchorages that might occur during the pretensioning operation .
calculate the design elongation as follows d pl ae where d design elongation in inches millimeters .
p tensioning force in pounds kilonewtons subtract the initial tensioning force from p. l distance from dead end anchorage to reference point measured in inches millimeters a crosssectional area of strand in square inches millimeters .
e modulus of elasticity of strand in pounds per square inch mpa .
c add correction factors to the design elongation for strand anchorage slip and temperature .
correct any movement in the anchorage abutments or in the overall anchorage system .
use the final elongation figure as the net elongation in jacking the strand .
d singlestrand jacking do not let the jack ram rotate more than one revolution while stressing any strand .
e draped strand jacking partially jack draped strands from the end of the bed to add tension .
raise or lower the strands to their final position to get the final tension .
ensure that the strands have no more than four points where the strand changes slope two of which shall be at each anchorage .
section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num use approved low friction devices at pickup and holddown points .
make the devices maintain the desired vertical and horizontal positioning of the strand .
after partial jacking deflect the strands to their final position in a sequence approved by the engineer .
f final readings after final stressing position all strands within the location tolerances specified in subsection num.b.num .
g calculate the final elongation according to subsection num.b.num.a.num.b .
uniformly distribute stress in the strands throughout the bed length .
num detensioning operation before detensioning submit the pattern and schedule for releasing the strands to the engineer for advance approval .
detension the members as follows a strip or loosen forms that tend to restrict the horizontal or vertical movement of the member prior to releasing the stress .
b if curing with steam carefully release the strand because of dimensional changes due to temperature and shrinkage changes .
where possible release the pretensioned strand while the units are moist and warm .
c in deflected strand construction immediately release the hold down devices within the member or members after curing with steam .
num stress release strength you may transfer stress to the concrete unless otherwise specified on the plans or in the special provisions based on the following requirements minimum strength determined by cylinders cast of the same concrete section minimum strength age concrete ibeams box beams flat slab deck sections or tee slab deck sections numpsi num mpa num hrs piling num psi num mpa other members as specified on the plans num strand release use the following table for each type of strand type of strand release single strand heat each strand and allow it to pull itself apart in the sequence of the approved pattern and schedule of release .
do not cut the strands .
multiple strand release either a symmetrical group of strands or all of the strands simultaneously .
remove the load on the strands from the anchorage and place it on the jacking system .
gradually release the jack or jacks until the strands are relaxed .
draped strand release according to a method where the weight of the beam is compared with twice the total amount of the vertical components of the holddown forces .
section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num use one of the following two methods method release as follows method i beam weight less than twice the total amount and vertical restraints can not counteract the vertical components of the hold down forces heat each draped strand at the end of each member to failure in the sequence of the approved pattern and schedule of release .
release holddowns and remove holddown bolts .
release straight strands as noted in subsection num.b.num.a.num method ii beam weight more than twice the total amount release holddown devices within the beam .
release the strands from the top to the bottom by either heating or jacking in the sequence of the approved pattern and schedule of release .
b. posttensioning use either the system required by the plans or an approved alternate system .
alternate systems may include the posttensioning of both straight and draped tendons .
ensure that the system meets the appropriate requirements that follow num tendons do not splice posttensioning tendons .
num ducts accurately position the ducts in which posttensioning tendons are placed and securely fasten them to prevent movement during concrete placement .
use flexible metal conduit metal tubing or other acceptable material for the ducts .
num stressing requirements prepare the members as follows a carefully thread tendons into the ducts .
b avoid contaminating the strand with oil grease or other bond breaking material .
if any strand is contaminated clean the strand with a suitable solvent or replace the strand .
c follow the stressing procedures and sequences approved by the engineer .
d after stressing anchor the tendons against the ends of the members and fill the ducts with grout .
num concrete strength stress the posttensioning tendons after the concrete in the member has reached the minimum strength and age requirements as follows minimum strength age num psi num mpa num days num psi num mpa num days c. posttensioning operation in general tension straight tendons from one end .
simultaneously tension draped tendons from each end .
pretension the members as follows num initial tension after threading the tendon in the duct apply an initial tensioning force of up to num percent of the final tensioning force with a jack .
determine the initial tension by reading the gauge .
do not use elongation to measure the amount of initial tension .
num final tension compute the final stress on tendons from the amount of the final elongation measurement checked by the jack pressure gauge reading .
num gauge reading ensure that the pressure gauge reading at the time of the measured elongation is within num percent of the calculated gauge reading for that particular elongation .
if the gauge pressure reading varies by more than num percent from the calculated reading stop the stressing operation and correct the defect before proceeding .
section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num num jacking while jacking draped tendons ensure that jack pressures and elongations are kept as near equal as is possible at each of the two jacks so the elongation measurements and jack pressures remain proportional .
num anchor devices design anchor devices that secure the tendon for the size of posttensioning tendon used .
after anchoring ensure that the devices can maintain a prestressed load of num percent of the maximum design load and do not slip more than num in num mm after anchoring .
place anchor devices exactly at right angles to the axes of the posttensioned tendons .
carefully note anchorage losses and take the proper corrective measures to ensure that the tendon has the final design stress .
num .
grouting a .
time limitations complete all grouting within num hours after posttensioning .
b. grout make grout to a consistency of thick paint .
num mix by volume num part portland cement num part max .
sand passing a no .
num num µm sieve and num part max .
water .
num within the limit specified vary the proportions of sand and water as required by the engineer .
num if you need to fill enclosures as hereinafter specified you may eliminate sand and use a neat cement grout in the mix .
num after adding all ingredients mix the batch for three minutes .
num make batches of grout small enough so that the batch may all be used up in less than num minutes .
num immediately before grouting blow out tendon ducts with compressed air .
ensure that the compressed air does not contain oil .
num vent each duct at each end .
ensure the vent has the means for positive closure when subjected to a minimum pressure of num psi num kpa .
num pump the grout into the duct towards an exit vent .
num after the grout has expelled all entrapped air and is flowing in a solid stream close the exit vent and build the pumping pressure to a minimum of num psi num kpa .
hold it at that level for a minimum of num seconds .
num close the grout entrance vent .
num do not move or disturb the member at all for at least num hours after grouting .
num .
concrete finish a. beams num finish the outside face of certain exterior beams specified in the table of bridge areas requiring a type iii finish in subsection num.ab with the type iii special surface coating finish .
num finish all other beams with a steel form finish .
num score the surfaces of the top flanges of all beams with a stiff wire brush or equivalent .
score the beams transverse to the longitudinal axis of the beams .
num transversely scrub the entire beam top with a coarse brush to remove all laitance and to produce a roughened surface for bonding to the slab .
remove all concrete fins or projections to produce a vertical face at the edge of the beam .
num if using prestressed concrete deck panels finish both sides of the beams top flange with a trowel for num in num mm from each panel edge to ensure a smooth and level bearing area .
b. superstructure deck units finish the riding surface of superstructure deck unitsflat slabs channels double tees etc.as specified in subsection num.t.num and the plans .
finish the traffic face and top face of curbs on exterior units and the outside face of certain exterior beams as specified in the table of bridge areas requiring a type iii finish in subsection num.ab .
c. substructure units finish the top surfaces of caps and piling with the type ivfloated surface finish specified in subsection num.ab.num .
d. patching the engineer will inspect all honeycombed areas .
the engineer may reject bridge members with extensive honeycombs within bearing areas .
section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num num patch as directed by the engineer as soon as possible after form stripping .
num the engineer may require that you use an epoxy bonding compound .
num remove holddown devices from the bottoms of the beams .
num coat the resulting holes with an epoxy bonding compound and plug them with grout .
num .
concrete curing cure concrete with one of the methods listed below .
provide means for keeping the temperature of bridge members above the freezing point for num days after concrete placement except for steam curing .
the department may reject bridge members based on improper curing .
a .
water curing cover all concrete surfaces that are not in contact with the forms with wet burlap or other suitable material .
keep the member wet for num days or until the concrete has reached the stress release strength specified in subsection num.b.num.a.num .
b .
steam curing do not begin steam curing for at least four hours after final placement of concrete .
num the engineer may delay the start longer if the concrete has not taken its initial set .
you may use sufficient heat during the delay to maintain the temperature of the concrete between num º and num ºf num º and num ºc .
num ensure the steam curing enclosures retain moisture and heat .
num after steaming begins you may raise the enclosure temperature at a maximum rate of num ºf num ºc per hour until the surface temperature of the concrete reaches an optimum temperature not to exceed num ºf num ºc .
num ensure that the differential surface temperature of the concrete within a member does not exceed num ºf num ºc during the curing period .
num continue steaming until reaching the stress release strength .
num lower the enclosure temperature at a maximum rate of num ºf num ºc per hour .
num maintain a film of water on all exposed surfaces of the concrete during the steam curing cycle .
num do not exceed the maximum temperatures .
num the department may reject bridge members based on excessive temperature .
c. heated forms when using approved heated forms keep the exposed surfaces of the concrete wet at all times .
num enclose the beds with a suitable weathertight covering supported to uniformly heat throughout the bed .
num apply the requirements stated in subsection num.b.num.b concerning the delay period temperature control curing duration and basis of rejection .
num .
tolerances a .
manufacture prestressed concrete bridge members within the dimensional tolerances listed in sopnum standard operating procedures for precastprestressed concrete .
these tolerances generally will be the maximum deviation allowed although normal manufacturing tolerances will be well within those listed .
b .
the department may reject bridge members based on excessive deviations .
num .
galvanized coatings a .
before shipping beams galvanize the exposed surfaces and edges of embedded structural steel bearing components and all exposed surfaces of attached structural steel bearing components according to astm a num a numm or a num a numm .
b .
touch up all areas to be welded after the welded area has cooled and the weld is completed and cleaned .
c. galvanize miscellaneous structural steel hardware bolts and washers prior to storage at the casting yard or jobsite .
num .
marking note this requirement does not apply to single point pickup locations placed on piling .
section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num a .
with the exception of the departments inspection stamp the contractor is responsible for the placement and accuracy of all markings on bridge members according to these specifications .
b .
the inspector will not act for the manufacturer with respect to marking but will cooperate with the plant personnel to ensure that the work is properly done with respect to time of marking accuracy of description and accuracy of location of marks and lettering .
c. locate the markings so they are hidden after completing project construction .
d. do not ship any unit from the plant until it carries the official gdt stamp and number assigned by the department to the inspector at the plant nor until the inspector checks and approves the markings required by these specifications .
e. required markings clearly mark bridge members to indicate the project identification date of manufacture beam identification number properly located to coordinate with the erection drawing pile length and location of pile singlepoint pick up .
f. time of marking num before stress transfer immediately after forms are removed and before transferring stress individually identify and date members .
this helps keep accurate records on each members bed location and date of concrete placement .
num before shipping give the inspector advance notice of shipping .
after securing members for shipment apply marking consisting of the project identification to each member .
g. the inspector will place the gdt stamp and number on each member .
the inspector will not use the gdt stamp until after the members have been satisfactorily finished and stored .
num .
handling and storing a. prestressing steel protect all prestressing steel from contact with dissimilar metals to prevent galvanic action and excessive rusting .
num the department will not consider light rust that does not visibly etch the steel as detrimental .
num keep prestressing steel free of harmful materials such as grease oil wax clay dirt paint and loose rust .
num use special care to keep prestressing steel free of form oil and other bondreducing material that may be used on the forms .
num handle prestressing steel at all times in such manner as to prevent kinks and nicks .
the department will not allow prestressing tendons that have kinks nicks bends or other defects .
num do not use torches or welding equipment adjacent to tensioned strand unless the strand is insulated against heating or burning .
b. reinforcement steel handle place and support all reinforcement steel according to the requirements of section num. c. prestressed concrete bridge members handle store and ship prestressed concrete bridge members in a way to eliminate the danger of cracks fractures and excessive bending stresses .
handle members by the two embedded pickup points unless the engineer approves other methods .
num except for piling handle members so their vertical axes remain plumb at all times .
num support members in storage on firm blocking located immediately below the two embedded pick up points .
in multiple layer storage support members in the stack with blocks of uniform thicknesses and in a vertical line .
num set all blocking at right angles to the longitudinal axis of the member and the longitudinal axis of the blocking shall be horizontal .
do not ship members until the concrete reaches its ultimate design strength .
note replace members that were damaged in handling or storage at no additional expense to the department .
however the engineer may determine that the damage is minor and may approve use of the member .
d. piling handle store and ship piling after stress release .
num the department may reject any piling cracked in handling storing or loading if the crack warrants .
section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num num the department will reject any cracked piling destined for locations involving sea water or alkali soils .
num mark rejected pile as rejected .
num store piling in groups with the same length .
num transport piling in a manner approved by the engineer .
upon request the engineer will furnish drawings giving the limits of truck bolster spacing for various sizes and lengths of piling .
e. beams handle or store fully pretensioned beams after stress release .
num use pickup and support points within num ft num mm of the beam ends .
num support beams on firm blocking located within num ft num mm of the permanent bearing area of the beam .
num you may handle or store fully posttensioned beams num hours after the grout has been placed in the tendon ducts .
num for beams manufactured by the combined method of pretensioning and posttensioning you may handle and store them after the pretensioning phase is completed .
do not handle again until num hours after grout placement .
num do not ship beams and other superstructure units until after their strength reaches the required minimum num day design strength .
num store beams in single layers not in stacks .
support beams so they meet the following requirements concerning warp and sweep twist of vertical axes of the ends of beams due to misalignment of blocking the maximum deviation between the vertical axes of the ends of beams shall be num inft num mmm of beam height .
tilt of vertical axis of an end of beam from the vertical due to deviation of blocking from the horizontal the maximum deviation of the vertical axis of an end of a beam shall be num inft num mmm of beam height .
lateral sweep due to manner of storage there shall be no discernible sweep induced by the manner in which a beam is stored .
c. acceptance num .
plant inspection a .
give notice to the engineer give the engineer ample notice before starting work so that the engineer can inspect all plant facilities involved in the production .
do not manufacture anything until the engineer approves all facilities .
b .
facilities for inspection allow free access to the inspector to all parts of the plant involved in the production process .
c. inspector authority the inspector has the authority to reject materials or quality of work that do not meet the specifications .
in cases of dispute the contractor may appeal to the engineer whose decision will be final .
num .
rejections if any material or finished members are defective they will be rejected even though the inspector may have accepted them .
a .
promptly replace rejected material or quality of work or make it good at your own expense .
num .
provisions for testing furnish and maintain sufficient testing equipment so that the inspector can conduct the following tests at the casting yard material test method fine aggregate aashto t num coarse aggregate aashto t num hardened concrete gdt num section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members num a. hardened concrete make cylindrical molds available for use on each casting bed .
b .
provide and maintain a machine and other accessories such as capping molds heating pots and capping compound sufficient to test compression specimens according to aashto t num. c. furnish all testing materials without cost to the department well in advance of the anticipated time of use .
the department will not compensate the contractor if the work is delayed waiting for approval of the materials furnished for testing .
num .
facilities for the inspector furnish for the sole use of the inspector a suitable field laboratory according to subsection num subsection num and subsection num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numprecast concrete catch basin drop inlet and manhole units num general description this section includes the requirements for manufacturing the following to the dimensions shown on the plans precast reinforced concrete catch basins drop inlets manhole units num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures section numreinforcement and tensioning steel b. referenced documents aashto m num aashto t num aashto t num sop num qpl num qpl num num materials the materials to be used shall meet aashto m num and the following requirements material section concrete class aanum vibrated air entrained num reinforcement for concrete steel bars num steel wire num section numprecast concrete catch basindrop inlet manhole units num welded steel fabric num macrosynthetic fibers num ensure that the concrete compressive strength is at least num psi num mpa .
do not use the gradation requirements .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
num precast concrete catch basin drop inlet and manhole units a .
requirements num .
reinforcement follow the plans except as follows a .
do not let steel reinforcement vary by more than num in num mm from the position shown in the design except at pipe connections .
b .
ensure the cover on the steel reinforcement is not less than that shown on the plans .
c. macrosynthetic fibers are permitted as reinforcement in lieu of steel reinforcement in precast manhole riser sections only .
approved fibers are listed on the departments qualified products list num qpl num entitled macrosynthetic fibers for concrete reinforcement .
num .
ensure all precast concrete units are true to shape with smooth dense and uniform surfaces .
b .
fabrication num .
casting a .
place the concrete in each unit without interruption .
b .
consolidate the concrete with an approved vibrator and handtamping as necessary .
force the concrete into the corners of the forms to prevent stone pockets or cleavage planes .
num .
holes for pipes make each hole about num in num mm larger than the outside diameter of the appropriate pipe .
num .
curing cure the units with one of the following methods until the minimum compressive strength has been achieved or for num hours whichever comes first .
a .
method num num place the units in a curing chamber free from outside drafts and cure them in a moist atmosphere not exceeding num f num c. num use steam injection for the time and temperature needed to obtain proper curing .
num construct the curing chamber and place the units so that steam may fully circulate around the entire unit .
b .
method num num keep the units wet by covering the concrete not in contact with the forms with wet burlap or other suitable material .
num protect the units from freezing between when you place the concrete until curing is complete .
num .
removing the forms leave the forms in place until you can remove them without damaging the unit .
num .
quality of work section numprecast concrete catch basindrop inlet manhole units num a .
correct minor surface cavities or irregularities that do not impair the service value of the unit by pointing with an approved mortar .
apply the mortar immediately after removing the forms .
b .
minor defects will not be cause for rejection .
c. acceptance num .
testing facilities ensure that the manufacturer furnishes facilities and assistance as required for the inspector to sample and test quickly and efficiently .
note check qpl num for preapproved manufacturers that supply material compliant with this specification .
num .
the department will accept the units based on the results of compressive tests on concrete cylinders and on inspection during manufacture .
the tests will determine the units conformance with the design and quality of work prescribed in these specifications and on the plans .
num .
the department will accept any unit that meets the test requirements regardless of age .
num .
rejection the inspector will reject units if they fail to meet any requirements in this specification and for any of the following defects imperfect mixing and molding honeycombed or open texture exposure of the reinforcement that indicates the reinforcement is misplaced num .
marking ensure that each approved unit is marked with the name or trademark of the manufacturer and the date it was cast .
the mark will be stenciled or otherwise placed on the inside of the unit so it is clearly legible at time of delivery .
a .
when approved by the inspector each unit will be stamped with the official mark of the department or certified pipe technician number cpt .
b .
accepted units or finished units will be rejected at any time if found to be defective .
num .
test as follows test method compressive strength aashto t num and aashto t num num .
compressive strength test the inspector shall do the following a .
make compression tests on cylinders to satisfy the minimum strength requirements .
b .
make at least three cylinders from each days pour and cure them in the same manner as the precast units .
d. materials warranty num .
shipping do not ship or transport any unit to the installation site unless it bears the required markings stated in subsection num.c.num .
num section numepoxy coated reinforcement strips num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numbituminous adhesive for raised pavement markers num general description this section includes the requirements for bituminous hotmelt adhesive used to place raised pavement markers .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcertification of materials b. referenced documents aashto astm t num t num t num t num c num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num num materials num bituminous adhesive a .
requirements num .
adhesive use an adhesive made of asphaltic material and a homogeneously mixed filler that meets the following physical requirements a. adhesive properties use the asphaltic material with filler .
min .
max .
test method softening point num f num c aashto t num penetration mm num oz num g num sec .
num f num c num num aashto t num flow num in num mm astm d num modified in subsection num.c viscosity num f num c num poises num pas astm d num modified in subsection num.c flash point c.o.c .
num f num c aashto t num section numbituminous adhesive for raised pavement markers num b. asphalt properties use the fillerfree material derived from the extraction and abson recovery process explained in subsection num.c .
min .
max .
test method penetration mm num oz num g num sec .
num f num c num aashto t num viscosity num f num c num poises num pas aashto t num viscosity ratio num f num c num see subsection num.c c. filler properties use the filler separation techniques described in subsection num.c .
min .
max .
test method filler content percent by weight num num see subsection num.c filler fineness percent passing no .
num num µm no .
num num µm no .
num num µm num num num astm c num modified in subsection num.c d. certification submit a certification from the manufacturer that includes the physical properties of the bituminous adhesives and that the material conforms with this specification as stated in subsection num materials certificate .
num .
packaging and labeling a .
pack the adhesive in a selfreleasing cardboard container of approximately num in num mm that can be stacked properly .
b .
fill the containers with two num lb num kg cubes that have a net weight of num lbs num kg .
c. put the manufacturer quantity and batch number on the label .
d. print bituminous adhesive for pavement markers on the label .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance num .
flow determine flow according to section num flow of astm d num. a .
set the oven temperature at num num f num num c. b .
prepare samples according to subsection num of aashto t num .
num .
viscosity determine viscosity according to astm d num using a spindle speed of num rpm .
a .
heat the adhesive to approximately num f num c and then let cool .
b .
determine viscosity at num numf num num c. num .
asphalt properties section numbituminous adhesive for raised pavement markers num determine the base asphalt properties based on the material obtained from the following extraction and abson recovery methods a .
extract the asphalt by heating the adhesive to the point where it will easily flow .
b .
add num to num g of adhesive to num ml of trichloroethylene that has a temperature of num to num f num to num c. c. stir the mixture to dissolve the asphalt .
d. decant the trichloroethyleneasphalt mixture .
e. recover the asphalt using the abson recovery method described in astm d num except do not use the extraction methods of astm d num and do not filter the solventasphalt mixture .
f. centrifuge the extraction solution of trichloroethylene and asphalt for at least num minutes at num times gravity in a batch centrifuge .
g. decant the solution into a distillation flask .
do not include any filler sediment .
h. apply heat and bubble carbon dioxide slowly until the solution reaches a temperature of num f num c. i .
increase the carbon dioxide flow to between num to num ml per minute .
j .
maintain the decanted solution temperature between num and num f num and num c with this carbon dioxide flow for at least num minutes and until the trichloroethylene vapors are completely removed from the distillation flask .
k. repeat the extractionrecovery method as necessary to obtain the desired quantity of asphalt .
l. determine penetration num f num c viscosity and viscosity ratio with the recovered asphalt .
num .
viscosity ratio determine the num f num c viscosity ratio by comparing the num f num c viscosity on the base asphalt before and after the thinfilm oven test .
a .
perform the thinfilm oven test as described in astm d num. b .
determine the specific gravity with a pycnometer as described in astm d num for use in the thinfilm oven test .
c. calculate the num f num c viscosity ratio by dividing the viscosity after the thinfilm oven test by the original num f num c viscosity .
num .
filler material separate the filler material from the asphalt to determine filler content and filler fineness .
a. filler content num determine the portion by weight of the adhesive that is insoluble in num num numtrichloroethane by weighing num num g of solid adhesive into a centrifuge flask with a volume of approximately num ml as specified in astm d num .
num add num ml of num num numtrichloroethane to the adhesive .
num break the adhesive into small pieces to dissolve the solids .
num place the sample flask in a balanced centrifuge and spin with a minimum relative centrifugal force of num as determined in section num of astm d num for num minutes .
num remove the sample flask and decant the solvent without losing any solids .
num repeat the application of solvent and centrifuging until the solvent is clear and the filler is visually free of asphalt .
num dry the filler at num num f num num c to remove solvent and weigh the resulting filler .
section numbituminous adhesive for raised pavement markers num num filter the decanted solvent to verify that no filler was lost .
num calculate the percent filler content as follows filler content by weight g filler wt .
g x num original adhesive wt .
g b. filler fineness num determine filler fineness according to astm c num using no .
num num µm no .
num num µm and no .
num num µm sieves .
num modify this method by using a watersoluble nonionic wetting agent such as triton xnum to aid the wetting action .
use a surfactant solution that is approximately num percent by weight .
num thoroughly wet the numgram dry sample in the surfactant solution .
num soak the sample for num minutes .
num transfer the filler to the sieve cup .
num spray water on the filler for two minutes .
num add surfactant solution as needed and physically disperse clumped particles .
num dry the sample and handle as directed in astm c num .
the department will reject any bituminous adhesive if it meets all requirements of this specification but fails in actual use .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numpaint num general description this section includes the requirements for all paints including pigments vehicles and the compositions of prepared paints for all purposes specified .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num b. referenced documents qpl num qpl num sop num aashto m num military specifications milenum b milpnum or us corps of engineers specification cnum federal test methods standard no .
num section numpaint num federal specifications astm ttenum ttpnumb ttpnumb ttpnumc ttpnum ttpnuma ttpnume ttrnum tttnum ttvnum d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num d num e num g num num materials a .
requirements num .
ingredients the engineer shall approve all paint ingredients .
mix the paints in the proportions specified in this section for each kind of paint .
the formulas given represent the proportions by weight of the materials to be used .
num .
condition of mixed paints ensure that mixed paints do not liver or curdle and that the pigments remain in suspension to a reasonable degree satisfactory to the engineer .
num .
filling and packaging the manufacturer shall strain paints before filling the containers .
the manufacturer also shall ship paints in strong substantial containers according to qpl numand qpl num plainly marked with the paint name and number color volume manufacturer name and address date of manufacture and the manufacturers lot number on every package .
the inspection stamp on the paint container will be evidence of approval .
traffic line paint manufactured for the department shall be delivered in num gallon num l drums or num gallon num l totes .
the manufacturer shall stencil on the head of each drum the kind of paint requisition number purchase order number and gross and net weights .
ensure that the drums are the removable head types .
ensure the totes are labeled appropriately .
num .
finished paints unless otherwise specified deliver paints to the project or the department completely mixed and ready for use without adding oils or thinner .
use well ground paints that do not settle or badly cake in the container and can readily be broken up to a smooth uniform paint with good brushing consistency .
when brushed or rolled on a smooth vertical surface the paint shall dry hard and elastic without running streaking sagging or spotting .
use paint for spray application that sprays satisfactorily and does not run sag or streak .
the first coat of paint applied in the shop or in the field to uncoated structural steel or wood is called the primer coat .
the paint covering the primer coat is called the second coat and the paint covering the second coat is called the third coat .
b .
fabrication the formulas given in this specification represent proportions by weight .
c. acceptance num .
testing test methods for paint analyses shall be according to the federal test methods standard no .
num or the astm standard methods of tests for paint .
num .
color match color visually by comparing with standard color chips obtained from the office of materials and research .
num .
inspection section numpaint num inspection and analysis will be made at the point of manufacture according to sop num .
the manufacturer shall assist as necessary permit the inspector to test the ingredients before the paint is made and witness the paint grinding .
the department reserves the right to sample and test all paint at any time before it is used .
num .
tolerances the department will accept a tolerance of num percent of the required value for the paint formulation and property requirements .
exception this tolerance does not apply where maximum and minimum values are noted .
d. materials warranty the following people shall furnish the department a certificate of analysis and manufacturers guarantee the manufacturer of each brand of paint submitted for acceptance under these specifications all contractors proposing to use any paint specified in this section ensure that the certificate of analysis shows the paint trade name to be furnished including a facsimile of the label if the paint is readymixed and an analysis showing the percentage of each of the chemical elements and compounds in the pigment and vehicle .
the guarantee shall assert that all paint furnished conforms to the analysis shown on the certificate filed and to the statement of percentages of ingredients shown on the labels which are required to be on each container .
the guarantee shall be sworn to by a person having authority to bind the manufacturer into an agreement num paints for structural steel a .
requirements num .
use structural steel paint that meets the applicable requirements of subsection num and the following no .
numa red primer see table num .
apply this paint with brush roller or airless spray .
no .
numw waterborne red primer see table num .
no .
num z inorganic zinc rich primer see table num no .
numa buff see table num .
apply this paint with brush roller or airless spray .
no .
numb aluminum see table num and subsection num.b fabrication .
no .
numw waterborne intermediate coat see table num .
no .
numa brown see table num .
apply this paint with brush roller or airless spray .
no .
numb green see table num .
apply this paint with brush roller or airless spray .
no .
numw waterborne green see table num .
table numno .
numa red primer brushing roller or airless spray type requirement maximum minimum paint composition percent by weight pigment num vehicle num coarse particles total residue retained on no .
num sieve based on paint percent by weight num fineness of grind north standard num viscosity krebs units num num section numpaint num requirement maximum minimum moisture content percent by weight num drying time hours set to touch num dry through num weight lbsgal kgl num num pigment composition percent by weight zinc hydroxy phosphite astm d num num red iron oxide astm d num num organo montmorillonite¹ num num vehicle composition percent by weight nonvolatile² num raw linseed oil astm d num alkyd resin solution federal specification ttrnum type i class a thinners and driers num thinners federal specification tttnum driers astm d num class c notes ¹ prewet organo montmorillonite with num num methyl alcohol by weight .
² ensure that the nonvolatile vehicle is composed of num proportions by weight of raw linseed oil and alkyd resin respectively .
table numno .
numw waterborne red primer requirement maximum minimum paint composition percent by weight pigment num vehicle num coarse particles total residue retained on num µm sieve based on paint percent by weight num fineness of grind north standard num viscosity krebs units num num drying time hours set to touch num dry through num weight lbsgal kgl num num section numpaint num requirement maximum minimum pigment composition percent by weight red iron oxide num zinc phosphate num vehicle composition percent by weight nonvolatile binder solids hgnum or hgnum¹ num methyl carbitol num texanol num dibutyl phthalate num other additives num note ¹or approved equivalent table numno .
numz inorganic zinc rich primer requirement maximum minimum zinc dust percent by weight zinc num lead num percent by weight of zinc in dried paint film num elcometer adhesion of dried paints psi mpa num num note the primer shall be selfcuring and shall consist of two components zinc dust and ethyl silicate vehicle .
a manufacturers product data sheet and a material safety data sheet msds shall accompany each shipment of inorganic zinc rich primer .
the product data sheet shall contain the following information for the mixed primer unit weight viscosity volatile organic content voc pot life percent solids by volume .
table numno .
numa buff brushing roller or airless spray type requirement max .
min .
paint composition percent by weight pigment vehicle num num coarse particles total residue retained on no .
num num µm sieve based on paint percent by weight num fineness of grind north standard num viscosity krebs units num num moisture content percent by weight num drying time hours num section numpaint num weight lbsgal kgl num num color match the departments standard color chip requirement max .
min .
pigment composition percent by weight zinc hydroxy phosphite astm d num titanium dioxide astm d num type iv organo montmorilloniteprewet with num num methyl alcohol by weight tinting pigments may be added as predisperesed pigments yellow oxide astm d num red iron oxide astm d num lampblack astm d num num num num num num num vehicle composition percent by weight nonvolatile num proportions by weight of raw linseed oil astm d num alkyd resin solution federal specification ttrnum type i class a num thinners and driers thinners federal specification tttnum driers astm d num class c num note num for the greatest effectiveness the organo montmorillonite should be prewetted with num num num methyl alcohol by weight .
note num the nonvolatile vehicle shall be composed of num proportions by weight of raw linseed oil and alkyd resin respectively .
table numno numb aluminum requirement maximum minimum paint composition aluminum paste aashto m num lbs kg num num aluminum vehicle aashto m num gal l num num drying time hours set to touch num num dry through num note refer to subsection num.b fabrication for additional requirements .
section numpaint num table numno .
numw waterborne intermediate coat requirement maximum minimum pigment composition percent by weight pigment num vehicle num coarse particles total residue retained on num µm sieve based on paint percent by weight num fineness of grind north standard num viscosity krebs units num num drying time hours set to touch num dry through num weight lbsgal kgl num num pigment composition percent by weight zinc phosphate num calcium carbonate num magnesium silicate astm d num num titanium dioxide astm d num type iv num vehicle composition percent by weight nonvolatile binder solid hgnum or hgnum¹ num methyl carbitol num texanol num dibutyl phthalate num other additives num notes numor approved equivalent section numpaint num table numno .
numa brown brush roller or airless spray type requirement maximum minimum .
paint composition percent by weight pigment vehicle num num num num pigment composition percent by weight basic lead silico chromate astm d num red iron oxidenum astm d num titanium dioxide rutile chalk resistant astm d num type iv barium sulfate astm d num organo montmorillonite tinting colors phthalocyanine blue lampblack and yellow iron oxide num num num remainder num num num num num requirement maximum minimum .
vehicle composition percent by weight alkyd resin ttrnum type i class a raw linseed oil astm d num mineral spirits driers antiskinning agents and methanolwater numprewet organo montmorillonite with num methanol water before adding to grind percent nonvolatile vehicle num num num num color match federal standard colors no .
num properties of finished paint weight lbsgal kgl num num viscosity krebs units num num fineness of grind north standard num section numpaint num table numno .
numb green brushing roller or airless spray type requirement maximum minimum paint composition percent by weight pigment num vehicle num coarse particles total residue retained on no .
num sieve based on paint percent by weight num fineness of grind north standard num viscosity krebs units num num moisture content percent by weight num drying time hours num weight lbsgal kgl num color shall match the departments standard color chip pigment composition percent by weight zinc hydroxy phosphite astm d num num titanium dioxide astm d num type iv num magnesium silicate astm d num num num organo montmorillonite¹ num num chromium oxide astm d num num num pure tinting colors no chrome green allowed remainder yellow iron oxide astm d num red iron oxide astm d num lamp black astm d num phthalocyanine green² astm d num vehicle composition percent by weight nonvolatile num alkyd resin solution federal specification ttrnum type i class a thinners and driers num thinners federal specifications tttnum driers astm d num class c note ¹ prewet organo montmorillonite with num num methyl alcohol by weight .
² chlorinated copper phthalocyanine full strength oil dispersable .
section numpaint num table numno .
numw waterborne green requirement maximum minimum paint composition percent by weight pigment num vehicle num coarse particles total residue retained on num µm sieve based on paint percent by weight num fineness of grind north standard num viscosity krebs units num num drying time hours set to touch num dry through num weight lbsgal kgl num num color shall match the departments standard color chip pigment composition percent by weight zinc phosphate num titanium dioxide astm d num type iv num magnesium silicate astm d num num calcium carbonate num pure tinting colors no chrome green allowed remainder yellow iron oxide astm d num red iron oxide astm d num lamp black astm d num phthalocyanine green astm d num vehicle composition percent by weight nonvolatile binder solids hgnum or hgnum¹ num methyl carbitol num texanol num other additives num note ¹or approved equivalent b .
fabrication num .
no .
numb aluminum prepare the aluminum paint by thoroughly mixing aluminum paste with mixing vehicle .
a .
ensure the paints are well ground do not settle or cake badly in the container and are readily broken up to a smooth uniform paint of good brushing consistency .
b .
use num lbs num kg of paste to num gal num l of vehicle .
mix this at the factory .
section numpaint num c. ensure a thorough mix with a minimum of stirring .
ensure that the paint shows satisfactory leafing qualities and solidly covers in one coat without running streaking or sagging .
d. if applying two coats of aluminum paint tint the first coat with iron blue paste to help distinguish the two coats .
c. acceptance see subsection num.c .
d. materials warranty see subsection num.d .
num traffic line paints a .
requirements use traffic line paints that meet the applicable requirements of subsection num and the following num .
no .
numc black traffic line paint a .
paint composition see table num. b .
finished paint num flexibility ensure paint flexibility by following this procedure a use a doctor blade or other suitable means to apply the paint to a numguage num mm clean tin plate panel .
apply to a wet film thickness of approximately num mils num mm .
b dry the panel in a horizontal position for num hours and then bake it for num hours at num f to num f num c to num c. c cool the panel to approximately num f num c and bend double over a ½ inch rod num mm rod .
ensure that the film does not show cracking or flaking upon bending or straightening .
num color ensure that the paint dries to a pure flat black and furnishes the maximum amount of opacity and visibility under both daylight and artificial light .
ensure that the paint does not discolor when exposed to weather or traffic and does not appreciably discolor with stains during service life on either concrete or bituminous surfaces .
num weight per gallon liter use paint weighing at least num lbgal num kgl at num f num c. num consistency the paint viscosity when measured at num ºf shall be num to num krebs units .
num moisture content the paint shall contain no more than num water .
num drying the paint shall dry to no pickup within num minutes when tested according to astm d num .
num spraying the paint shall be factorymixed ready for application through spray machines without using thinners .
num storage the paint shall not cake liver thicken curdle gel or show other objectionable properties after storage for num months .
num coarse particles and skins the paint shall not contain more than num percent of coarse particles and skins .
num fineness of grind the paint shall have a grind of num to num hegman scale .
num packaging the finished paint shall be passed through a no .
num mesh screen while filling the containers .
section numpaint num table numno numc black traffic line paint requirement maximum minimum paint composition percent by weight pigment vehicle nonvolatile vehicle percent by weight of vehicle num num num num num pigment composition percent by weight lamp black astm d num calcium carbonate astm d num type gc note num grade num diatomaceous silica astm d num type b magnesium silicate astm d num organo montmorillonite note num num num num num num num num num num vehicle composition percent by weight alkyd resin solution petroleum thinner driers and other additives num num alkyd resin solution characteristics type pure drying alkyd type of oil soya linseed or a mixture of the two nonvolatile percent by weight num num volatile type vm p naphtha viscosity gardnerholdt znum znum viscosity at num solids g d color gardnernum num num acid number solids basis num alkyd resin solution characteristics lbsgal kgl solution num num num num requirement maximum minimum modifying oil iodine number note num num phthalic anhydride percent by weight of nonvolatile num oil acids percent num num compatibility num in vm p naphtha resin andor derivatives none phenolic resin modifiers none notes for table num section numpaint num num .
no .
numa waterborne white traffic line paint a .
paint composition see table num. b .
finished paint num flexibility apply the paint to a num gauge num mm clean tin plate panel to a wet film thickness of approximately num mils num mm .
use a doctor blade or other suitable means .
a dry the panel horizontally for num hours .
b bake the panel for num hours at num to num f num to num c. c cool the panel to about num f num c and bend it double over a num in num mm rod .
ensure that the film does not crack or flake when bent or straightened .
num bleeding ensure that the paint does not bleed over a bituminous surface type used in georgia .
num color ensure that the paint dries to a pure intense white and furnishes the maximum amount of opacity and visibility under both daylight and artificial light .
ensure that the paint does not discolor when exposed to weather or traffic and does not appreciably discolor with stains during service life on either concrete or bituminous surfaces .
num consistency use paint with a viscosity of num num krebs units at num f num c. num drying ensure that the paint dries to nopickup within six minutes when tested according to astm d num .
ensure that the paint dries through within num minutes when applied at num mils num mm wet thickness at num f num c. num spraying mix the paint at the factory so it can be applied by spray machines without adding thinners .
num storage ensure that the paint does not cake liver thicken curdle gel or show any other objectionable properties after storage for six months .
num coarse particles and skins ensure that the paint contains less than num percent of coarse particles and skins .
num fineness of grind ensure that the paint has a grind of num to num hegman scale .
num weight per gallon liter use paint weighing at least num lbgal .
at num f num kgl at num c. num packaging pass the finished paint through a no .
num num µm screen while filling the containers .
num freezethaw and heat stability ensure that the paint shows no coagulation discoloration or change in consistency greater than num krebs units when tested according to ttpnume .
num ph ensure that the ph is greater than num .
num .
you may use the following chemical composition requirements for calcium carbonate in lieu of those for type gc .
however all physical properties prescribed for type gc grade num are required .
requirement maximum minimum moisture and other volatile matter percent by weight num total calcium and magnesium carbonates percent by weight magnesium carbonate num num num .
prewet organo montmorillonite with num num methyl alcohol by weight .
num .
use modifying oil acids isolated by federal test method no .
num method num that have an iodine number as specified in table num alkyd resin solution characteristics .
section numpaint num table numno .
numa waterborne white traffic line paint requirement maximum minimum paint composition percent by weight pigment num num vehicle num num nonvolatile vehicle percent by weight of vehicle num num pigment composition percent by weight titanium dioxide astm d num type ii rutile num calcium carbonate astm a num type gc grade num num vehicle composition percent by weight acrylic emulsion enum or dtnumna num nv¹ num num methanol num num texanol coalsecent num num other additives num num propylene glycol num note ¹ or approved equivalent num .
no .
numb waterborne yellow traffic line paint a .
paint composition see table num. b .
finished paint num flexibility apply the paint with a doctor blade to a num gauge num mm clean tin plate panel to a wet film thickness of approximately num mils num mm .
a dry the panel horizontally for num hours .
b bake the panel for num hours at num to num f num to num c. c cool the panel to about num f num c and bend it double over a num in num mm rod .
ensure that the film does not crack or flake when bent or straightened .
num bleeding ensure that the paint does not bleed on any bituminous surface type used in georgia .
num color ensure that the paint dries to a bright yellow that matches color chip num of federal color standard numb within the limits of the highway yellow color tolerance chart .
ensure that the paint does not discolor when exposed to weather or traffic and does not appreciably discolor from stains during service life on either concrete or bituminous surfaces .
num consistency ensure a viscosity of num num krebs units at num f num c. num drying ensure that the paint dries to nopickup within num minutes when tested according to astm d num .
ensure that the paint dries through within num minutes when applied at num mils num mm wet thickness at num f num c. num spraying mix the paint at the factory so it can be applied by spray machines without adding thinners .
section numpaint num num storage ensure that the paint does not cake liver thicken curdle gel or show any other objectionable properties after storage for num months .
num coarse particles and skins ensure that the paint contains less than num percent of coarse particles and skins .
num fineness of grind ensure that the paint has a grind of num to num hegman scale .
num weight per gallon liter use paint weighing at least num lbgal num kgl at num f num c. num packaging pass the finished paint through a no .
num num µm screen while filling the containers .
num freezethaw and heat stability ensure that the paint shows no coagulation discoloration or change in consistency greater than num krebs units when tested according to ttpnume .
num ph ensure that the ph is greater than num .
table numno .
numb waterborne yellow traffic line paint requirement maximum minimum paint composition percent by weight pigment num num vehicle num num nonvolatile vehicle percent by weight of vehicle num num pigment composition percent by weight titanium dioxide astm d num type ii rutile num leadfree organic yellow no .
num num calcium carbonate astm d num type gc grade num num vehicle composition percent by weight acrylic emulsion enum or dtnumna num nv¹ num num methanol num num texanol coalsecent num num other additives num propylene glycol num note ¹or approved equivalent num .
no .
numa waterborne high build white traffic line paint a .
paint composition see table num. b .
finished paint num flexibility apply the paint to a num gauge num mm clean tin plate panel to a wet film thickness of approximately num mils num mm .
use a doctor blade or other suitable means .
a dry the panel horizontally for num hours .
b bake the panel for num hours at num to num f num to num c. c cool the panel to about num f num c and bend it double over a num in num mm rod .
ensure that the film does not crack or flake when bent or straightened .
num bleeding ensure that the paint does not bleed over a bituminous surface type used in georgia .
section numpaint num num color ensure that the paint dries to a pure intense white and furnishes the maximum amount of opacity and visibility under both daylight and artificial light .
ensure that the paint does not discolor when exposed to weather or traffic and does not appreciably discolor with stains during service life on either concrete or bituminous surfaces .
num consistency use paint with a viscosity of num num krebs units at num f num c. num drying ensure that the paint dries to nopickup within six minutes when tested according to astm d num .
ensure that the paint dries through within num minutes when applied at num mils num mm wet thickness at num f num c. num spraying mix the paint at the factory so it can be applied by spray machines without adding thinners .
num storage ensure that the paint does not cake liver thicken curdle gel or show any other objectionable properties after storage for six months .
num coarse particles and skins ensure that the paint contains less than num percent of coarse particles and skins .
num fineness of grind ensure that the paint has a grind of num to num hegman scale .
num weight per gallon liter use paint weighing at least num lbgal .
at num f num kgl at num c. num packaging pass the finished paint through a no .
num num µm screen while filling the containers .
num freezethaw and heat stability ensure that the paint shows no coagulation discoloration or change in consistency greater than num krebs units when tested according to ttpnume .
num ph ensure that the ph is greater than num .
table numno .
numa waterborne high build white traffic line paint requirement maximum minimum paint composition percent by weight pigment num num vehicle num num nonvolatile vehicle percent by weight of vehicle num num pigment composition percent by weight titanium dioxide astm d num type ii rutile num calcium carbonate astm a num type gc grade num num vehicle composition percent by weight acrylic emulsion meeting ttp_nume type iiinum num num methanol num num texanol coalsecent num num other additives num num propylene glycol num note ¹or approved equivalent num .
no .
numb waterborne yellow high build traffic line paint a .
paint composition see table num .
section numpaint num b .
finished paint num flexibility apply the paint with a doctor blade to a num gauge num mm clean tin plate panel to a wet film thickness of approximately num mils num mm .
a .
dry the panel horizontally for num hours .
b. bake the panel for num hours at num to num f num to num c. c. cool the panel to about num f num c and bend it double over a num in num mm rod .
ensure that the film does not crack or flake when bent or straightened .
num bleeding ensure that the paint does not bleed on any bituminous surface type used in georgia .
num color ensure that the paint dries to a bright yellow that matches color chip num of federal color standard numb within the limits of the highway yellow color tolerance chart .
ensure that the paint does not discolor when exposed to weather or traffic and does not appreciably discolor from stains during service life on either concrete or bituminous surfaces .
num consistency ensure a viscosity of num num krebs units at num f num c. num drying ensure that the paint dries to nopickup within num minutes when tested according to astm d num .
ensure that the paint dries through within num minutes when applied at num mils num mm wet thickness at num f num c. num spraying mix the paint at the factory so it can be applied by spray machines without adding thinners .
num storage ensure that the paint does not cake liver thicken curdle gel or show any other objectionable properties after storage for num months .
num coarse particles and skins ensure that the paint contains less than num percent of coarse particles and skins .
num fineness of grind ensure that the paint has a grind of num to num hegman scale .
num weight per gallon liter use paint weighing at least num lbgal num kgl at num f num c. num packaging pass the finished paint through a no .
num num µm screen while filling the containers .
num freezethaw and heat stability ensure that the paint shows no coagulation discoloration or change in consistency greater than num krebs units when tested according to ttpnume .
num ph ensure that the ph is greater than num .
table numno .
numb waterborne high build yellow traffic line paint requirement maximum minimum paint composition percent by weight pigment num num vehicle num num nonvolatile vehicle percent by weight of vehicle num num pigment composition percent by weight titanium dioxide astm d num type ii rutile num leadfree organic yellow no .
num num calcium carbonate astm d num type gc grade num num vehicle composition percent by weight section numpaint num requirement maximum minimum acrylic emulsion meeting ttpnume type iii¹ num num methanol num num texanol coalsecent num num other additives num propylene glycol num note ¹or approved equivalent b .
fabrication see subsection num.b .
c. acceptance see subsection num.c .
d. materials warranty see subsection num.d .
num sign enamel a .
requirements num .
ensure that sign enamels either baking or airdrying except black meet the requirements of federal specifications ttenum and subsection num .
num .
use the identified class shown in table num for the respective types .
also ensure that each color matches federal standard numa as designated .
table numsign enamel federal specification requirements fed .
stand .
no .
num a fed .
spec .
ttenume color number class type yellow num b a baking air drying white num b a baking air drying red num b a baking air drying blue num b a baking air drying green num b a baking air drying num .
for a black sign enamel use a semigloss enamel that matches federal standard number num a color num and meets the requirements of military specifications milenum b and subsection num .
section numpaint num b .
fabrication prepare the surface and use a primer recommended by the manufacturer of the sign enamel .
c. acceptance see subsection num.c .
d. materials warranty see subsection num.d .
num paint for timber a .
requirements ensure that paints for timber meet the requirements of subsection num and federal specification ttpnumb unless otherwise specified .
num .
if leadfree fumeresistant paint is specified ensure that it meets the requirements of federal specification ttp numb .
num .
if chalking is a specified requirement ensure that the paint meets federal specification tttnumb modified to require that the percentage of anatase be equal to that specified in ttpnumb for both rutile and anatase .
b .
fabrication see subsection num.b .
c. acceptance see subsection num.c .
d. materials warranty see subsection num.d .
num miscellaneous paints a .
requirements num .
paint for steel piling and sway bracing use paint for steel piling and sway bracing that meets the requirements of subsection num and the following a .
no .
nump general ensure that materials used as a primer andor finish coat are formulated from either a coal tar pitch or a native pyrobitumen resin .
you may use other types of material if they meet the requirements in table num below .
table numprimerfinish coat requirements properties requirements color black odor ensure coal tar materials have no pyridine pyridine base or tar acid odor .
consistency easily applied by brush or spray to a coverage of num ft²gal num m²l without sagging yielding film thicknesses of about num mils num mm wet and num mils num mm dry .
drying time apply at a rate of num ft²gal num m²l .
ensure that the material dries to a firm film within num hours at num num f num num c and can receive a second coat .
section numpaint num properties requirements chemical resistance ensure that the material remains intact and in good condition when immersed for num days in each of the following inorganic acids alkalies and salts num sulfuric acid num hydrochloric acid num phosphoric acid num sodium hydroxide num sodium chloride num calcium chloride num durability before initially accepting a product to be supplied under this specification the complete systemfrom primer when required to finish coatsshall be subjected to accelerated weathering and atmospheric exposure tests according to astm d num and astm g num type d. num ensure that the system remains intact without cracking and prevents significant steel corrosion for at least num hours exposure in the accelerated weathering test and num years atmospheric exposure in a coastal environment .
num the state materials engineer may approve systems that perform satisfactorily for up to num hours of accelerated weathering pending completion of the numyear atmospheric exposure tests .
num after the department initially accepts the material you do not need to test each lot of material .
however the department will conduct other durability tests at its discretion .
b .
no .
nump special provisions coating use special protective coatings instead of any other coating required by the specifications for steelh piling steel sway bracing metal shells for castinplace concrete piling or prestressed concrete piling in all intermediate bents of the cap and pile trestletype .
num get approval from the laboratory for the protective coating material .
num use a twocomponent chemically cured coaltar epoxy that meets the requirements of either type i class num military specification milpnum ships or u.s .
corps of engineers specification cnum .
num ensure that the coating exhibits optimum chemical and physical resistance to alkalies and mineral acids under continuous immersion service .
num ensure that the cured coating withstands considerable physical abuse such as direct impact abrasion and flexing .
num furnish a written certification to the engineer that the material meets the requirements of these specifications .
num .
galvanizing repair compound use a compound that meets the general requirements of subsection num and table num .
table numgalvanizing repair compound requirements maximum minimum paint composition percent by weight pigment num num vehicle num num pigment composition percent by weight zinc dust federal specification ttpnum num num section numpaint num maximum minimum dust metallic zinc powder type num lead suboxide stabilizer num suspending agent num vehicle composition percent by weight nonvolatile vehicle num volatile vehicle num a. nonvolatile vehicle use chlorinated rubber and a suitable plasticizer for the nonvolatile portion of the vehicle .
ensure that the chlorine content based on the nonvolatile vehicle is at least num percent by weight .
b .
volatile vehicle use a volatile vehicle that is completely compatible with the other ingredients of the finished product .
ensure that the vehicle meets all the physical and chemical requirements of the end product .
c. finished compound ensure that the finished compound meets the requirements of table num .
table numfinished compound requirements characteristic requirement condition in the container no pigment component of the readymixed compound settles .
when the package remains unopened for one year you can readily disperse the pigment by hand mixing .
the vehicle does not liver curdle or show excessive bodying .
application the material to repair galvanizing and to galvanize welds in the field shall be such that when applied there is no unusual difficulty in horizontal vertical or overhead positions .
adhesion expose test panels coated according to field application specifications to weather for at least num months in a position num degrees vertical facing south .
after this time ensure that the test panels show no visible signs of peeling or flaking .
gassing no build up of gas or excessive pressure in the container when stored at room temperature for num months .
dry film thickness the compound leaves a dry film between num num mils num num mm thick when applied according to field application specifications .
drying time the compound is set to touch in num minutes and is dry to recoat in num hours .
the material is thoroughly hard within num hours after application .
hardness dry and cure the test panels coated under these specifications for at least num hours .
brush a section by hand with a wire brush .
continue brushing until you see bright metal .
measure the dry film thickness .
accept the material if the brushing does not reduce the film below the specified thickness .
characteristic requirement consistency viscosity at num f num c is num num krebs units as measured by the stormer viscometer .
weight per lb liter num num lbs num num kg at num f num c. packaging commercial paint packaging is acceptable for containers smaller than num gal num l. for num gal num l packages use no .
num gauge steel pails .
do not pack more than num gal num l of compound in a single container .
storage store the compound where the temperature stays above num f num c. section numpaint num num .
aluminum caulking compound use a compound that meets the requirements of subsection num third bullet and table num .
table numaluminum caulking compound requirements properties max .
min .
compound composition percent by weight pigment num vehicle num pigment composition percent by weight calcium carbonate astm d num type gc num mineral filler num aluminum paste federal specification ttpnumc type ii class iii num titanium dioxide astm d num type ii class ii num vehicle composition percent by weight nonvolatile num refined vegetable oil num polybutene oil num fatty acid num thinner and drier num color aluminum a .
other properties properties requirement consistency can be applied by hand caulking gun knife or trowel .
adhesion good adhesion to any dry dustfree or oilfree surface .
curing a light film forms in num to num hours .
a tough metallic film develops in num to num weeks .
exposure good resistance to water and weather .
b .
fabrication see subsection num.b .
c. acceptance see subsection num.c .
d. materials warranty see subsection num.d .
num miscellaneous paint materials a .
requirements use other paint materials that meet the following requirements section numpaint num num .
raw linseed oil use oil that meets the requirements of astm d num .
num .
boiled linseed oil use oil that meets the requirements of astm dnum .
num .
turpentine use turpentine that meets the requirements of astm d num .
num .
mineral spirits use petroleum spirits mineral spirits that meets the requirements of astm d num .
num .
spar varnish use varnish spar phenolic resin as per federal specification ttvnum .
num .
tinting pigment paste use lampblack venetian blue or iron blue as tinting pigments .
the engineer may approve other tinting pigments subject to limitations .
add all tinting pigments in paste form .
num .
putty use putty that meets the requirements of federal specifications ttpnuma type ii .
b .
fabrication see subsection num.b .
c. acceptance see subsection num.c .
d. materials warranty see subsection num.d .
section numwater num general description this section includes the requirements for water used in portland cement mixtures .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto t num aashto t num astm c num gdt num num materials num water for portland cement mixtures a .
requirements num .
use water that is reasonably clear without oil salt acid alkali organic and other injurious substances .
num .
the department may allow drinking water that is used for ordinary household use without testing it .
num .
do not use water from shallow muddy or marshy surfaces .
test and approve all other sources before using them .
section numwater num num .
when the source of water is relatively shallow ensure that the source depth and intake exclude silt mud grass and all other foreign material .
num .
do not use water with detergents that will entrain air in portland cement concrete .
num .
do not use water with impurities above the following limits impurity concentration acidity or alkalinity calculated in terms of calcium carbonate num total organic solids num total inorganic solids num sulfate sonum num chloride num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will reject any water that when compared with accepted water shows any indication of unsoundness marked change in time of set or reduction of more than num percent in mortar strength .
test as follows test method quality of water solids ppm aashto t num setting time of concrete mixtures astm c num mortar making properties aashto t num air content of concrete gdt num sonum ppm alkalis ppm astm d num cl ppm aashto t num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num recycled wash water a .
requirements recycled wash water shall conform to aashto m num and meet the following requirements chemical designation limits test method sonum ppm num astm d num alkalis ppm num astm d num total solids ppm num aashto t num cl ppm num aashto t num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numwater num c. acceptance conduct test methods according to the following quality of water solidsppm aashto tnum setting time of concrete mixtures astm c num mortar making properties aashto t num air content of concrete gdt num sonum ppm alkalis ppm astm d num cl ppm aashto t num section numfabrics num general description this section includes the requirements for the following fabrics plain cotton duck rubberimpregnated cotton duck burlap and cotton bags plastic filter fabric pavement reinforcement fabric silt fence filter fabric num related references a .
standard specifications section nummaterials certification b. referenced documents federal specification cccc num type iii astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num astm d num grab astm d num section numfabrics num astm d num gdt num gdt num gdt num qpl num qpl num qpl num qpl num num materials num plain cotton duck a .
requirements num .
use plain cotton duck meeting the requirements of federal specification cccc num type iii .
num .
ensure the duck weighs at least num oz.yd² num gm² .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num rubberimpregnated cotton duck a .
requirements num .
use preformed rubberimpregnated fabric pads made of multiple layers of num oz num g cotton duck impregnated and bound with high quality natural rubber or made of equivalent materials compressed into resilient pads of uniform thickness .
num .
use enough plies to reach the specified thickness after compression and vulcanizing .
num .
ensure the finished pad withstands compression loads of not less than num psi num mpa when applied perpendicular to the plane of the laminations .
ensure the pad does not extrude or harmfully reduce in thickness .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numfabrics num num burlap bags a .
requirements num .
use burlap bags made of at least num percent jute and manila fibers .
num .
use burlap weighing num to num oznum ft² num to num gm² .
num .
use bags with a capacity of num to num ft³ num to num m³ .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num cotton bags a .
requirements num .
use cotton bags with osnaburg num x num thread count and a nominal fabric weight of num ozydnum num gmnum .
num .
use bags having num in num mm sewn seams with at least num stitch per num in num mm .
num .
use num or num ply num cotton yarn or equivalent for the stitches .
num .
ensure seam efficiency is at least num percent .
ensure the inside measurements tolerance is num in num mm .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num plastic filter fabric a .
requirements num .
use pervious sheets of plastic yarn made from a longchain synthetic polymer .
use polymer composes of at least num percent by weight of propylene ethylene amide ester or vinylidene chloride .
use a sheet of plastic yarn containing stabilizers andor inhibitors added to the base plastic to make the filaments resistant to deterioration due to ultraviolet andor heat exposure .
num .
ensure the fabric is finished so that the filaments will retain their relative position with respect to each other .
num .
use fabric without defects rips holes or flaws .
num .
use fabric meeting the following physical requirements for woven and nonwoven fabric section numfabrics num woven fabrics tensile strength any direction num lbs num n minimum bursting strength num psi num mpa minimum elongation before breaking num to num percent open area num to num nonwoven fabrics puncture resistance num lbs num n minimum grab tensile strength num lbs num n minimum grab elongation num minimum flow rate h from num to num in num to num mm num galmin ft² num literssecondm² minimum to num gal minft² num literssecondm² maximum use fabric evaluated by the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep .
num .
seams a .
get approval on the seams from the engineer before use on a project .
b .
use fabric sewn with thread of the same chemical requirements as the fabric or use fabric bound with cement or heat .
either have the fabric bound or sewn at the point of manufacture or at a location approved by the engineer .
c. seam uses you may use one seam in edge drain and underdrain applications .
you may bond or sew fabric together to form sections at least num ft num m wide for use under rip rap or behind retaining walls .
num .
fabric use a .
use woven fabrics beneath rip rap when dropping stone from num ft num m or less .
b .
you may use woven fabrics that meet the flow rate for edge drains .
c. use nonwoven fabrics to line edge drains underdrains or behind retaining walls where specified .
d. do not use nonwoven fabrics for filter beneath rip rap .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test according to the following test method puncture resistance astm d num tensile strength elongation grab strength astm d num bursting strength astm d num percent open area gdt num flow rate gdt num section numfabrics num num .
see qpl num for acceptable woven and nonwoven fabrics meeting the requirements of this specification .
see qpl num for acceptable geocomposite wall drains .
num .
the department will reject any fabrics that meet this specification but fail to perform in actual use .
d. materials care and warranty wrap fabric in burlap or similar heavy duty protection during shipment and storage to protect it from mud dirt dust and debris .
num pavement reinforcement fabric a .
requirements type i and type ii pavement reinforcement fabric num .
use pavement reinforcement fabric that has the following properties is nonwoven heatresistant material composed of polypropylene or polyester fibers can be saturated with asphalt cement can be placed smooth with mechanical devices and be without wrinkles can withstand the heat of asphaltic concrete mixes during paving operations can withstand normal field handling and construction operations without damage meets the following physical requirements .
the bid item or plans will indicate which type of fabric is required for a project .
type i type ii tensile strength minimum num lbs num n num lbs num n elongation at break num min .
num max .
num min .
num max .
asphalt retention minimum num galyd² num lm² num galyd² num lm² num .
submit a certificate from the manufacturer showing the physical properties of the material used and how it meets this specification .
submit the certificate according to subsection num materials certification .
num .
demonstrate to the department that fabric meeting the physical properties requirements of this specification has been used successfully in installations with similar environmental and project conditions .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
high strength pavement reinforcement fabric num .
use pavement reinforcement fabric with the following properties is a flexible waterresistant highdensity asphaltic membrane laminated between two layers of high strength heat resistant polypropylene or polyester fabric .
can be placed smooth with mechanical devices and be without wrinkles .
can withstand the heat of asphaltic concrete mixes during paving operations .
can withstand normal field handling and construction operations without damage .
has a selfadhesive backing adhered to a film release liner .
meets the following physical requirements .
the bid item or plans will indicate which type of fabric is required for a project .
section numfabrics num width minimum num in num mm tensile strength minimum num lbsinnum num mpa elongation num to num softening point asphaltic membrane minimum num numf num numc caliper num inch num mm num retained after loading pliability cold flex num num mm x num num mm specimen condition specimen at num numf num numc for num hour num bend on num num mm mandrel no separation num .
submit a certificate from the manufacturer showing the physical properties of the material used and how it meets this specification .
submit the certificate according to subsection num materials certification .
num .
demonstrate to the department that fabric meeting the physical properties requirements of this specification has been used successfully in installations with similar environmental and project conditions .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance type i and type ii pavement reinforcement fabric test according to the following test method tensile strength astm d num grab elongation astm d num grab asphalt retention gdt num high strength pavement reinforcement fabric test according to the following test method tensile strength astm d num elongation astm d num softening point astm d num caliper astm d num pliability cold flex astm d num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numfabrics num num silt fence filter fabric a .
requirements num .
use approved silt fence from qpl num. a .
type a and b fences use either woven or nonwoven filter fabric for type a and b fences .
if using woven fabric the fabric may have slit tape yarns in one direction warp or fill only .
b .
type c fences use noncalendered woven fabric constructed with monofilament yarns only .
note approved fabrics must consistently exceed the minimum requirements of this specification as verified by the office of materials and research .
if a fabric is removed from the qualified products list do not use it in the work until the department has reestablished the products acceptability .
num .
ensure silt fence filter fabrics have the following characteristics has strong rotproof synthetic fibers formed into either a woven or nonwoven fabric has no treatment or coating that might significantly alter its physical properties after installation contains stabilizers andor inhibitors to make the filaments resistant to deterioration resulting from exposure to sunlight or heat makes a pervious sheet of synthetic fibers oriented into a stable network so that the fibers retain their relative position with respect to each other under normal handling installation and service conditions has finished fabric edges to prevent the outer yarn from pulling away from the fabric has no defects or flaws that would significantly affect its physical andor filtering properties meets the following physical or dimensional requirements type fence a b c minimum tensile strength pounds newtons num warp num num fill num num warp num num fill num num warp num num fill num num elongation max .
num num num apparent opening size max .
sieve size no .
num num um no .
num num um no .
num num um flow rate gal min.ft² lmin.m² num num num num num num ultraviolet stability num num num num bursting strength psi kpa num num num num num num minimum fabric width num in num mm num in num mm num in num mm num .
minimum roll average of five specimens .
num .
percent of required initial minimum tensile strength .
num .
use silt fence filter fabrics evaluated by the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep .
b .
fabrication the fabric may be manufactured with pockets for posts hems with cord or with posts preattached using staples or button head nails .
ensure the fabric has the manufacturers name and product trade name labeled on the fabric at a minimum of num ft num m intervals .
ensure the fabric has a color yarn mark in the fabric num inches num mm num inch num mm from both top and bottom ends for type a and c and num inches num mm num inch num mm from both top and bottom ends for type b fabric .
c. acceptance test according to the following section numfabrics num test method tensile strength astm d num elongation astm d num apparent opening size astm d num flow rate gdt num ultraviolet stability astm d num after num hours weathering according to astm d num bursting strength astm d num diaphragm bursting strength tester d. materials care and warranty wrap fabric in a heavyduty protective covering during shipment and storage to protect it from mud dirt dust and debris .
do not expose fabric to temperatures greater than num o f num o c. num filter fabric for embankment stabilization see special provision .
num section numlime num general description this section includes the requirements for agricultural lime lime for subbase and subgrade stabilization and lime for asphaltic concrete .
num related references a .
specifications general provisions num through num .
section num miscellaneous erosion control items section num grassing gsp num b. referenced documents aashto m num astm c num astm c num astm c num liming materials act of num num materials num agricultural lime a .
requirements apply agricultural lime made of ground or pelletized dolomitic limestone at the rate recommended by a public or private soil laboratory that participates in a national proficiency testing program .
proof of testing is the responsibility of the contractor .
provide a soil test report to the engineer prior to application .
take soil test samples in accordance with gsp num sampling testing and inspection specifications .
agricultural lime will meet the following requirements requirements percent by weight calcium carbonates equivalent min .
num elemental magnesium derived from magnesium carbonate min .
num passing no .
num num mm sieve min num passing no .
num num µm sieve min num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept agricultural lime that meets the above requirements .
section numlime num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num lime for subbase and subgrade stabilization a .
requirements use either a commercial dry hydrated lime or a commercial granular quicklime for soil stabilization .
num .
hydrated lime use hydrated lime that meets the requirements of astm c num except use lime that has at least num percent by weight passing the no .
num num µm sieve .
num .
quicklime use quicklime that meets the requirements of astm c num except use lime that has num percent by weight passing the numinch num mm sieve .
if slurry is to be made from slaking quicklime use quicklime containing at least num percent total calcium oxide and magnesium oxide cao mgo and at least num percent total available calcium oxide cao .
a. furnish certified test reports with each shipment of lime attesting that the lime meets the requirements of the specification .
however the engineer may inspect test and reject the material at any time .
b .
lime from more than one source or more than one type on the same project may be used but do not mix lime of different types or from different sources .
c. protect the lime from exposure until used .
ensure that the lime is dry enough to flow freely when handled .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test the hydrated and quicklime used for soil stabilization according to astm c num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num lime for asphaltic concrete a .
requirements use hydrated lime that meets the chemical and physical properties of aashto m num type i .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance num .
run the chemical analysis of hydrated lime used in asphaltic concrete according to astm c num .
num .
test the physical properties of the hydrated lime according to the residue test in astm c num .
note qpl num for lime is used in asphaltic concrete only .
num .
see qpl num for acceptable hydrated lime that meets the requirements of this specification .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section nummineral filler num general description this section covers mineral filler used as an ingredient in bituminous paving mixtures .
use mineral filler listed in the approved asphalt mix design and job mix formula and in qualified products list qpl num .
use an approved mineral filler that meets the requirements below and consist of finely divided rock dust slag dust hydrated lime hydraulic cement or fly ash .
other fine inert nontoxic materials produced as byproducts of industrial processes and meeting the requirements below may be approved as mineral filler based on satisfactory performance in the asphalt mix design procedure .
ensure mineral filler is sufficiently dry flows freely and is free from lumps .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents qplnum aashto r num aashto t num aashto t num aashto t num gdtnum gdt num num materials num mineral filler a .
requirements use mineral filler meeting the following gradation limits sieve size percent passing no .
num num m num no .
num num m num no .
num num m num ensure that the mineral filler is free from impurities .
subject mineral filler for use in stone matrix asphalt sma to mortar property testing according to aashto tnum aashto rnum aashto tnum and aashto tnum .
mineral filler may be rejected and removed from qplnum for unsatisfactory performance as an ingredient in an asphalt mixture as determined in these procedures or in the sma mix design procedure gdtnum .
ensure the total fine mortar meets the following requirements test specification unaged dsr gsin kpa num minimum rtfo aged dsr gsin kpa num minimum pav aged bbr stiffness mpa num maximum section nummineral filler num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test gradation according to gdtnum .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numchlorides num general description this section includes the requirements for calcium chloride .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto m num num materials num calcium chloride a .
requirements use calcium chloride that meets the requirements of aashto m num type i or type ii .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section num elastomeric bearing pads num general description this section includes the requirements for elastomeric bearing pads .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials b. referenced documents aashto standard specifications for highway bridges divisions i and ii aashto m num num materials num elastomeric pads a .
requirements num .
type use elastomeric bearing pads of the types dimensions and shapes specified in the plans .
a .
design the pads according to division i of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
b .
use num percent virgin chloroprene neoprene that meets the requirements of aashto m num as the elastomer portion of the compound unless otherwise specified .
num .
certification submit with each shipment from the neoprene manufacturer a certification to the engineer about the physical properties of the material and compliance with these specifications .
a .
submit a certificate from the pad manufacturer stating that the lot representing the shipment has been tested according to aashto m num. b .
include test results data in the certificates .
b .
fabrication use the materials fabricate and install the pads according to division ii of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
c. acceptance the department will accept the pads based on the material certification and inspection of each pad .
the department will inspect the pads when received for compliance to quality of work type dimension and shape requirements .
the department reserves the right to sample and test completed pads according to the provisions of section num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numepoxy resin adhesives num general description this section includes the requirements for the most common epoxy adhesives used in highway construction or maintenance .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents aashto t num astm num federal hazardous products labeling act gdt num qpl num num materials num epoxy resin adhesives a .
requirements num .
use the types of epoxy adhesives below a .
type ir rapidsetting marker adhesive for bonding raised pavement markers to pavement .
b .
type is standard setting marker adhesive for bonding raised pavement markers to pavement .
c. type ii epoxy adhesive for bonding plastic concrete to hardened concrete .
d. type iii epoxy adhesive for bonding hardened concrete to hardened concrete or for bonding miscellaneous materials such as metals .
e. type iv epoxy adhesive for creating an epoxy mortar for use with clean concrete or mortar sand .
f. type v epoxy adhesive for repairing cracks in concrete by intrusion grouting .
g. type vi epoxy adhesive for a complete application or as a component in the application of a skid resistant or protective coating on hardened portland cement concrete or asphaltic concrete .
h. type vii discontinued .
i .
type viii epoxy adhesive used for anchors and dowel bar implants .
do not use in sustained tension load applications .
either mix this epoxy by machine to the proper ratio or package it in a twocomponent cartridge with a mixing nozzle that thoroughly mixes the two components as they are dispensed .
use a nozzle at least num in num mm long .
num .
furnish the epoxy adhesive as two separate components .
num .
viscosity ensure that the viscosities of the separate components are similar and conducive to easy blending of the epoxy adhesive system .
a .
submit the viscosity for the epoxy adhesive system to the engineer .
b .
ensure that the viscosity of the mixed system is compatible with the intended use of the system .
section numexpoxy resin adhesives num num .
labeling clearly label each container of the separate components of an epoxy adhesive system with the following information specification number and type component designation a or b manufacturers batch numbera batch is a single charge of all components in a mixing chamber expiration date shelf life for separate components in original containers mixing ratio and directions by volume or weight as designated by the manufacturer potential hazards and precautions according to the federal hazardous products labeling act num .
stencil the component designation on the top of each container .
num .
physical requirements ensure that the mixed epoxy adhesive system meets the applicable requirements of table num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance each epoxy adhesive system shall meet the requirements of this section .
if the department qualifies or disqualifies a system for one of the types specified it will not affect the qualification or disqualification of any other type .
the department will reject any epoxy adhesive system that meets all the requirements of this section but fails in actual use .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
table num mixed epoxy adhesive systems requirements type designation property ir is ii iii iv v vi vii viii test method pot life at num f num oc minutes num num num num num num num num gdt num elongation at num f num oc percent num num num max .
gdt num bond strength psi mpa at num hr and num f num oc at num hr and num f num oc at num hr and num f num oc num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gdt num shore d hardness at num num section numexpoxy resin adhesives num num f num oc max .
astm num sag test no sag aashto t num wet bond test psi mpa num num aashto t num section num shelf life months num num num num num num num num note values are minimums except where a range is shown or otherwise noted .
epoxy adhesive system only .
for separate components in original containers .
section num bearing plates with polytetrafluoroethylene surfaces num general description this section includes the requirements for polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe bearing surfaces .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials b. referenced documents aashto standard specifications for highway bridges division ii astm d num astm d num num materials num ptfe bearing surfaces a .
requirements num .
ensure the expansion bearings with polytetrafluoroethylene ptfe sliding surfaces meet the dimensions shown on the plans and meet the requirements of the fastening method to the structure .
num .
use bearings that meet the requirements for ptfe bearing surfaces in division ii of the aashto standard specifications for highway bridges .
num .
ensure the ptfe resin is virgin material not reprocessed and meets the requirements of astm d num and astm d num .
num .
submit certified test reports materials certificates and a certificate of compliance with this specification .
b .
fabrication num .
package each completed bearing to protect it from damage during shipment and storage .
num .
clearly identify and mark the components of each bearing and securely fasten them for shipment .
ship to the project locations for each structure as stated on plans .
c. acceptance the department reserves the right to sample and test completed bearings or components according to section num .
section numbearing plates with polytetrafluoroethylene surfaces num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numwaterproofing membrane materials num general description this section includes the requirements for waterproofing materials that serve as a barrier between the concrete bridge deck and the overlay of asphaltic concrete .
the membranes included herein are for bridge decks pavement joints and cracks and retaining wall joints .
num related references a .
standard specifications section nummaterials certification b. referenced documents astm d num astm d num die c astm d num method a astm e num procedure b astm e num gdt num qpl num num materials num waterproofing membrane material for bridge decks a .
requirements num .
use a waterresistant primer adhesive that is supplied by the manufacturer of the membrane or other approved equal compatible with the membrane .
num .
use an approved sealant compatible with the membrane and primer as mastic .
num .
provide certified results from the manufacturer of the membrane system of the tests in subsection num.c .
num .
resubmit the certified test results each time the products formulation is changed .
num .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance test the membrane system with gdt num and meet these requirements section numwaterproofing membrane materials num characteristic requirement bond no break in bond curled edges bubbles or pinholes water permeability above num ohmsft² num megaohmsm² measured indirectly in ohms per square foot meter heat resistance withstand num f num c and retain an electrical resistance above num ohmsft² num megaohmsm² resistance to aggregate penetration retain an electrical resistance above num ohmsft² num megaohms m² after granite chip creep damage test for num hours at num f num c resistance to freezethaw cycles after num cycles of freezing and thawing the test membrane shall have the tensile strength of similar samples of the same membrane unfrozen chemical resistance remain intact and in good condition when immersed for num days in each of the following inorganic acids alkalies and salts num sulfuric acid num hydrochloric acid num sodium hydroxide num sodium chloride num calcium chloride resistance to shear have a shear resistance of num lbs num kg or pass the departments evaluation of where and how the shear failure took place .
waterproofing effectiveness the membrane system does not displace retain an electrical resistance above num ohmsft² num megohmsm² see qpl num for membranes that meet the requirements of this specification .
num waterproofing membrane for pavement joints and cracks a .
requirements num .
use waterproofing membrane that incorporates a highstrength heatresistant woven fabric embedded in a layer of selfadhesive rubberized asphalt .
a .
ensure that the membrane contains at least num percent synthetic rubber by weight .
b .
ensure that the combined amount of asphalt and plasticizer oils is at least num percent of the total weight of the membrane .
the total weight of the membrane for this purpose does not include the weight of any reinforcement or fabric .
num .
get primer from the membrane manufacturer or some approved equal compatible with the membrane .
num .
use membrane with the following physical properties thickness of rubberasphalt membrane num in num mm minimum water permeability num ohmsft² num megaohmsm² breaking factor num lbsin num knm minimum heat resistance num f num c minimum without membrane damage and retain minimum num ohmsft² num megaohms m² resistivity puncture resistance mesh num lbs num n minimum elongation of mesh num to num minimum pliability num in num mm mandrel num bend at num f num f num c num c no cracks in the membrane section numwaterproofing membrane materials num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance num .
test as follows test method water permeability gdt num breaking factor astm d num method a heat resistance gdt num puncture resistance astm e num elongation of mesh astm d num pliability ¼ in num mm mandrel num bend at num num f num num c astm d num num .
see qpl num for membranes that meet the requirements of this specification .
num .
the department will remove from the list any membrane that meets this specification but fails in actual use .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num waterproofing membrane for retaining wall joints a .
requirements num .
use these waterproofing barriers for concrete and other masonry surfaces at locations shown on the plans .
num .
use waterproofing membrane that incorporates a crosslaminated high density polyethylene film adhered to a flexible selfadhesive rubberized asphalt .
num .
get primer from the membrane manufacturer or an approved equal compatible with the membrane .
num .
use membranes that meet the following requirements when tested with the required test method thickness num in num mm minimum thickness of polyethylene film num in num µm minimum tensile strength num psi num mpa minimum ultimate elongation num minimum permeanceperms grainsft²hrin hg ngs m² pa num num maximum cycling over crack at num f num c no effect num cycles puncture resistance num lbs num n minimum pliability num bend over num in num mm mandrel at num f num c no cracks num .
submit a certification from the manufacturer that the physical properties of the membrane meet the specification according to subsection num materials certification .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numwaterproofing membrane materials num c. acceptance test as follows test method tensile strength astm d num die c ultimate elongation astm d num die c permeance astm e num procedure b puncture resistance astm e num pliability astm d num cycling over crack apply and roll membrane across two primed concrete blocks with no separation between the blocks .
open and close the crack from num to num in num mm .
see qpl num for membranes that meet the requirements of this specification .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numseed and sod num general description this section includes the requirements for seed and sod .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num materials num seed a .
requirements num .
use seed that meets the requirements of the georgia seed laws and rules and regulations .
num .
the germination purity and maximum weeds specified in the georgia seed laws for all seeds used by dot are germination and hard seed minimum num purity minimum num weed seeds maximum num noxious seeds maximum num seeds per lb num seeds per kg subject to the limitations in table num section numseed and sod num num .
seed mixture when seed mixtures are specified each variety of seed shall be furnished separately and mixed after approval by the engineer .
table numnoxious weed list name limitations num .
field bindweed convolvulus arvensis prohibited num .
cocklebur prohibited num .
hedge bindweed convolvulus sepium prohibited num .
nutgrass cyperus rotundus prohibited num .
blessed thistle cnicus benedictus num per pound num per kg num .
wild onion andor wild garlic allium spp .
num per pound num per kg num .
sandbur cenchrus pauciflorus num per pound num per kg num .
johnson grass sorghum halepense num per pound num per kg num .
wild mustard and turnips brassica spp .
num per pound num per kg num .
blue weed helianthus ciliaris num per pound num per kg num .
wild radish raphanus raphanistrum num per pound num per kg num .
dodders cuscuta spp .
num per pound num per kg num .
canada thistle cirsium arvense num per pound num per kg num .
quack grass agrophron repens num per pound num per kg num .
russian knapweed centaurea picris num per pound num per kg num .
bermuda grass cynodon dactylon num per pound num per kg num .
cheat or ches bromus secalinus andor bromus commutatus num per pound num per kg num .
darnel lolium temulentum num per pound num per kg num .
cornockle agrostemma githago num per pound num per kg num .
horsenettle solanum carolinense num per pound num per kg num .
purple nightshade solanum elaeagnifolium num per pound num per kg num .
buckhorn plantain plantago lanceolata num per pound num per kg num .
docks rumex spp .
num per pound num per kg num .
gian foxtail num per pound num per kg num .
sheep sorrel rumex acetosells num per pound num per kg num .
red rice oryza sativa variety num per pound num per kg num .
sorghum almum num per pound num per kg sum total noxious weeds num per pound num per kg b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numseed and sod num c. acceptance num .
get approval from the engineer before sowing seed .
num .
ensure each bag of seed is tagged with an analysis tag showing the results of a test made within num months of planting .
a .
collect and check the tags to ensure that they show a lot number a test date within num months and that the seed quality meets the requirements in table num . b .
the georgia department of agriculture and the laboratory will randomly sample seed .
num .
even though the engineer approves the seed you are still responsible to furnish and sow seed that meets these specifications at the time of sowing .
num .
if the engineer requires provide seed samples to the engineer early enough before seeding to allow further testing before seeding .
num .
you may increase the rate of seeding to obtain the minimum pure live seed content specified if a low percentage of germination causes the quality of the seed to fall below the minimum .
note you may increase the seeding rates if the noxious weed seed per square yard meter does not exceed the allowable quantity at the regular rate of seeding .
num .
the department will reject wet moldy or otherwise damaged seed .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num sod a .
requirements num .
use living growing sod of the designated species for block or big roll sod .
this includes sod that is dormant during the cold or dry season and capable of renewing growth after the dormant period .
num .
obtain all sod from approved nurseries that have a georgia live plant license .
num .
ensure that at least num percent of the plants in the sod are of the designated variety of grass .
b .
fabrication num .
mow grass and weeds to a maximum height of num in num mm .
rake and remove the grass before cutting the sod .
num .
cut the sod into the following sizes block sodnum in num mm by num in num mm big roll sodnum in num mm by num ft num m ensure that the sod has at least num in num mm of soil adhering firmly to the roots .
num .
always exercise care to retain the soil on the roots of the sod during cutting transporting and planting .
do not dump the sod from vehicles .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on the following num .
notify the engineer to inspect the sod sources before it is harvested .
num .
the engineer will inspect the sod while it is being planted .
num .
the department will reject sod with weeds or other growth or foreign material that may be detrimental to the planting .
sod that is excessively dried out exposed to heat or not viable will also be rejected .
do not assume that an approval of a source means that the material is accepted .
d. materials warranty num .
transplant the sod within num hours from the time it is harvested .
section numseed and sod num num .
sod that is not transplanted within num hours shall be kept moist and protected from exposure to heat direct sunlight and freezing until it is transplanted .
do not exceed the numhour time limit for transplanting all of the harvested sod .
num .
cut and install sod only when the soil moisture conditions are favorable .
section numfertilizers num general description this section includes the requirements for fertilizers .
comply and meet the fertilizer requirements of the georgia fertilizer act of num and the georgia soil amendment act of num which regulates labeling sampling and tonnage reporting .
purchase all fertilizers through a georgia registered licensed distributor .
all fertilizer is subject to a sampling inspection by the georgia department of agriculture .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num section num miscellaneous erosion control items section num grassing section num vine shrub and tree planting gsp num b. referenced documents georgia fertilizer act of num georgia soil amendment act of num num materials num fertilizer a .
requirements num .
use commercial fertilizer as a single nutrient or mixed grade .
num .
apply fertilizer based on recommendations from a public or private soil laboratory that participates in a national proficiency testing program .
proof of testing is the responsibility of the contractor .
provide a soil test report to the engineer prior to application .
take soil test samples in accordance with gsp num sampling testing and inspection specifications .
num .
from this recommendation use single nutrient or mixed grade fertilizers containing the nutrients nitrogenn phosphate pnumonum and potashknumo in amounts recommended by the soil test .
composted animal manure may be substituted for commercial fertilizer that meets the soil test recommendations .
see web based fertilizer calculators to assist in determining the correct analysis and amounts to be applied according to the soil test .
num .
clearly label the analysis on the fertilizer container .
num .
apply fertilizer as a dry or liquid material using equipment specifically designed for mixing and agitating the fertilizer .
dry or liquid fertilizer may be applied by use of a hydroseeder .
num .
any fertilizer that becomes caked or otherwise damaged making it unsuitable for use shall be replaced at the contractors expense .
section numfertilizers num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept fertilizer that meets the above requirements .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section nummiscellaneous planting materials num general description this section includes the requirements for miscellaneous planting materials such as the following plant topsoil mulch vines shrubs trees and miscellaneous plants inoculants porous material prepared plant topsoil tree paint stakes organic soil additives num related references a .
specifications section numsoil base materials section numemulsified asphalt b. referenced documents ansi znum american standard for nursery stock standardized plant names method of test for moisture content of hay or straw united states department of agriculture and the united states composting council test methods for the examination of composting and compost tmecc .
gdt num num submittals submissions for erosion control compost submit a notarized certification that includes the following the feedstock by percentage in the final compost product .
a statement that the compost meets federal and state health and safety regulations .
section nummiscellaneous planting materials num a statement that the composting process has met time and temperature requirements .
a copy of the lab analysis less than four months old performed by a seal of testing assurance certified lab verifying that the compost meets the physical requirements specified .
when requested by the engineer one solvita compost maturity test kit six tests for every num ydnum num mnum of compost supplied shall be provided .
the solvita compost maturity test kit is available from woods end research laboratory inc .
box num mt .
vernon maine num num email infowoodsend.org or approved equal .
num materials num plant topsoil a .
requirements num .
use plant topsoil with the following characteristics obtained from welldrained arable land but not from fields where tobacco grew in the last three years or where johnson grass or kudzu is present .
friable loamy soil with between num and num percent organic matter .
determine the percentage by measuring the loss on ignition of ovendried samples ignited at num f num c. reasonably free from subsoil heavy or stiff clay coarse sand and other deleterious substances .
has no toxic amounts of acid or alkaline elements .
can sustain healthy plant life .
meets the grade requirements of subsection num.a.num .
num .
the department reserves the right to inspect all plant topsoil during the planting period .
the department will reject any material that does not meet the specifications .
num .
do not use frozen muddy or nonfriable topsoil .
num .
before delivering any topsoil to the job site clear stones larger than num in num mm size and roots sticks brush coarse litter and other substances that would interfere with mixing planting and maintenance .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num mulch a .
requirements num .
use mulch materials from two groups a. grassing and erosion control threshed rye oat or wheat straw or bermuda grass hay b. vine shrub tree and miscellaneous plant plantings pine straw pine bark or hardwood mulch see num.a.num for pine bark and hardwood mulch .
section nummiscellaneous planting materials num num .
use mulch materials from either group that meet the following requirements are accepted by the engineer .
can be distributed uniformly when properly loosened produce the desired results meet the moisture requirements specified herein contain no excessive amounts of noxious weed seeds num .
noxious weed seeds do not use hay or straw mulch material that has matured seeds from noxious weeds or other species that would harm surrounding farmland .
num .
moisture content ensure that the mulch material is reasonably dry .
num .
erosion control compost use erosion control compost that consists of num untreated wood chips blended with num general use compost measured by volume .
a .
wood chips shall be fresh or partially composted wood chips less than or equal to num in num mm in length with num passing a num in num mm sieve and less than num passing a num in num mm sieve .
wood chips shall not contain any visible refuse or other physical contaminants material toxic to plant growth or over num sand silt clay or rock material .
b .
produce general use compost by aerobic biological decomposition of organic matter .
compost feedstock may include but is not limited to leaves and yard trimmings class a biosolids food scraps food processing residuals manure or other agricultural residuals forest residues bark and paper .
compost shall not contain any visible refuse or other physical contaminants material toxic to plant growth or over num sand silt clay or rock material .
mixed municipal solid waste compost and class b biosolids as defined in the united states environmental protection agency code of federal regulations usepa cfr title num part num are unacceptable .
ensure compost meets all applicable usepa cfr title num part num standards for class a biosolids and the following requirements table num physical requirements for compost test requirements test method organic matter content num dry mass tmecc numa particle size num passing num in num mm sieve num retained on num in num mm sieve tmecc numb soluble salts num max .
dsm tmecc numa fecal coliform pass tmecc numb ph num num ph tmecc numa stability num or below tmecc numb maturity greater than num tmecc numa heavy metals pass tmecc num and tmecc numb a soluble salt content up to num dsm for compost used in compost manufactured topsoil will be acceptable .
note all physical requirements are in accordance with the united states department of agriculture and the united states composting council test methods for the examination of composting and compost tmecc .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section nummiscellaneous planting materials num c. acceptance num .
if the material feels damp the department will use gdt num to test for moisture content .
num .
to pass materials shall have a moisture content of num percent or less .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num vines shrubs trees and miscellaneous plants a .
requirements num .
use stock that meets the requirements of all state and federal laws for inspection of plant diseases and infestation .
num .
use nursery grown and collected plant materials that meet all regulations of the states of their origin and destination and that meet federal regulations governing interstate movement of nursery stock .
num .
use stock that is true to name and variety and is of first class quality with well developed tops and vigorous healthy root systems .
note use plant names according to the edition of standardized plant names in effect at the time of invitation for bids .
num .
use only nurserygrown stock that conforms to ansi znum american standard for nursery stock .
a .
the department will not accept plants andor trees that are severely cut back or pruned to conform to contract size requirements .
b .
the department will reject trees and shrubs that are undersized have poorly developed tops or root systems or are infected with disease or infested with insects .
num .
certification furnish all certificates of disease and infestation inspection a list of plant materials purchased and a complete list of nurseries from which each plant was grown .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will inspect plants at the nursery whenever necessary .
num .inspect and grade living plants for type size and quality according to ansi znum american standard for nursery stock .
num .
even if the department accepts materials after a test at the source the department may inspect the stock during planting and reject any that does not meet specification .
num .
the department will reject any of the following stock damaged during digging loading transporting planting and transplanting broken or loose balls or balls of less diameter than that specified large canopy shade trees without a single dominant central leader num .
replace rejected stock at your own expense .
num .
dispose of rejected stock to the satisfaction of the engineer .
d. materials warranty num .
delivery a .
give the engineer at least num hours notice before delivering any stock to the job site .
b .
send an invoice with each shipment that shows the sizes and varieties of material included .
section nummiscellaneous planting materials num num .
packaging pack stock for shipment to properly protect against drying freezing breaking or other injury .
num inoculants a .
requirements num .
use a pure culture of nitrogenfixing bacteria for an inoculant to treat seeds .
select an inoculant for maximum vitality and ability to transform nitrogen from the air into soluble nitrates and deposit them into the soil .
num .
use only purebred cultures less than one year old .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the engineer will review acceptable cultures .
d. material warranty general provisions num through num .
num prepared plant topsoil a .
requirements num .
use prepared plant topsoil made from plant topsoil organic soil additive commercial fertilizer and lime as described in subsection num.b .
num .
base any volume for peat moss used as an organic soil additive on the compressed bale .
num .for loose peat double the volume .
b .
fabrication num .
make prepared plant topsoil from the following four parts plant topsoil subsection num at least one part organic soil additive by volume subsection num .
a commercial fertilizer grade num at the rate of num lbyd³ num kgm³ lime at the rate of num lbyd³ num kgm³ num .
base the above volumes on naturally compacted undisturbed topsoil .
c. acceptance see the appropriate subsections .
d. material warranty general provisions num through num .
num stakes a .
requirements num .
use wood stakes as indicated in the specifications or shown on the plans .
use the stakes for vine shrub tree and miscellaneous plantings .
num .
saw wood stakes from either oak or gum .
use only stakes that are number two common or better either rough or dressed .
section nummiscellaneous planting materials num b .
fabrication num .
cut the stakes from sound solid undecayed wood without unsound knots .
num .
shape stakes to within num in num mm for all dimensions .
num .
taper all stakes at one end .
c. acceptance the department will reject any stake that does not meet the following test num draw a line from the center of the top to the center of the butt of each stake .
num ensure that the line stays within the body of the stake and is not more than num in num mm from the geometric center of the stake .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num organic soil additives a .
use four types of organic additives peat moss pine bark compost and hardwood mulch .
num .
peat moss use peat moss that meets the following requirements be granulated sphagnum virtually free from woody substances consisting of at least num percent partially decomposed stems and leaves of sphagnum be essentially brown in color be free of sticks stones and mineral matter be in an airdry condition shows an acid reaction of num ph to num ph meets state and federal regulations num .
pine bark use pine bark that meets the following requirements be obtained from diseasefree wood num percent of which is num in² num mm² or less in area and num percent is more than num in² num mm² in area .
contain no noxious weed seeds soil sawdust or any substance toxic to plant growth be at least two years old num .
compost use compost that meets the following requirements be organic materials that have undergone biological decomposition be disinfected using composting or similar technologies be stabilized so it is beneficial to plant growth be mature dark brown or black in color and have minimal odors contain no human pathogens fall within a ph range of num to num provide to the department a list of all the ingredients in the original compost mix in the order of their relative proportions on a weight basis .
num .
hardwood mulch use hardwood mulch that meets the following requirements derived from diseasefree deciduous trees section nummiscellaneous planting materials num particle size of less than num in num mm diameter and less than num in num mm in length .
hardwood mulch shall complete two composting cycles of num of num oc so that all viable weed seeds are destroyed and no further decomposition due to nitrification will occur free from toxic levels of acidity and alkalinity derived from sources other than cypress trees provide test results stating that the ingredients meet federal state and local requirements for priority pollutant limits and do not contain levels of any chemicals that are harmful to plants or humans .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the materials based upon their compliance with this specification .
d. material warranty general provisions num through num .
section numfencing num general description this section includes the requirements for the following types of fence and fencing accessories chain link fence woven wire fence barbed wire ground rods field fencing silt fabric fencing num related references a .
standard specifications section numwood posts and bracing section numfabrics b. referenced documents astm aashto a num a num a num a numm a num a numm a num a num a num a num f num m num m num m num m numm section numfencing num num materials num chain link fence a .
requirements use zinc or aluminum coated steel fabrics fittings accessories and posts for chain link fence conforming to the following requirements num .
fence fabric use woven wire with reasonably uniform num in num mm square mesh .
ensure that the mesh has parallel sides and horizontal and vertical diagonals of uniform dimensions .
use the wire size specified on the plans or in the proposal .
a. zinc coated use steel fabric that conforms to aashto m num .
ensure that the wire and hotdip coating conform to aashto m num type i class c. b .
aluminum coated use steel fabric conforming to aashto m num .
ensure the wire and coating conform to aashto mnum type ii .
num .
fittings and accessories a .
tension wire use wire that conforms to aashto m num .
use wire coated according to aashto m num section num for aluminum coated fabric .
use wire coated according to aashto m num section num for zinccoated fabric .
b. fittings use fittings conforming to aashto m num .
num ensure fittings or accessories not included in aashto m num conform to industry standards for heavy industrialtype fences .
num hotdip the materials in zinc with aashto m num grade num coating .
for aluminum coated fabric you may use materials made from aluminum alloy num diecast or sand alloy num zgnuma or tenzalloy .
num use bolts and nuts that conform to industry standards and are zinc coated with the hotdip process according to aashto m num m numm .
num .
posts rails and braces use posts rails and braces that conform to aashto m num and astm f num .
diameter wall thickness and weight must conform to astm f num figure num summary of requirements for industrial fence and the physical tolerance and material requirements must conform to aashto m num .
do not use light industrialcommercial fence as detailed in astm f num figure num .
check the plans for specifications on posts used for special applications .
use special posts that conform to aashto m num or that are approved by the office of materials and research .
num .
gates use support posts and gate frames as designated on the construction detail or project plans .
use gate materials that meet the requirements of subsection num.a.num .
a .
use the same coating requirements as for the fence posts .
coat gate frames after completing all welding .
b .
use fittings and hinges conforming to subsection num.a.num.b .
b .
fabrication ensure that the chain link fence fabric is produced by recognized good commercial practices .
num .
apply the zinc or aluminum coating to the fabric in a continuous process .
do not apply in roll form .
num .
carefully inspect the coated fabric visually both before and after weaving to determine the coating quality .
c. acceptance the department will reject chain link fabric that has excessive roughness blisters sal ammoniac spots bruises flaking bare spots or other obvious defects to any considerable extent .
section numfencing num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num woven wire fence a .
requirements num .
fabric use fabric that meets the requirements of astm a num design number num with class num coating .
a .
ensure that the galvanizing is uniform .
b .
ensure that less than num percent of the joints are deficient in zinc coating as determined by astm a num. c. you may use aluminum coated steel that meets the requirements of astm a num design number num for the woven wire fence fabric .
num .
posts use steel or wood posts of the sizes shown on the plans .
a .
use wood posts that meet the requirements of subsection num. b .
use steel posts and bracing that meet the requirements of astm a num .
galvanize posts and braces with the hotdip method according to astm a numa numm .
num .
certification furnish a certification to the engineer from the manufacturer that shows the physical properties of the materials .
num .
accessories galvanize the following accessories according to astm a num a numm .
use num oz.ft² num gm² as the galvanizing minimum .
galvanize other accessories as necessary or specified on the plans .
a .
wire fasteners use fasteners that meet the requirements of astm a num. b .
tension wire use no .
num gauge wire .
c. staples use no .
num gauge staples num in num mm long .
d. nails use num in num mm roofing nails to fasten metal caps to wooden posts .
num .
gates use support posts and gate frames of the size designated on the construction detail or project plans .
a .
use a frame that is an all welded unit .
ensure that the gate is galvanized after welding with num oz.ft² num gm² of spelter coating .
b .
use hinges latches and other accessories of good commercial quality that are coated as in subsection num.a.num .
b .
fabrication num .
ensure that the woven wire fence fabric is produced by methods recognized as good commercial practices .
num .
carefully inspect the galvanized fabric to determine the zinc coating quality .
c. acceptance the department will reject woven wire fabric that has excessive roughness blisters sal ammoniac spots bruises flaking bare spots or other obvious defects to any considerable extent .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numfencing num num barbed wire a .
requirements num .
galvanized steel barbed wire use wire that meets the requirements of astm a num and has a class num zinc coating .
num .
aluminum coated steel barbed wire use wire that meets the requirements of astm a num .
num .
posts use posts as specified in subsection num.a.num for barbed wire fence .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num ground rods a .
requirements num .
use ground rods that are num to num in num to num mm diameter and at least num ft num m long unless otherwise shown on the plans .
num .
ensure that the ground rods are galvanized steel with a minimum coating of num oz.ft² num gm² according to the requirements of astm a num a numm .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num field fencing woven wire and barbed wire a .
requirements num .
definition field fencing designates replacement fencing outside the right of way or temporary fencing inside the right of way provided you do not reuse the materials for permanent fencing inside the right of way .
num .
fence fabric use woven wire fabric that meets the requirements of astm a num design no .
num and has a class i coating unless otherwise designated .
num .
barbed wire use wire that meets the requirements of astm a num and has a class i coating .
use the same number of barbed wire strands as the existing or replaced fence or as specified in the plans .
section numfencing num num .
posts use either galvanized steel painted steel or treated timber of the dimensions and spacing shown on the construction detail or plans .
num .
gates use posts frame material hinges and fittings of acceptable commercial quality .
get approval from the engineer before use .
num .
use the special plan details andor special provisions for any special design of the field fence .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance num .
get approval from the engineer for all materials .
ensure that the materials are of an acceptable commercial quality and are equivalent in quality to the fence being replaced or to the existing fence as applicable .
num .
do not send materials to the laboratory unless requested by the engineer or required by the plans .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num silt fabric fencing a .
requirements num .
fabric a .
see subsection num silt fence filter fabric for the types of fabric available .
b .
use a woven wire support fence or a polypropylene support mesh with type c fence .
num woven wire support fence a .
ensure the woven wire support fence is at least num inches num mm high with at least num horizontal wires .
b .
ensure the vertical wires have a maximum spacing of num in num mm .
c. ensure the top and bottom wires are at least num gauge num mm and all other wires are at least num gauge num mm .
use washburn and moen standard requirements for determining wire gauge .
d. you may use other designs subject to approval by the office of materials and research .
num polypropylene support mesh a .
ensure the polypropylene support mesh is sewn to the fabric num in num mm num in num mm from top and bottom of fabric and num in num mm num in num mm from top and bottom of fabric .
use a tnum black polyester thread to sew mesh to fabric with a lock stitch at num to num stitches per inch .
b .
ensure the height of the polypropylene support mesh is at least num in num mm with a plus tolerance of num in num mm .
c. ensure the polypropylene support mesh minimum tensile strength in the machine direction is num lbnum inches and num lbnum inches in the transverse direction .
d. ensure minimum average weight of the polypropylene support mesh is num lbnum ftnum .
e. ensure the average strand count of the polypropylene support mesh in the machine direction is num num per num inches and num num per num inches in the transverse direction .
f. ensure the polypropylene support mesh contains stabilizers andor inhibitors that make the mesh resistant to deterioration from exposure to sunlight or heat .
num .
posts use post sizes and types as determined by the type of fence being installed .
generally hardwood posts will be limited to ash hickory or oak .
other hardwoods may be acceptable if approved by the office of materials and research .
section numfencing num a .
type a fence use either wood or steel posts that are at least num ft num m long .
num if using soft wood use posts that are at least num in num mm in diameter or nominal num x num in num x num mm and straight enough to provide a fence without noticeable misalignment .
num if using hardwood use posts that are num x num in num x num mm with a minus tolerance of num in num mm providing the cross sectional area is at least num in num num mmnum .
num if using steel use posts that are u t or c shaped with a minimum weight of num lbft num kgm and have projections for fastening the fence to the posts .
b .
type b fence use either wood or steel posts that are at least num ft num mm long .
num if using soft wood use posts that are at least num in num mm in diameter or nominal num x num in num x num mm .
num if using hardwood use posts that are num x num in num x num mm with a minus tolerance of num num in num mm providing the cross sectional area is at least num innum num mmnum .
num if using steel posts use types u t or c shapes with a minimum weight of num lbft num kgm .
c. type c fence num woven wire supported use only steel posts with a minimum length of num ft num m. use u t or c shaped posts with a minimum weight of num lbft num kgm .
use posts that have projections for fastening the woven wire and filter fabric .
num polypropylene mesh supported use either wood or steel posts that are at least num ft num m long .
a .
if using soft wood use posts that are at least num in num mm in diameter or nominal num x num in num x num mm and straight enough to provide a fence without noticeable misalignment .
b .
if using hardwood use posts that are num x num in num x num mm with a minus tolerance of num in num mm providing the cross sectional area is at least num in num num mmnum .
c. if using steel posts use u t or c shaped posts with a minimum weight of num lbft num kgm .
use posts that have projections for fastening the woven wire and filter fabric .
note you must use woven wire or polypropylene mesh to provide extra support for type c fence installations .
num .
fasteners for wooden posts a .
wire staples use staples that are at least num gauge num mm legs at least num in num mm long and a crown at least num in num mm wide .
b. nails use nails that are at least num gauge num mm num in num mm long with button heads of at least num in num mm .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numpolyacrylamide pam num general description this section covers the use of anionic polyacrylamide pam as a floculant on construction projects .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numgrassing b. referenced documents qpl num num materials a .
requirements use only polyacrylamide pam products listed on the qualified products list qpl num .
ensure polyacrylamide pam emulsions and powders are of the anionic type only and meet the following requirements num .
meets the epa and fda acrylamide monomer limits of equal to or less than num acrylamide monomer .
num .
has a density of num to num by weight and a molecular weight of num to num mgmole .
num .
mixture is noncombustible .
num .
contains only manufacturer recommended additives .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance num .
polyacrylamide pam products must meet the requirements of section num and be listed on qpl num .
num .
provide manufacturers data on charge density and molecular weight .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section nummiscellaneous num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num section numsign fabrication num general description this section includes the requirements for fabricating and applying messages on sign blanks laminated panels and extruded panels .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numlegal regulations and responsibility to the public section numsign posts section numsign blanks and panels section numreflectorizing materials section numsign paint section nummast arm assemblies section numreflective and nonreflective characters b. referenced documents manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd num materials use the dimensions colors and reflectorizing as specified in the plans proposal and manual on uniform traffic control devices mutcd .
the materials requirements are as listed below material section posts for groundmounted signs num aluminum sign blanks num extruded aluminum sign panels num reflective sheeting num silk screen lettering paint num mast arm assemblies num demountable characters with type vi reflective sheeting num direct applied nonreflective characters num num .
handle the clean metal blanks and panels with either a mechanical device or with clean cotton gloves before applying any paint .
num .
after the final metal treatment protect the blanks and panels at all times from contact or exposure to greases oils dusts or other contaminants .
num .
get approval for all materials used to fabricate the finished signs according to these specifications .
num painted signs a .
requirements num .
use paint in fabricating these signs that meets the requirements in this specification and is of the type specified .
section numsign fabrication num num .
do not paint sign blanks or panels on which reflective sheeting shall be applied .
b .
fabrication num .
coat the sign blanks or panels on one face and all the edges with one coat of primer .
allow the primer to dry thoroughly .
num .
apply a coat of the specified enamel to the primed face and edges .
a .
ensure the film is num mils num mils num µm num µm thick when dry .
determine the thickness with a suitable gauge accurate to num mil num µm .
b .
apply the paint with either sprayers or rollers .
num .
ensure that the finished paint surface is smooth uniform and exhibits neat work quality .
num .
ensure that the paint does not run curdle or separate after application .
c. acceptance the department will reject any sign panels or blanks with paint that is not of the proper thickness or with paint that has run curdled or separated after application .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num reflective sheeting signs a .
requirements use materials that meets the requirements of these specifications and is of the type specified .
b .
fabrication num .
apply the reflective sheeting to the face of the sign blank or panel with either an approved vacuum applicator using a combination of vacuum and heat or an approved roller process using heat when necessary .
num .
apply the specified sheeting type and level of reflectivity according to the sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
num .
splice the sheeting on a sign according to the sheeting manufacturers recommendations .
num .
age the sheeting for num hours .
c. acceptance after applying the sheeting properly test the adhesion to ensure it produces a durable bond equal to or greater than the strength of the reflective sheeting .
num .
ensure that the adhesion is strong enough to resist stripping from the blank when tested with a stiff putty knife .
num .
ensure that no air pockets or bubbles exist between the sheeting and the sign blank .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num message a .
requirements ensure that all finished signs have the following characteristics the signs are clearcut the lines of all letters and details true regular and free from all waviness unevenness and furry edges or lines the signs do not have scaling cracking pitting blistering dents or blemishes of any kind section numsign fabrication num the size style and spacing of the letters numerals symbols and borders used to convey the message are according to the details shown in the mutcd and on the plans .
see subsection num patented devices if patented materials are used .
b .
fabrication ensure that the legends and borders have one coat of silk screen paint as per subsection num .
num .
apply legends and borders by using one of the following processes silk screening reverse screening directly applying nonreflective durable glossy plastic film that meets the requirements of section num .
num .
airdry or ovenbake the sign at a temperature that will not affect the sign .
num .
demountable legends and borders may be used where approved by the engineer .
note attach all demountable legends letters numerals symbols and borders to the sign face with pullthrough rivets recommended by the manufacturer .
c. acceptance the department will accept finished signs based on quality of workmanship and accuracy of dimensions and message .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numsign posts num general description this section includes the requirements for the following galvanized steel sign posts galvanized steel structural shape posts aluminum structural shape posts delineator posts wood sign posts groundmounted breakaway sign supports num related references a .
standard specifications section numcertification of materials section numguard rail components section numwood posts and bracing section numpreservative treatment of timber products section numreflectorizing materials section numsign posts num b. referenced documents astm a num a numa numm a numa numm a numa numm a num anuma numm a num a numa numm b num b numm b num b numm b num b numm b num b numm b num b num g num aashto m num section num ansi b numm ansi b num aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals current edition georgia standard no .
num southern pine inspection bureau grading rules num edition nchrp num qpl num qpl num qpl num num materials num galvanized steel sign posts drive type a .
requirements use drivetype steel posts made of flanged u channel or square tubular sections .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
num .
uchannel use uchannel posts made of rerolled rail steel or new billet steel that meets the mechanical requirements of astm a num grade num and the chemical requirements of astm a num for rails with nominal weights of num lbsyd num kgm or greater .
a. dimensions weights tolerances use the dimensions weights and tolerances in table num for uchannel posts unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
num use post lengths as specified on the plans .
num use post assemblies within a sign structure from the same manufacturer .
section numsign posts num table numdimensions weights and tolerances for galvanized steel sign posts drive type outside diameters tp num in mm tp num in mm tp num in mm tp num in mm tolerance in mm flange width a. rib back b .
flat back num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num depth of u a. rib back b .
flat back num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num weight per linear foot meter before drilling punching holes or galvanizing a. rib back b .
flat back num lb num kg num lb num kg num lb num kg num lb num kg num lb num kg num lb num kg num lb num kg num lb num kg num num b. bolt holes ensure the bolt holes are properly punched or drilled with the following characteristics num holes are num in num mm diameter and spaced num in num in num mm num mm center to center .
num ensure that the holes start num in num mm from the top and extend the full length of the post for types ii iii and iv and at least num in num mm for type i .
num the department will not accept fieldpunched holes .
c. coatings ensure that the posts are coated according to astm a numa numm after the holes are punched or drilled .
num .
square tubular use square tubular posts that meet the requirements of astm a numa numm structural steel grade num class num grade num class num. a. dimensions weights tolerances use the dimensions weights and tolerances shown in table num for square tubular posts unless otherwise indicated on the plans table numdimensions weights and tolerances for square tubular posts tp num tp num tp num tp num tp num tolerance outside size in mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num wall thickness in mm num num num num num num num num num num num num num weight before drilling punching holes or galvanizing lbft kgm num num num num num num num num num num num num use post lengths as specified on the plans .
num use post assemblies within a sign structure from the same manufacturer .
b. bolt holes ensure all bolt holes are properly punched or drilled with the following characteristics section numsign posts num num holes are num in num in num mm num mm diameter and spaced num in num in num mm num mm center to center .
num ensure that the holes start num in num mm from the top and extend the full length of the post on all four sides for types num num and num and at least num in num mm on all four sides for type num .
num the department will not accept fieldpunched holes .
c. coatings coat square tubular posts with zinc at a minimum thickness of num ozftnum num gmnum .
num .
bolts nuts and washers use bolts nuts metallic washers and spacers made of aluminum stainless steel or galvanized steel .
use stainless steel that meets the requirements of astm a numa numm type bnum .
a. bolts use bolts num in num mm diameter with hexagonal heads .
ensure they are long enough to extend at least num in num mm beyond the nut when installed .
num use a bolt thread fit of ansi b numm class numh .
num if using aluminum bolts ensure that the aluminum meets the requirements of astm b num b numm alloy numtnum .
b .
nuts use selflocking plasticinsert hex nuts .
num use a bolt thread fit of asni b num class numg .
num if using aluminum bolts ensure that the aluminum meets the requirements of astm b numb numm alloy numtnum .
c. washers place metallic washers under all bolt heads .
place nylon washers between the metallic washer and the sign face .
num if using aluminum washers ensure that the aluminum meets the requirements of astm b num bnumm alloy numtnum .
num use aluminum washers with num in num mm inside diameter num in num mm outside diameter and num in num mm thick .
num use standard galvanized and stainless steel washers that meet the size requirements of ansi b num .
num use nylon washers with num in num mm inside diameter num in num mm outside diameter and num in num mm thick .
use nylon washers in combination with metallic washers to prevent torsional damage caused by the twisting action of the bolt heads .
d. coatings use galvanized steel bolts and nuts that meet astm a num requirements .
b .
fabrication num .
roll or form post sections of the dimensions specified .
num .
round all sharp corners and make rough or burred parts smooth .
num .
punch or drill holes as specified in subsection num.a.num.b .
num .
galvanize as necessary according to astm a numa numm .
c. acceptance get approval for each sign support matrix from the fhwa .
the fhwa evaluates the matrix according to the aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaries and traffic signals current edition .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numsign posts num num galvanized steel structural shape posts a .
requirements num .
ensure that the galvanized steel shapes for sign posts match the shape and dimensions shown on the plans .
a .
use steel that meets the requirements of astm a num a numm grade num num. b .
galvanize the shapes according to astm a numa numm .
handle the structural shape through only one hole during galvanizing .
num .
submit a certification according to subsection num materials certification .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num aluminum structural shape posts a .
requirements num .
ensure that the aluminum shapes for sign posts match the shape and dimensions shown on the plans .
note use aluminum that meets the requirements of astm b numb numm alloy numtnum .
num .
submit a certification according to subsection num materials certification .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num delineator posts a .
requirements num .
check the plans for the types of delineator posts to use .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
num .
if using flexible delineator posts use only those indicated on the georgia department of transportation qualified products list .
num .
mounting fasten all delineators to be mounted on galvanized or aluminum posts with commercial aluminum lock bolts .
note fasten delineators to be mounted on wood posts with galvanized wood screws .
num .
galvanized steel posts section numsign posts num use posts that meet the requirements of subsection num.a .
num .
aluminum flange type posts use aluminum that meets the requirements of astm b num b numm alloy numtnum .
a .
provide a post section in the form of a flanged u with dimensions shown on the plans .
point the bottom of the post .
b. punch or drill holes as specified in subsection num.a.num.b .
num .
wood delineator posts use num in num mm square posts of the length specified on the plans .
a .
use wood posts that meet the requirements of subsection num. b .
treat wood posts with preservative according to section num .
num .
flexible delineator posts use posts made of a durable plastic or poly resin material .
check the plans to see the type of flexible delineator post used for each location .
a .
physical characteristics use posts that can either be driven into the ground with equipment that does not damage the posts or reflective sheeting or be surfacemounted onto pavement .
num .
drill or form pilot holes where necessary to embed the posts as shown on the plans .
num classify flexible delineator posts as follows type i a b curved or flat soil mount surface mount type ii a b tubular soil mount surface mount num use durable flexible nondiscoloring posts that can recover from repeated vehicle impacts .
num ensure that materials used to manufacture flexible delineator posts are stabilized with uv ultraviolet inhibitors to prevent degradation .
num ensure that the posts are inert to normal atmospheric elements and chemicals possibly used in grass or weed control .
num use material for the post that can accept reflective sheeting .
b .
color use gray white or yellow posts as required .
c. reflective sheeting use white or yellow reflective sheeting on the posts as required .
use sheeting that meets the requirements of subsection num type iii .
obtain approved reflective sheetings from qpl num. d. certification submit a certification from the manufacturer that the flexible delineator posts are formulated of the same material as when tested by national transportation product evaluation program ntpep and will meet the requirements of this specification .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance num .
performance criteria get approval for flexible delineator posts through the evaluation performed by ntpep .
section numsign posts num the department will use the data generated by the ntpep testing to select usable materials that performed satisfactorily when tested with the following material and field tests .
num .
shapes and dimensions materials test a .
ensure that flexible delineator posts are curved flat or tubular with the upper num in num mm presenting at least a num in num mm wide profile facing approaching traffic .
b .
place the top of the wide profile sheeting num in num mm from the top of the delineator post .
c. cap the top of tubular posts to prevent water inclusion .
d. design flexible delineator posts that are soil mounted to connect with a drivetype anchor base made of corrosionresistant material .
when a post is no longer serviceable remove it and replace it in the same anchor base .
e. ensure that the minimum length for the anchor base is num in num mm and the minimum height above ground for the soil mount flexible delineator posts is num in num mm .
f. design surfacemount flexible delineator posts to connect with the base assembly and be easily replaced when the existing post is no longer serviceable .
use post heights of num in num mm num in num mm or num in num mm as required .
num .
weathering materials test a .
ensure that flexible delineator posts withstand num hours of uv exposure in the quv weatherometer without significant color change or physical deterioration .
if the department sees splitting cracking delaminating or other failures it will reject the delineator post .
b .
the department will conduct the test according to astm g num .
num .
field tests perform impact tests on the flexible delineator posts as described below a .
install num delineator posts in num rows of num each so that num row will be bumper hits and num row will be wheel hits in num pass of the vehicle .
b .
set the delineator post with a height of num in num in num mm num mm from ground level with the reflective sheeting facing the test vehicle .
c. use a standard american sedan or pickup for the test vehicle .
ensure that the vehicle has no unusually sharp hood ornaments or other appurtenances .
d. impact num delineator posts num times with the test vehicle at num mph num kph e. hit the posts five times at an ambient temperature of num f num f num c num c and five times at an ambient temperature of num f num f num c num c. f. after concluding the impact test ensure that at least num of the num posts remain intact are securely anchored and return to their original vertical orientation within an angle of num degrees .
g. of the num posts that remain intact ensure that they also retain at least num percent of their reflective sheeting and show minimal signs of distress cracking loss of rigidity .
num .
the department will place flexible delineator posts that pass the laboratory material test and field test requirements on the approved list .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num wood sign posts a .
requirements num .
use wood sign posts to support special signs when noted on the plans .
use posts that comply with georgia standard no .
num .
num .
treat the posts with preservative according to section num and standard no .
num notes .
section numsign posts num num .
use wood that matches that specified in subsection num except that it shall meet the grading requirements for no .
num sr or no .
num sr as specified in the current southern pine inspection bureau rules .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num ground mounted breakaway sign supports a .
requirements num .
use groundmounted breakaway sign supports of any assembly approved by the department as a breakaway foundation .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
num .
design the support to modified aashto wind loads of num mph num kph .
num .
certification furnish a copy from the manufacturer of an independent testing agency report showing that the support has been dynamically tested according to aashto standard specifications for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals current edition .
a. furnish evidence that the support has been tested and has met the criteria established in nchrp num. b .
supply a certification showing the physical properties of the material and how it meets the specifications as stated in subsection num materials certification .
c. show evidence that the assembly has been used successfully in installations with similar environmental and project conditions to the satisfaction of the department .
num .
sign support design a .
type a a singlepost mount that can support a num ft² num m² sign mounted to the centroid num ft num m above ground .
b .
type b a twopost mount that can support a num ft² num m² sign mounted to the centroid num ft num m above ground .
c. type c a threepost mount that can support a num ft² num m² sign mounted to the centroid num ft num m above ground .
num .
base assembly a .
ensure that the furnished base assembly protrudes no more than num in num mm above ground .
b .
ensure that the foundation assembly is compatible with the applicable sign post in subsection num. c. ensure that the assembly is galvanized with the hotdip method as per astm a numa numm or an approved equal .
d. to use an alternate protective coating obtain approval from the office of materials before using it on department projects .
num .
assembly hardware a .
use base attachment hardware that matches the plans and is as recommended by the manufacturer .
b .
ensure that the hardware is protectively coated as in astm a numa numm astm b num class num or astm b num type ii class num whichever is applicable .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numsign posts num c. acceptance use foundation assemblies that are fhwaapproved for the specific design category for which the unit was evaluated .
foundation assemblies are evaluated according to aashto standard specifications for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals current edition .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numsign blanks and panels num general description this section includes the requirements for aluminum sign blanks and panels and extruded aluminum sign panels .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents astm b num astm b num b numm astm b num b numm astm f num f numm astm f num f numm astm b num b numm num materials num aluminum sign blanks a .
requirements num .
use aluminum sign blanks of the type size and shape specified a .
type i signs with an area of num ft² num m² or less at least num in num in num mm num mm thick .
b .
type ii signs with an area more than num ft² num m² at least num in num in num mm num mm thick .
num .
use metal for the sign blanks that meets the requirements of astm b num b numm alloy numtnum or numhnum .
num .
see table num for locations of bolt holes in the sign blanks .
punch or drill bolt holes num mm diameter .
the table shows where the holes are located for each type and size of blank .
num .
submit to the engineer at least num ft² num m² of the sign material for each lot or shipment of each type .
section numsign blanks and panels num table numbolt hole locations for sign blanks and panels num .
diamondshaped blanks size number of holes required and spacing num in num mm num holes num in num mm from center on diagonal line num in num mm num holes num in num mm from center on diagonal line num in num mm num holes num in num mm from center on diagonal line num in num mm num holes num on each side num in num mm from both vertical and horizontal center line num .
square shaped blanks all sizes to num num mm num holes num in num mm from edge in center of opposite sides num in num mm num holes num in num mm from edge in center of opposite sides note drill or punch num in num mm num in num mm and num num mm diamond and square blanks for use as either type .
num .
rectangular sign blanks up to num in x up to num in num mm x up to num mm num holes num in num mm from the edge in the center of each side up to num in x num num innum mm x num num mm num holes num in num mm from the edge in the center of each side num num x num num mm num holes num in num mm from edge at num in num mm from top and bottom edges num x num in num x num mm and num x num in num x num mm num holes num in num mm from edge at num in num mm from top and bottom edges over num x num in num x num mm num holes num horizontal dimension from edge at num in num mm from top and bottom edges over num x num in num x num mm num holes num horizontal dimension from edge at num in num mm from top and bottom edges over num x over num in num x over num mm num holes num horizontal dimension from edge at num num mm from top and bottom edges num .
octagonal sign blanks num x num in num x num mm and num x num num x num mm num holes num in num mm from edge on vertical center line num x num in num x num mm num holes num on each side num in num mm from both vertical and horizontal center lines num .
triangular sign blanks with point down num in num mm num holes on vertical center line spaced num in num mm and num in num mm from the top num in num mm num holes on vertical center line spaced num in num mm and num in num mm from the top num in num mm num holes num each num in num mm from vertical center line num in num mm and num in num mm from top section numsign blanks and panels num num .
circular sign blanks num in num mmdiameter num holes on vertical center line num in num mm from center num in num mm diameter num holes on vertical center line num num mm from center num .
interstate route shield blanks num x num in num x num mm and num x num in num x num mm num holes on vertical center line spaced num in num mm and num in num mm from top num x num in num x num mm and num x num in num x num mm num holes on vertical center line spaced num in num mm and num num mm from top num .
isosceles triangular sign blanks with point to the right num x num x num in num x num x num mm num holes each num in num mm from left edge num in num mm from horizontal center line num x num x num in num x num x num mm num holes each num in num mm from left edge num in num mm from horizontal center line num .
pentagonal sign blanks with point up num in num mm num holes on vertical centerline spaced num in num mm and num in num mm from bottom edge num in num mm num holes on vertical centerline spaced num in num mm and num num mm from bottom edge b .
fabrication num .
complete all fabrication including shearing cutting and drilling or punching holes before treating the metal and applying the face material .
num .
cut the metal blanks to size and shape .
ensure that the blanks are free of buckles warp dents cockles burrs and defects resulting from fabrication .
num .
finish each face of the blank to be a plain surface and flat .
num .
metal treatment use conversion coating or anodizing to finish the metal before painting or applying the reflective sheeting .
a .
ensure the finished sign blank or panel has a uniform lightcolored appearance without splotches or stains .
b .
if the finishing procedure produces an iridescent color ensure that the shade is uniform .
c. thoroughly clean the metal before finishing .
num begin cleaning with an etchtype alkaline cleaner or with a vapor degreaser using a trichloroethylene or perchloroethylene solvent .
num use the cleaner according to the manufacturers specifications .
num after using an alkaline etching cleaner treat the metal with an acid solution or desmutting compound .
use the desmutting agent according to the manufacturers specifications .
d. finish finish the metal with a chromate conversion coating or by anodizing with a chromic acid anodizing solution .
use the conversion coating compound according to the manufacturers specifications .
e. handling carefully handle the metal with a device or with clean cotton gloves between all cleaning and finishing operations and before applying the finish material .
be sure that the metal never comes in contact with greases oils dust or other contaminants before you apply the finish material .
section numsign blanks and panels num c. acceptance the department will accept the sign blanks based on results of chemical and physical tests on the materials approval of methods and procedures for metal treatment and acceptable quality of work of the finished blank .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num extruded aluminum sign panels a .
requirements num .
use extruded aluminum sign panels close to the shape and size shown on the plans .
num .
ensure that the aluminum meets the requirements of astm b num b numm alloy numtnum or numtnum .
num .
accessories ensure that the accessories for fabricating the signs meet the following a. bolts use bolts for connecting the panels that are num in mnumxnum tolerance grade num unc numa thread numg threads and num in num mm long .
use bolts that meet the requirements of astm f num f numm alloy num tnum .
b. hex nuts use hex nuts with tolerance grade num threads that meet the requirements of astm f num f numm alloy numtnum .
c. washers use washers that meet the requirements of astm b num b numm alloy numtnum .
d. posts clips use clips as shown on the plans and that meet the requirements of astm b num alloy numtnum .
e. post clip bolts use bolts that are num in mnumxnum tolerance grade num unc numa thread numg threads and num in num mm long and meet the requirements of astm f num f numm alloy numtnum .
f. post clip nuts use hex locknuts that meet the requirements of astm b numb numm alloy numtnum .
g. post clip washers use washers that meet the requirements of astm b num b numm alloy numtnum .
num .
tolerances ensure that the sections are within the established commercial tolerances of the aluminum industry .
a .
ensure that all panels num in num mm wide have a nominal weight of num lbft num kgm .
use these sections only at the top of signs that do not conform to num ft num mm modules .
b .
ensure that all panels num ft num mm wide have a nominal weight of num lbft num kgm .
use these sections as the normal sign panel .
c. before supplying an alternate extruded panel section of equal or greater section moduli with dimensions suitable to use hardware as shown on the plans obtain written approval from the engineer .
num .
submit to the engineer at least num ft² num m² of the sign material for each lot or shipment of each type .
b .
fabrication num .
make the extruded panel signs as shown on the plans .
num .
finish the extruded panels as specified in subsection num.b.num .
c. acceptance the department will accept these sign panels based on results of chemical and physical tests of materials approval of methods and procedures for metal treatment and the quality of workmanship on the finished panel .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numreflectorizing materials num general description this section includes the requirements for reflective sheeting .
num definitions reflective sheeting types type i mediumintensity retroreflective sheeting engineering grade that is typically an enclosed lens glass bead retroreflective material .
type ii mediumhighintensity retroreflective sheeting super engineering grade that is typically enclosed lens glassbead retroreflective material .
type iii highintensity retroreflective sheeting that is typically an encapsulated glassbead retroreflective material or an unmetalized microprismatic retrotreflective element material .
type iv highintensity retroreflective sheeting that is typically an unmetallized microprismatic retroreflective element material .
type v superhighintensity retroreflective sheeting that is typically a metallized microprismatic retroreflective element material .
this material is typically used for delineators .
type vi elastomeric highintensity retroreflective sheeting without adhesive that is typically a vinyl microprismatic retroreflective material .
this material is typically used for orange temporary roll up signs .
type vii superhighintensity retroreflective sheeting that is typically an unmetallized microprismatic retroreflective element material .
type viii superhighintensity retroreflective sheeting that is typically an unmetallized microprismatic retroreflective element material .
type ix veryhighintensity retroreflective sheeting that is typically an unmetallized microprismatic retroreflective element material .
type x superhigh intensity retroreflective sheeting that is typically an unmetallized microprismatic retroreflective element material .
type xi veryhighintensity retroreflective sheeting that is typically an unmetalized cube corner microprismatic retrotreflective element material .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents astm d num qpl num num materials num type i ii iii iv v vi vii viii ix x and xi reflective sheeting a .
requirements num .
use reflective sheeting that meets the requirements of astm d num .
num .
use reflective sheeting as listed in qpl num .
num .
use reflective sheeting that has been evaluated by the national transportation product evaluation panel ntpep test facility or other approved test facility .
section numrelectorizing materials num num .
submit the following to the department a .
a certificate with each lot or shipment stating the following the material supplied will meet all the test requirements listed herein .
you have performed the specified tests to ensure compliance .
you will submit test results upon request .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance num .
the engineer will reject reflective sheeting in the following situations a .
the material fails to meet any on of the designated requirements .
b .
the material meets the requirements but later fails during sign fabrication or in actual field use .
cracks wrinkles delamination color change or abnormal loss of reflectivity constitute failure .
c. natural causes deteriorate the material to the extent that num the sign is ineffective for its intended purpose as defined in subsection num.c.num.b above .
num the average nighttime reflective brightness is less than num of the values specified in table num or table num .
d. materials warranty transfer to the department a performance warranty for type i ii iii iv v vi vii viii ix x or xi reflective sheeting issued by the manufacturer .
ensure that the warranties cover the full replacement cost including material and labor .
include in these warranties a provision that the warranty is subject to a transfer to the department .
submit a warranty from the manufacturer that states that the reflective sheetingprocessed applied to sign blank materials and cleanedmeets the outdoor weathering photometric requirements of astm d num .
section numsign paint num general description this section includes the requirements for opaque silk screen lettering paint and transparent process colors intended for fabricating high quality durable reflective signs and emblems by screen processing spraying roll coating or hand brushing .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents astm g num type d astm d num section numsign paint num num materials num silk screen lettering paint a .
requirements num .
process colors use process colors and toner that are weather resistant and designed for use on reflective sheeting .
a .
you may tone or blend process colors to make the desired color but supply each color readymixed to a smooth uniform texture .
b .
if painting on reflective sheeting use only paint recommended by the sheeting manufacturer .
num .
submittals a .
submit a numpint numl sample of each color paint from each lot to be used .
b .
submit to the engineer a certificate from the fabricator stating that the paint used on the project signs is recommended by the sheeting manufacturer and is of the same lot as the test sample .
num .
color and transparency ensure that the transparent colors have the following characteristics when processed according to the manufacturers instructions through a numxx screen onto silverwhite reflective sheeting background a .
produce a true color under both diffuse and reflected light .
b .
match the color samples submitted by the engineer .
c. allow good reflective brilliance of the processed sheeting .
num .
process color and toner use process colors that flow out and dry to a tough smooth glossy surface free of defects pattern nonwet spots and have a sharp edge screen processed .
ensure that the process colors have the following characteristics when applied according to the manufacturers instructions have an appropriate viscosity for the purpose intended .
dry to a solid film in num hours at num f num c and num percent relative humidity .
withstand curing at temperatures up to num f num c for num hours without adverse effect or embrittlement .
be removable with a recommended solvent before it thoroughly dries without damaging the reflective sheeting .
num .
durability num use weatherresistant colors when processed through a numxx screen and finished according to the recommended procedures .
num after cleaning ensure that the material meets the following requirements no appreciable color change no loss by either diffuse or reflected light no significant change in transparency when exposed to accelerated weathering for num langleys facing south unprotected at num degrees in south florida or num hours atlas twin arc weathering astm g num type d as per astm d num .
num after accelerated exposure ensure that no process color can be removed when tested by scratching through the surface applying cellophane tape over the scratched area and removing the tape with one quick motion .
b .
fabrication num .
when using color silk screen paint other than black thoroughly stir the paste before use and frequently during use .
stir especially when using reverse silk screening .
num .
ensure that the finished silk screen has no streaks .
if the paint has streaks the engineer or inspector will reject it .
num .
apply the paste on the silk screen with a rubber squeegee that is as wide as the sign .
section numsign paint num c. acceptance the engineer will approve the lettering paint based on the results from the color transparency viscosity dry time and removability tests from submitted paint samples .
d. materials warranty storage and packaging ensure that the material in storage for up to one year does not skin settle change color thicken or liver so that normal mixing procedures do not return the material to the proper consistency and texture .
section nummast arm assemblies num general description this section includes the requirements for steel posts arms and guy wires and cable for mast arm assemblies .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials b. referenced documents astm a numa numm astm a num federal specification fftnum type iii qpl num num materials num steel posts and arms for mast arm assembly a .
requirements a .
use steel posts and arms of the dimensions shown on the plans and that meet the requirements of astm a num for type e or s grade b with a galvanized finish .
b .
use pipe of weight class xs schedule no .
num .
do not use the hydrostatic test requirements .
c. submit a certification to the engineer from the manufacturer that the materials meet the requirements of this section .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the engineer will accept the material based on the certification according to subsection num materials certification and on results of galvanized coating tests made by the department .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section nummast arm assemblies num num guy wires and cable a .
requirements a .
use guy wires for mast arm assemblies and cable for overhead sign assemblies of the dimensions shown on the plans and that meet the requirements of astm a num siemensmartin grade with class a coating .
b .
provide extra heavy wire rope thimbles that meet federal specification fftnum type iii for each end of the cable .
c. submit a certificate from the manufacturer according to subsection num materials certification .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the engineer will accept the material based on the certificate .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numdelineators num general description this section includes the requirements for center mount reflector delineators .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents general provisions num through num .
num materials definitions for optical requirements use the following definitions in this specification num .
entrance angle the angle at reflector between direction of light incident on it and direction of reflector axis .
num .
observation angle the angle at reflector between observers line of sight and direction of light incident on reflector .
num .
specific intensity candlepowerfootcandle mcd returned at the chosen observation angle by a reflector for each footcandle lux of illumination at the reflector .
section numdelineators num num center mount reflector delineators a .
requirements num .
use a reflector delineator made of a hermetically sealed acrylic plastic prismatic reflex reflector with a single grommetted hole .
num .
submit num delineators of each color to be used on the project to the department for testing .
num .
acrylic plastic reflector use an acrylic plastic reflector .
submit to the department the manufacturer of the raw material and the identification number of the particular molding compound to be furnished .
a .
ensure that the reflector has the following characteristics a clear transparent plastic face with at least num in² num mm² of reflective area the lens a heatscalable plastic back fused to the lens under heat and pressure around the entire perimeter of the lens and the central mounting hole a unit permanently sealed against dust water and water vapor b .
use a crystal colorless amber or red reflector as specified on the plans .
c. ensure that the lens has the following characteristics a smooth surface without projection or indentations other than a central mounting hole and identification number a rear surface bearing a prismatic configuration that will affect total internal reflection of light the manufacturers trademark molded legibly into the lens face num .
specific intensity ensure that the specific intensity of each reflex reflector used in delineators or markers equals or exceeds the following minimum values regardless of reflector orientation .
observation angle entrance angle specific intensity candlepower per footcandle mcd per lux degrees degrees crystal amber red num num num num num num num num num num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance num .
the engineer will accept the material based on test results optical seal and heat resistance of samples taken by the department .
the department will return undamaged delineators to the contractor .
num .
optical test a .
place the reflex reflector to be tested about num ft num m from a single light source that has an effective diameter of num in num mm .
operate the light source at normal efficiency .
note if using a test distance other than num ft num m modify all other dimensions for this test in the same proportion as the test distance .
b .
measure the return light from the reflector with a photoelectric photometer that has a minimum sensitivity scale of num x num footcandlesmm num x num luxmm .
section numdelineators num note use a photometer with a receiver aperture num in num mm diameter shielded to eliminate stray light .
c. place the light source center num in num mm from the aperture center for a num degree observation angle .
d. during testing spin the reflectors to average the orientation effect .
e. the department will reject a tested reflector if it fails the specific intensity minimum .
if more than num reflectors fail out of num tested the department will reject the lot .
num .
seal test use this test to determine if a reflector is adequately sealed against dust and water .
a. submerge num samples in a water bath at room temperature .
b .
subject the submerged samples to a vacuum of num in num mm gauge for num minutes .
c. restore atmospheric pressure and leave the samples submerged for num minutes .
d. examine the samples for water intake .
e. the department will reject the lot if more than num percent of the reflectors fail .
num .
heat resistance test a .
place three reflectors in a horizontal position on a grid or perforated shelf inside a circulating oven that allows air to circulate freely .
b .
set the oven temperature at num f num f num c num c and let the specimens sit at this temperature for num hours .
c. after the num hours remove the samples from the oven and let them cool in air to room temperature .
d. rejection the department will reject the lot if any sample shows significant change in shape and general appearance when compared with unexposed control standards .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numreflectors and nonreflective characters num general description this section includes the requirements of demountable characters with type vi reflective sheeting and directapplied nonreflective characters .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcertification of materials section numreflectorizing materials b. referenced documents astm b num b numm astm d num num materials num demountable characters with type ix reflective sheeting a .
requirements num .
use type ix reflective sheeting letters numerals symbols and borders that meet the requirements of subsection num type ix .
num .
use a silver color unless otherwise specified on the plans .
num .
apply the characters to aluminum flat frames as recommended by the sheeting manufacturer .
num .
use flat frames letter numerals symbols and borders made from aluminum sheet num in num mm thick matching astm b num numm alloy numhnum .
num .
submit to the department one letter of a predominant size and type to be used on the project .
a certificate to the engineer stating that the material used on the project is the same as the sample submitted .
b .
fabrication num .
before applying any sheeting properly degrease etch and treat each frame with a light tight amorphous chromate type coating .
num .
mechanically apply the reflective sheeting to the prepared flat aluminum frames .
use the proper equipment as prescribed by the sheeting manufacturer .
num .
when recommended by the sheeting manufacturer coat the completed demountable letters numerals symbols and borders with a clear finish approved by the sheeting manufacturer .
apply the clear coat to the sheeting surface to ensure the sheeting has a fully glossy coat and a complete edge seal .
num .
ensure that the finished letters numerals symbols and borders show careful workmanship are clean cut sharp and have a plane surface .
num .
use the character size and shape to determine the hole spacing to mount the frame with aluminum rivets or other approved noncorrosive fasteners .
do not space holes more than num in num mm on center .
section numreflectors and nonreflective characters num c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on test results of samples taken by the department or of samples submitted by the manufacturer or fabricator when directed .
the sample shall consist of one letter of predominant size and type to be used on the project .
samples submitted by the manufacturer or fabricator to the engineer shall include a certificate stating that the material used on the project is the same as the sample submitted .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num direct applied nonreflective characters a .
requirements num .
use directapplied nonreflective characters as opaque legend stripping and symbols on traffic control signs made from reflective sheeting that meets subsection num .
num .
use nonreflective weatherproof plastic film that is precoated with pressuresensitive or heatsensitive adhesive backing .
num .
use sheeting that is flexible enough to be easily cut shaped and applied over reflective sheeting .
num .
submit the manufacturers certification to the engineer showing the properties of the materials used and how they match the specifications as required by subsection num materials certification .
num .
ensure that the nonreflective sheeting is weather resistant after processing and application according to the manufacturers recommended procedures .
a. expose the nonreflective sheeting for num hours in an atlas twin arc weatherometer as per astm d num. b .
clean the sheeting .
c. the department will reject nonreflective sheeting that appreciably discolors cracks crazes blisters changes dimensionally or adversely effects the reflective sheeting on which it is mounted .
num .
use adhesive that has the following characteristics is precoated and pressuresensitive class num or tackfree and heatactivated class num .
be able to apply either without adding more adhesive to either the nonreflective sheeting or to the reflective sheeting .
has a protective liner that can be peeled off without being soaked in water or other solvents .
ensure that the liner is easily removed after accelerated storage for num hours at num f num c under num psi num kpa of pressure .
forms a durable vandalresistant bond to smooth and weather resistant surfaces .
adheres securely at temperatures ranging fromnum to num f num to num c just num hours after application .
prevents the sheeting from shocking off the panel when struck at num f num c. b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance the department will accept the material based on the manufacturers certificate .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num section numwild animal warning reflector system num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numraised pavement markers num general description this section includes the requirements for raised pavement marker materials for use in reflective ceramic and channel markers .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents astm c num astm c num astm d num astm d num federal method tttnum method num num materials a .
requirements do not use any marker materials until the laboratory approves it .
num .
use raised pavement marker sources as listed in qpl num .
num .
use raised pavement markers of the type shown in the plans or specified in the proposal .
this specification references markers as follows type description num twoway onecolor num x num in num mm x num mm reflective num oneway onecolor num x num in num mm x num mm reflective num twoway two color num x num in num mm x num mm reflective num round white yellow or black ceramic non reflective num oval white yellow or black ceramic nonreflective num oval white or yellow ceramic reflective num white or yellow ceramic jiggle bar nonreflective num white or yellow ceramic jiggle bar reflective num white or yellow channel nonreflective section numraised pavement markers num num white or yellow channel reflective num twoway onecolor num x num in num mm x num mm reflective num oneway one color num x num in num mm x num mm reflective num twoway two color num x num in num mm x num mm reflective num twoway one color flexible reflective num oneway one color flexible reflective num .
certification submit a certification to the engineer from the manufacturer showing the physical properties of the markers and their conformance to this specification .
num .
packaging pack shipments in containers that are acceptable to common carriers .
a .
pack the containers to ensure delivery in perfect condition .
b .
clearly mark each package of pavement markers with the size color type and lot number .
c. you are liable to replace any damaged shipments .
num raised retroreflective pavement markers type num num num num num and num a .
requirements num .
use raised retroreflective pavement makers that meet the requirements of astm d num designation h. num .
use raised retroreflective pavement makers as listed in qpl num .
num .
use raised retro reflective pavement makers that have been evaluated by the national transportation product evaluation panel ntpep test facility or other approved test facility .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num c. acceptance the department will give conditional and final approval to retro reflective pavement markers evaluated by the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep the georgia department of transportation or other department approved test facilities and place them on qpl num .
all white and yellow retro reflective pavement markers must meet the requirements of this specification and the following ntpep field performance requirement .
a .
conditional qpl placement the department may add markers on a conditional basis to qpl num .
these markers must maintain an average coefficient of luminous intensity for num months during the ntpep evaluation of not less than num of the values shown in table num of astm d num. b .
final qpl approval or rejection the department will approve or reject markers based on the marker maintaining an average coefficient of luminous intensity of num cdfc for num months during the ntpep evaluation .
num flexible reflective markers type num and num a .
requirements use markers manufactured by extruding plastic into an l shape with nominal dimensions of num in num mm long x num in num mm high vertical face x num in num mm wide base leg .
ensure that the markers have the following a pressuresensitive adhesive with a paper release liner to the bottom of the base leg .
section numraised pavement markers num strips of metallized acrylic reflective sheeting on either one or both sides of the vertical face .
a clear plastic cover to protect the reflective strip .
ensure that the cover withstands a chipseal operation and is easily removed after the operation .
num .
hardness a .
select five random markers b .
use astm d num to determine the shore a hardness c. the department will reject markers whose body and clear protective cover hardness is less than num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
num ceramic pavement markers type num num num num and num a .
requirements num .
use ceramic pavement markers made from a heatfired white vitreous ceramic base and a heat fired opaque glazed surface to produce the properties required in these specifications .
a .
do not place glaze on the marker bottom where it connects to the road surface .
b .
thoroughly and evenly mature the markers .
ensure that they have no defects that affect appearance and serviceability .
c. use reflective ceramic markers that meet the specific intensity of each reflective surface according to table num of astm d num. d. ensure that the mean thickness of the glazed surface is at least num in num mm when measured at least num in num mm from the edge of the marker .
e. ensure that the water absorption of the ceramic markers does not exceed num percent of the original dry weight when tested according to astm c num. f. ensure that the glazed surface does not craze spoil or peel when passed through one cycle of the autoclave test at num psi num kpa astm c num .
num .
use the designated colors for the white and yellow markers .
a .
ensure that the colors are uniform .
b .
ensure that black matches federal color no .
num. c. determine the color by visually comparing each marker with calibrated standards having cie chromaticity coordinate limits .
determine the limits with federal methods of test tttnum method num using a rectangle with the following corner points num num num num nummgo white .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num min .
yellow .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num min .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance num .
use a random sample of five markers for lens impact strength temperature cycling and compressive strength tests specified in astm d num .
section numraised pavement markers num num .
use the following table to determine if the markers pass the tests .
markers that pass department action num of num accept the lot .
num or less of num reject the lot no resample allowed .
num of num the contractor may request a retest .
the department will retest an additional num random markers in the test or tests where the original sample failed .
num of num retested accept the lot .
num or less of num retested reject the lot no resample allowed .
num .
compressive strength test a .
the markers pass if the average compressive load of all five markers is at least num psi num kn .
no individual marker shall be less than num psi num kn .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num channel pavement markers type num and num a .
requirements num .
use channel pavement markers made of either a heatfired white vitreous ceramic base with a heatfired opaque glazed surface or a num gauge num mm steel body with a heatfired porcelain finish .
a .
ensure both ceramic and steel channel markers have no defects that affect appearance and serviceability .
b .
ensure that the mean thickness of the glazed surface of ceramic channel markers is at least num in num mm when measured at least num in num mm from the edge of the marker .
c. ensure that mean thickness of the porcelain finish on the steel channel markers is at least num in num mm .
d. ensure that the water absorption of the ceramic markers does not exceed num percent of the original dry weight when tested according to astm c num. e. ensure that the surface of the markers do not craze spoil or peel when passed through one cycle of the autoclave test at num psi num kpa astm c num .
num .
use the designated colors for the white and yellow markers .
a .
ensure that the colors are uniform .
b .
determine the color by visually comparing them with calibrated standards having cie chromaticity coordinate limits .
determine the limits with federal methods of test tttnum method num using a rectangle with the following corner points num num num num nummgo white .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num min .
yellow .num .num .num .num .num .num .num .num num min .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numraised pavement markers num c. acceptance num .
ensure that type num markers meet the specific intensity of each reflective surface according to table num in astm d num .
num .
use a random sample of five markers for lens impact strength temperature cycling and compressive strength tests specified in astm d num .
num .
select two of the five markers and subject them to all the required tests .
num .
use the following table to determine if the markers pass the tests .
markers that pass department action num of num accept the lot .
num of num reject the lot no resample allowed .
num of num retest the three remaining markers .
num of num retested num or less of num retested accept the lot .
reject the lot no resample allowed d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numlighting standards and towers num general description this section includes the requirements for the structural components of poles towers bases anchor bolts luminaires and other attachments used for roadway high mast or other lighting .
in particular the section covers the following steel lighting standards and towers aluminum lighting standards prestressed concrete standards service cars support and lowering assemblies grounding num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of work section numsteel structures section numrepair of galvanized coatings section nummanufacture of prestressed concrete bridge members section numlighting standards and towers num b. referenced documents astm aashto a numa numm a numa numm a numa numm a numa numm a numa numm a numa numm a numa numm b num m numm numm m num milwnum aisi num aisi num aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals num materials design lighting assemblies consisting of standard tower bracket arms lowering assembly and luminaire support and assemblies according to aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaire and traffic signals .
submit to the engineer the manufacturers design calculations and shop drawings for each type of lighting standard or tower to be used .
num steel lighting standards and towers a .
requirements num .
include the following in the makeup of lighting standards and towers a pole and bracket arms as required on the plans a steel base welded to the other end complete with bolts for use as an anchor base pole or attached to an approved breakaway device such as slip base aluminum transformer base breakaway couplings etc .
when so specified .
num .
steel structures use structural carbon or structural low alloy steel that meets the requirements of aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
however do not use astm a numa numm aashto m numm numm steel .
num .
steel pipe use steel pipe according to astm a numa numm grade b or approved equal .
no hydrostatic test is required .
b .
fabrication num .
roadway standards unless otherwise specified do the following a .
make the shaft or appropriate shape continuously taper with a base welded to the lower end .
b. construct the standard of steel at least num gauge num mm thick to the dimensions required for the specified mounting height .
form the standard from one piece with one electrically welded longitudinal joint and no intermediate horizontal joints .
c. after forming and welding coldroll the shaft longitudinally under sufficient pressure to flatten the weld and increase the physical characteristics of the metal in the shaft .
d. ensure that the shaft has a reinforced handhole with a cover except where a transformer base is specified .
provide a num in num mm approved grounding connector in the shaft or base .
equip the top of the shaft with a removable pole cap held securely in place .
section numlighting standards and towers num galvanize the shaft with the hotdipped method in astm a numa numm .
num .
lighting towers a .
make the shaft to meet the requirements of the roadway standard subsection num.b.num .
b. construct the standard to continuously taper num to num inft num to num mmm .
c. ensure that the standard has the necessary dimensions and metal quality to meet the requirements for the pecified mounting height .
d. you may form the shaft in sections with each section having no more than two longitudinal welded seams .
e. use intermediate horizontal welds only at section joints .
f. make telescoped joints overlap at least num pole diameters measured at the minimum diameter of the inner telescoping section .
g. have field welding done only by an approved certified welder who represents the manufacturer .
ensure the welding follows the requirements of section num. h. repair any damage to spelter coating according to section num. i. matchmark all sections of the shaft so that the tapered sections are assembled properly .
num .
post top or other standards for special installation a .
make the post top and other standards meet the requirements for roadway standards subsection num.b.num .
b .
make the top diameter of the shaft num in num mm or include a num in num mm tenon unless otherwise specified to insert the shaft or tenon into the luminaire .
num .
anchor base do the following unless otherwise specified a .
secure a steel base to the lower end of the shaft with two continuous electric welds .
ensure that the base develops the full strength of the adjacent shaft section to resist bending .
b .
where the plans specify a frangible or breakaway base attach the base to an approved breakaway device with an approved number and type of bolts .
c. provide removable cast or pressed steel covers with each base .
appropriately attach each cover to the base .
num .
steel bracket arms do the following unless otherwise specified a .
use the design dimensions from the plans .
b .
ensure that the installed bracket connects securely with the shaft and has a smooth wiring raceway .
c. use stainless steel bolts and nuts that meet the requirements of astm a numa numm type bnumc or aisi num to attach the bracket arm assembly .
num .
transformer bases do the following unless otherwise specified a .
use the dimensions on the plans to build the bases .
num make top and bottom plates that meet the requirements of astm a numa numm grade num num and are fabricated to receive the shaft anchor bolts and the foundation bolts .
num make the side panels meet the requirements of aisi num .
num create a base thick enough for the height of the standard .
b .
fit the base with a door that can be securely fastened .
num .
anchor bolts a .
provide bolts as follows lighting standard num anchor bolts lighting tower num anchor bolts minimum b .
use the size indicated on the plans or as required by the manufacturers shop drawings .
section numlighting standards and towers num c. use anchor bolts nuts and washers that meet the requirements of aashto m num grade num .
supplementary requirement s num of aashto m num also applies .
note do not use grade num num. d. install anchor bolts with a leveling nut and a flat washer between the leveling nut and the base plate .
num use a template to install the bolts .
num place a flat washer on top of the base plate .
num lock a lock washer on top of the flat washer and secure the nut .
num fully grout the space between the shoe base and the top of the footing with nonshrink grout .
e. galvanize threaded ends of anchor bolts hexagonal nuts flat washers and lock washers according to astm a numa numm and plan details .
num .
finish unless otherwise specified galvanize all steel lighting standards and towers including pole base transformer base and bracket arm assembly according to astm a numa numm .
c. acceptance num .
the engineer reserves the right to make test and inspections as necessary to ensure compliance with these specifications and to reject items that fail testing .
num .
the engineer will accept the steel lighting standards and towers based on the results of physical and chemical tests made by the department .
the manufacturers certification showing physical and chemical properties of the metal prior to forming .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num aluminum lighting standards a .
requirements include the following in making aluminum lighting standards num .
a pole and bracket arms as required on the plans .
num .
an aluminum base welded or bonded to the lower end complete with bolts for use as an anchor base pole or attached to an approved breakaway device such as an aluminum transformer base breakaway couplings etc .
when so specified .
b .
fabrication use aluminum materials that meet the requirements of aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals .
num .
roadway standards a .
make the shaft with a continuous taper and weld or bond a base to the lower end .
b .
give the shaft a reinforced handhole with a cover except when a transformer base is specified .
c. provide a num in num mm approved grounding connection in the shaft or base .
d. equip the top of the shaft with a removable pole cap held securely in place with set screws .
num .
post top or other standards for special installation do the following unless otherwise specified a .
build the standard to meet the requirements for roadway standards subsection num.b.num .
section numlighting standards and towers num b .
make the top diameter of the shaft num in num mm or include a num in num mm tenon to insert the shaft or tenon into the luminaire .
num .
anchor base do the following unless otherwise specified a .
secure the onepiece aluminum base to the lower end of the shaft by either using two continuous welds .
inserting the base at least num in num mm into the shaft and bonding with a weatherproof structural epoxy adhesive that fully develops the required strength as specified by the design criteria .
b .
ensure that the base develops the full strength of the adjacent shaft section to resist bending .
c. when the plans call for a frangible or breakaway base attach the base to an approved breakaway device with an approved number and type of bolts or use a base that is an approved breakaway type .
d. provide removable cast or pressed aluminum covers with each base .
appropriately attach each cover to the base .
num .
aluminum bracket arms a .
use the plan design and dimensions .
b .
ensure that the installed bracket arm connects securely with the shaft and has a smooth wiring raceway .
c. use stainless steel bolts and nuts that meet the requirements of astm a numa numm type bnumc or aisi num to attach the bracket arm assembly .
num .
transformer bases a .
form the base of cast aluminum that meets the requirements of astm b num alloy anum tnum to dimensions on the plans .
use aluminum as the primary material .
b .
make the top so it can receive the anchor base bolts and the bottom so it can receive the anchor bolts .
num .
anchor bolts use bolts as described in subsection num.b.num .
num .
finish all aluminum lighting standards including pole base transformer base and bracket arm assembly in a natural aluminum color unless otherwise specified .
c. acceptance num .
the engineer reserves the right to make test and inspections as necessary to ensure compliance with these specifications and to reject items that fail tests .
num .
the engineer will accept the aluminum lighting standards and towers based on the results of physical and chemical tests made by the department the manufacturers certification showing physical and chemical properties of the metal prior to forming the standard d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num prestressed concrete lighting standard a .
requirements num .
make the prestressed concrete lighting standard of the design and dimensions in the plans .
make the standard with machines in steel forms by the centrifugal spinning process to ensure maximum density .
num .
use a manufacturing method that produces a smooth cable raceway throughout the length of the standard .
make the raceway between num to num in num to num mm in diameter when measured at the top of the standard .
b .
fabrication num .
use materials and manufacturing methods according to section num with the following exceptions section numlighting standards and towers num a .
concrete use class aaa concrete with a maximum aggregate size of num in num mm and a maximum slump of num in num mm after the spinning process .
b. detension you may detension the standards after num hours under a lowtemperature steam process .
however if the standard does not reach a compression strength of num psi num mpa in this numhour period the inspector will reject the standard .
c. finish ensure that the standard has a smooth uniform finish from a water carborundum mechanical process that removes the laitance and surface content revealing the aggregate .
num .
bases a. furnish the standards with an anchor base or a precast butt base .
note if using the precast butt base cast it as an integral part of the standard during the spinning process .
make a conduit entrance as shown on the plans .
b .
make the boltdown anchor base have a cast steel anchor base that meets the requirements of astm a numa numm grade num num. c. secure the base to the primary pole reinforcement so it is strong enough to transmit the required loads to the anchor bolts .
num .
bracket arms a .
you may make the bracket arm assembly of aluminum or steel that meets the requirements shown herein .
b .
galvanize the steel bracket arm assembly according to astm a numa numm .
c. acceptance num .
the engineer reserves the right to make test and inspections as necessary to ensure compliance with these specifications and to reject those items failing such tests .
num .
the engineer will accept these standards based on tests made by representatives of the department during the manufacturing process .
num .
give sufficient notice to the engineer prior to manufacture to arrange for the required inspection .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num service car a .
requirements num .
use a powerdriven hoisting device suitable for safely servicing any level of the lighting tower .
num .
furnish shop and working drawings or illustration sheets as needed according to section num .
num .
transfer to the engineer all guarantees on materials and equipment that the manufacturer normally furnishes together with all operating instructions and service manuals .
include in the guarantees the provision that they are subject to such transfer .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty submit guarantees on materials and equipment .
section numlighting standards and towers num num high mast luminaire support and lowering assembly a .
requirements num .
this assembly shall be a mechanical device capable of supporting the luminaire assembly at the required operating position and raising and lowering the assembly to ground level for servicing .
num .
furnish shop and working drawings or illustration sheets according to section num .
num .
transfer to the engineer all guarantees on materials and equipment that the manufacturer normally furnishes together with all operating instructions and service manuals .
include in the guarantees the provision that they are subject to such transfer .
b .
fabrication num .
use aashto standard specifications for structural supports for highway signs luminaires and traffic signals to build the assembly .
num .
support head frame use a head frame with three supports for the suspension cables and a pulley for the power cable .
a .
place the suspension supports num degrees apart .
place the power cable pulley midway between two suspension supports .
b .
attach two pulleys to the inside of each support one at each end .
construct the pulleys so that the suspension cables ride freely in the groove of the pulleys .
provide cable guides and retainers to keep the suspension cables and power cable inside the pulleys .
c. supply a hood for the support head frame to protect against weather for all working components at the pole top .
ensure that the hood adequately ventilates the pole .
num .
luminaire mounting ring a. equip the inner portion of the ring with approved rollercontact springloaded centering arms .
the arms center the luminaire ring while ascending or descending the pole protect the pole and luminaires and prevent jamming during the raising and lowering operations .
make the rollers for the centering arms of a waterresistant nonmarking composition material .
b .
design the mounting ring to symmetrically mount the number of luminaires indicated on the plans .
num provide a weatherproof junction box and terminal board terminating the power cable and connecting the luminaire wiring .
num provide a weatherproof power receptacle to test the luminaires when the ring is in the lowered position .
num .
nonlatching device design a .
if the design does not have a latching device at the top of the pole position the luminaire mounting ring tightly against the support head frame .
note use a positive visible indication that the required force has been applied .
b .
make sure the luminaire mounting ring and support head frame can hold the luminaire mounting ring in place and prevent rotation while in the raised position .
num .
latching device design a .
use a latching device at the top of the pole to latch all three suspension points and support the total weight of the ring including luminaires .
b .
place all moving parts of the latching device in the luminaire mounting ring .
note use a positive visible indication of the latching position .
num .
miscellaneous hardware section numlighting standards and towers num use noncorrosive miscellaneous fittings fasteners and hardware for the support head frame and luminaire mounting ring .
use an approved means for locking nuts .
num .
hoisting systems a .
ensure that each pole has three suspension cables and one hoisting cable .
b .
use cables that have num strands of num wires each made of stainless steel aircraft cable according to milw num type num composition b. c. use at least num in num mm diameter suspension cables and at least a num in num mm diameter hoisting cable .
d. anchor the ends of the poles suspension cables to the top of the suspension cable bracket assembly .
pass the other ends through the pulleys on the support head frame and attach to the luminaire mounting ring .
e. secure the hoisting cable at the bottom center of the suspension cable bracket assembly .
attach the other end to the drum of the motordriven winch .
prevent future twisting and eliminate any tension developed during initial installation of the hoisting cable system .
f. use a wormgear reducing winch with a reduction ratio that is selflocking in both raising and lowering operations .
completely enclose the wormgear in a lubricating reservoir .
g. make the winch operable with either an electric drill motor or a nema frame motor as described in lowering device power supply unit .
h. provide a hand crank for raising and lowering .
i .
include a cable guardretainer for the winch drum .
this will force the cable away from the ends of the drum for spooling and prevent the cable from coming off the drum .
j .
design the entire hoisting system so that power cable suspension cables and hoisting cable may be replaced from the ground .
num .
lowering device power supply unit a .
use a lowering device power supply unit that is either an electric drill motor or a nema frame motor .
num equip both motors with a factoryset torque limiter .
power each from a weatherproof outlet or receptacle located in the service area of the pole .
num you may use a stepdown transformer to supply the required motor voltage .
b .
make the transformer an integral part of the power supply unit when required .
c. attach and lock in place the drill or motor at the pole handhole .
provide a remote control system that works from at least num ft num m away .
num .
high mast power cable a .
use extraheavy duty power cable in a jacket that resists oil and sunlight .
include in the cable the number and size of copper insulated conductors required on the plans .
b. securely connect the power cable to the luminaire mounting ring and the suspension cable bracket assembly so it will not damage the cable and supports only its own weight .
num .
pole disconnect a. furnish each pole with a molded case circuit breaker in a nema enclosure of the size and type specified on the plans .
b .
make the breaker accessible through the pole handhole .
get the breaker from the manufacturer of the raising and lowering device .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty submit guarantees on materials and equipment .
section numlighting standards and towers num num grounding a .
requirements general provisions num through num .
b .
fabrication num .
connect the power system ground to the pole .
num .
include a grounding conductor with the high mast power cable and connect it to the luminaire mounting ring .
num .
ground the pole disconnect to the pole .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numluminaires num general description this section includes the requirements for the following types of luminaires roadway rest area high mounting height offset underpass navigation lighting num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents ansiies types specified on plans num materials use luminaires that are complete including ballast lamps fuses and associated hardware and wiring .
num luminaires a .
requirements num .
standard equipment for roadway rest area high mounting height and offset luminaires use luminaires for these locations that have the following equipment a. lamps check the plans for the lamp wattage type and size .
b. ballasts use ballasts that meet these requirements unless otherwise specified section numluminaires num are part of the luminaire housing or in a separate weatherproof housing attached to the luminaire housing .
are used for multiple circuits unless otherwise specified .
operate at voltages shown on the plans .
provide rated lamp watts to the lamp through a range in primary voltage of num percent .
have a power factor of at least num .
provide enough open circuit voltage to start lamps at a temperature as low asnum f num c. are enclosed in an epoxy encapsulated covering mounted on the external pole base or cabinet .
c. controls the local power company will provide and install control equipment including photoelectric control receptacle contactor and other equipment unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
d. level indicator when shown on the plans as a required item ensure that each luminaire has a builtin device indicating the direction and amount of tilt over a range of num to num degrees in any direction .
ensure that the indicator has the following characteristics has three calibrations accurate to within num degree a level b num degree tilt c num degree tilt is clearly visible without aid in daylight to a distance of num ft num m. does not alter or reduce the amount of light from the luminaire .
has a transparent container made of clear ultravioletinhibited acrylic .
the lower surface is curvilinear in any vertical crosssection to support a spherical indicator and dampening fluid .
uses a clear dampening fluid made of num percent glycerol and num percent ironfree water .
uses a highly visible orange or red color ball in the spherical indicator that is chemically inert to the dampening fluid .
num .
roadway luminaires ensure that roadway luminaires have or meet the following requirements a .
are placed horizontal or vertical as indicated on the plans .
b .
have an aluminum housing with the following a num in num mm slipfitter a removable aluminum reflector a detachable prismatic glass refractor and aluminum refractor holder a prewired terminal board and integral ballast an adjustable porcelain enclosed mogul socket with spring loaded center contact and lamp grips an approved type gasket with a positive latch at the street side of the luminaire c. distribute light according to ansiies type as specified on the plans .
num .
rest area luminaires ensure that rest area luminaires have or meet the following requirements are placed vertically have a hinged aluminum canopy have a pressed glass prismatic refractor unless otherwise specified have a die cast aluminum basehousing with access door and slipfitter for a num in num mm od pile top or tenon have a prewired terminal board and integral ballast have a porcelain enclosed mogul socket with spring loaded center contact and lamp grips distribute light according to ansiies type as specified on the plans section numluminaires num num .
high mounting height luminaires ensure that high mounting height luminaires have or meet the following requirements a .
have a raintight precisioncast aluminum housing that includes an adjustable slipfitter for a num in num mm mast arm that allows adjustments of at least num degrees above and below the mast arm axis .
b .
contain a prewired terminal board .
c. have an integral ballast with quick disconnect plug .
d. have an adjustable porcelainenclosed mogul socket with springloaded center contact and lamp grips .
ensure that the lamp socket adjusts to obtain maximum intensity at vertical angles from num to num degrees .
provide a separate lamp support to prevent vibration damage .
e. be able to accept no .
num to no .
num awg wire with clamptype terminals .
f. have ballast enclosed in a raintight cast aluminum housing fully serviceable without removing the luminaire from its bracket .
g. have refractors andor lens that are heat and shockresistant tempered glass .
h. distribute light according to ansiies type as specified on the plans .
num .
offset luminaires ensure that offset luminaires have or meet the following requirements a .
have raintight precisioncast aluminum housing with a bakedon enamel finish and the following twin trigger latches a hinged door for easy access to internal components noncorrosive hardware b .
include a porcelainenclosed mogul socket with springloaded center contact and lamp grips .
num ensure that the grips are permanently attached to the reflector to properly position the lamp .
num equip the socket wiring with a quickdisconnect to easily remove the reflectorsocket assembly .
c. include a highly polished anodicsurfaced aluminum reflector and a prismatic borosilicate glass refractor .
d. have seals or gaskets at all critical points to form a weathertight breathing seal .
e. include a prewired terminal board .
f. have integral wired ballast that meets the ballast requirements of this specification and the plans .
g. have a slipfitter for a num to num in num to num mm od pole tenon and external means to level and aim both horizontally and vertically for rapid and versatile field installation .
h. be adjusted and sized after the pole is erected and plumbed to provide the lighting pattern according to the plans and the manufacturers recommendations and instructions .
i .
efficiently distribute light uniformly along the roadway when offset as shown on the plans and with spacings up to num mounting heights .
num .
underpass luminaires type a a .
housing ensure that the type a housing meets these requirements unless otherwise indicated on the plans be surfacemounted at about num ft num m above the edge of the finished pavement on an outside bridge pier as shown on the plans be diecast aluminum with an integral ballast have a specular aluminum reflector have a detachable thermal shockresistant glass refractor have an adjustable porcelainenclosed mogul socket with springloaded center contact and lamp grips to properly position the lamp have a hinged door assembly protected by safety chains and an approved gasket to keep out moisture and dirt section numluminaires num be able to attach directly to the bridge pier or underpass wall b .
light distribution for type a use an enclosed high intensity discharge h.i.d .
luminaire unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
ensure that the luminaire distributes light in a widebeam diffused pattern .
c. lamp use a lamp of the wattage type and size shown on the plans .
d. ballast use ballast that meets the provisions of subsection num.a.num.b .
e. controls use controls that meet the provisions of subsection num.a.num.c .
f. include all thimbles fittings elbows etc .
in the price bid for conduit .
the department will include a pay item for necessary conduit in the contract .
num .
underpass luminaires type b a .
housing ensure that type b housing meets the following requirements be made from aluminum with a specularfinish onepiece aluminum reflector and a clear ribbed onepiece detachable sidehinged cover of acrylic plastic .
ensure that the cover is completely gasketed to keep out contamination .
have a heavyduty galvanized mounting support that allows the unit to rotate num degrees around its lateral axis when mounted .
include springloaded heavyduty recessed doublecontact lamp holders to accept a single fnumpg num fluorescent lamp .
be able to attach to the bridge pier or underpass wall .
b .
light distribution for type b use an enclosed fluorescent luminaire with a widebeam diffused light distribution pattern .
c. lamp use a num watt fnum pg numcw fluorescent lamp with a recessed double contact base and a rated life of at least num hours unless otherwise indicated on the plans .
d. ballasts for multiple circuits use ballasts that meet the following requirements have a power factor of at least num to operate at voltages shown in the plans provide enough opencircuit voltage to start lamps at temperatures as low as num f num c are inside the luminaire housing can service one or two luminaires as indicated on the plans e. controls use controls that meet the provisions of subsection num.a.num.c .
f. circuit breakers install galvanized weatherproof circuit breakers and cabinets as indicated on the plans .
use cabinets num x num in num x num mm deep .
g. install cabinets conduit and complete wiring as shown on plans and as directed by the engineer .
num .
navigation lighting luminaires a .
housing use cast aluminum housing of the type specified on the plans .
use housing that has a gasketed service door for relamping .
b. lamps use clear numwatt rough service lamps with num volt rating .
c. receptacles use receptacles rated at least num watts num volts for medium screw base lamps .
use a design that will not freeze the lamps with aluminum screw base shells .
d. lens use num in num mm marine type fresnel lenses .
num use a lens color with horizontal arcs of visibility as shown on the plans .
num for fixed span installations you may use a combination of the following luminaires and colors section numluminaires num location color degrees of horizontal arcs of visibility channel center green num channel margin red num main channel white num pier bent red num abutment red num fender system red num axis line or center line red num num mount channel marker luminaires with a swivel so that you can move the arm and luminaire in a numdegree arc to replace the lamp and maintain the unit .
num unless otherwise noted use pivot or swiveltype channel marker luminaires with either bronze or galvanized steel retriever chain and swivel .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numelectrical wire and cable num general description this section includes the requirements for electrical conductors wire and cable .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents national electrical code num materials num electrical wire and cable a .
requirements num .
conductors unless otherwise specified use conductors that meet the following requirements are made of copper section numelectrical wire and cable num are the size and type shown on the plans meet the requirements of the national electrical code note do not use conductors not meeting this requirement or with illegible identification .
num .
wire and cable use wire and cables that have the following requirements a .
are new without kinks or other defects when installed b .
are single conductor or multiconductor with one of the following types rhhrhwuse num c rhw use thw xhhw or thwn num c rhh xhhw or thhn num c c. use insulation for num volts as indicated on the plans .
num .
underground cable use underground wire that meets the following requirements be rot and vermin proof be the proper size be a type recommended by the cable manufacturer for direct burial in earth b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numelectrical conduit num general description this section includes the requirements for metallic nonmetallic and flexible electrical conduit .
num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents national electrical code ansi cnum astm a num federal specification wwcnuma federal specification wcnum section numelectrical conduit num american national standards institute ansi specification cnum underwriters laboratories ul num national electrical manufacturers association nema standard tc num type hw num materials num metallic conduit a .
requirements num .
use metallic conduit that meets the requirements of and is used according to the latest edition of the national electrical code .
a .
check the plans or project proposal for the type of conduit allowed .
b .
ensure each section of conduit shows approval by the underwriters laboratories inc. ul .
num .
rigid steel conduit ensure that rigid steel conduit elbows and couplings meet ansi cnum .
use conduit protected by a uniform metallic zinc coating on both the exterior and interior surfaces .
a .
coat the conduit and coupling with a minimum coating of num oz.ft² num gm² total of both surfaces .
b .
determine the weight of the zinc coating using either astm a num or if the engineer elects a magnetic or electromagnetic thickness gage to measure the coating thickness .
num .
rigid aluminum conduit ensure that rigid aluminum conduit elbows and couplings meet federal specification wwcnuma .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num nonmetallic conduit a .
requirements num .
polyvinyl chloride pvc conduit use unplasticized pvc conduit that meets the requirements of ul num. a .
use type i conduit only when encased in concrete .
ul num refers to type i as type eb .
b .
use type ii conduit for direct burial .
use schedule num heavy wall unplasticized pvc conduit that meets the requirements of federal specification wcnum unless otherwise specified .
num .
fiberglass reinforced epoxy fre conduit use fre conduit and fittings that meet the requirements of nema standard tc num type hw .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
section numelectrical conduit num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num flexible conduit a .
requirements num .
use flexible conduit with a galvanized steel core and a uvresistant pvc cover .
num .
use liquidtight conduit with a continuous copper ground .
num .
use conduit that meets the requirements of article num of the national electrical code .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section num miscellaneous electrical materials num general description this section includes the requirements for the following miscellaneous electrical materials ground rods fuses and fuse holders lightning arresters circuit breakers disconnect switches photoelectric controls magnetic contactors num related references a .
standard specifications general provisions num through num .
b. referenced documents astm a numa numm eeinema publications num materials ensure that all electrical materials are approved by the underwriters laboratory or other acceptable testing agency .
section nummiscellaneous electrical materials num num ground rods a .
requirements num .
use ground rods that are num in num in num mm num mm diameter and num ft num m long unless otherwise shown on the plans .
num .
ensure that the rods are galvanized steel with a minimum coating of num ozft² num gm² according to astm a numa numm .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num fuses and fuse holders a .
requirements use fuses of the amperage indicated on the plans and with an appropriate voltage rating to operate at the voltage specified on the plans .
b .
fabrication num .
use intheline waterproof fuse holders .
a. construct and install the fuse holder so it will retain the fuse on the load side if disconnected or broken apart .
b .
install the fuse holder with a breakaway feature when specified on the plans .
num .
install a weatherproof boot furnished by the fuse holder manufacturer over each end of the fuse holder .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num lightning arresters a .
requirements use lightning arresters of the metal oxide varistor type rated at num volts and have the number of poles required unless otherwise specified .
provide a pole for each ungrounded leg of the service voltage .
b .
fabrication num .
for units not sealed at the factory a .
apply silicone caulk to the lead entrance .
b .
install heat shrinkable tubing with precoated sealant on the interior surface over the lead entrance .
num .
place the arrester in a watertight housing .
ensure that the lead entrance to the housing is encapsulated or sealed .
section nummiscellaneous electrical materials num c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num circuit breakers a .
requirements num .
use circuit breakers that have the following characteristics are thermal magnetic molded case quickmake and quickbreak operate with overthecenter toggles with the handle going to a position between on and off to indicate automatic tripping can bolt on with an industrial rating and a minimum interrupting capacity of num rms symmetrical amperes be enclosed in a lockable weatherproof enclosure have proper lugs that are sized for the cable used .
do not cut cable strands to attach to circuit breakers .
num .
use multipole breakers that are of the single handle and common trip type with a voltage rating of at least num volts from line to ground .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num disconnect switches a .
requirements num .
use disconnect switches with the voltage and ampere rating specified on the plans .
num .
fuse the switches as designated on the plans .
num .
use switches that are numpole numwire solid neutral with heavy duty rating unless otherwise specified .
you may install the switch separately or with a magnetic contactor .
num .
enclose the switch in a lockable stainless steel weatherproof enclosure .
num .
use the proper lug sized for the cable used .
do not cut cable strands to attach to disconnect switches .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section nummiscellaneous electrical materials num num photoelectric controls a .
requirements num .
use photoelectric controls that have the following characteristics have a factory setting for turnon at num footcandles num lux ambient light level have a suitable differential between turnon and turnoff levels to prevent cycling at critical levels operate on a supply voltage of num volts num hz ac with an inrush rating of num amperes at num volts operate with a lamp load rating of num watts for incandescent and num voltamperes for mercury vapor and fluorescent lamps contain builtin surge and lightning protection have a rated life at full load of at least num onoff operations have relay contacts that are singlepole singlethrow spst normally closed nc have dielectric strength of at least num volts between any current carrying part and metal mounting surface withstand an ambient temperature range ofnum to num f num to num c have a moistureproof housing about num in num mm high with a base diameter of less than num in num mm have a chassis of molded phenolic with three lockingtype blades and a neoprene gasket that meet eeinema publications num .
provide an approved receptacle for mounting the photoelectric control .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
num magnetic contactors a .
requirements num .
use magnetic contactors that have the following characteristics have the voltage and ampere rating as specified on the plans have the number of poles required to open each ungrounded conductor have a coil voltage of num volts num hz ac unless otherwise specified are in lockable stainless steel weatherproof enclosures unless otherwise specified have proper lugs sized for the cable used num .
do not cut cable strands to attach to contactors .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
section nummiscellaneous electrical materials num d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numtraffic signal equipment num general description this section provides specifications for a variety of traffic signal equipment .
ramp meters are defined as a form of traffic signalization and all general provisions for traffic signalization are applicable unless otherwise noted in the plans and specifications .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numconcrete structures section numstrain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies section numtraffic signal installation section numelectrical wire cable and conduit section numjoint fillers and sealers section numpiling and round timber section numpaints field painting section nummast arm assemblies section numelectrical wire and cable section numelectrical conduit section numwireless communication equipment section numfiber optic system section num video detection system section numcommunications and electronic equipment b. referenced documents national electrical manufacturers association nema standards publication ts num section num nema standard publication ts num num institute of transportation engineers itevehicle traffic control signal heads specification ite vehicle traffic control signal heads light emitting diode ledcircular signal supplement june num num specification ite vehicle traffic control signal heads part num light emitting diode led vehicle arrow traffic signal modules specification ite pedestrian traffic control signal indications part num light emitting diode led pedestrian traffic signal modules specification international municipal signal association imsa num specification imsa numspecification imsa numspecification section numtraffic signal equipment num imsa numspecification imsa numspecification underwriters laboratory inc. ul num tests for flammability of plastic materials for parts in devices and appliances ul num standard for safety for thermoplasticinsulated underground feeder and branchcircuit cables traffic signal control equipment specifications january num edition and applicable addenda state of california business transportation housing agency state of california department of transportation caltrans qualified products list qpl controller assemblies for the model num traffic controller caltrans transportation electrical equipment specifications tees august num num and applicable addenda georgia department of transportation qualified products list numpolyurethane sealant for inductive loopsamerican society of testing and materialsastm anum standard specification for carbon structural steel astm anum standard specification for pipe steel black and hot dipped zinccoated welded and seamless astm anum standard specification for zinc hotdip galvanized coating on iron and steel products astm anum standard specification for zinc coating hot dip on iron and steel hardware astm anum standard specification for structural bolts steel heat treated num ksi minimum tensile strength astm anum standard specification for zinccoated steel wire strand astm anum standard specification for high strength lowalloy columbiumvanadium structural steel astm cnum standard test method for determining the static coefficient of friction of ceramic tile and other like surfaces by the horizontal dynamometer pullmeter method astm dnum standard test methods for determining the izod pendulum impact resistance of plastics astm dnum standard test methods for tensile properties of plastics astm dnum standard test method for rockwell hardness of plastics electrical insulating materials astm dnum standard test methods for flexural properties of unreinforced and reinforced plastics and electrical insulating materials astm dnum standard test methods for determination of the impact resistance of thermoplastic pipe and fittings by means of a tup astm dnum standard practices for evaluating the resistance of plastics to chemical reagants electronic industries standards eia num materials num general a .
requirements ensure that the traffic signal equipment and materials meet the plans and specifications .
all equipment furnished shall be new and meet the requirements of the following underwriters laboratory incorporated ul electronic industries association eia national electric code nec american society of testing and materials astm american national standards institute ansi section numtraffic signal equipment num international municipal signal association imsa national electrical manufacturers association nema applicable standards specifications and regulations of the georgia department of transportation traffic signal electrical facility navigator support tsef num e. confederate avenue building num atlanta ga num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty provide to the district signal engineer or maintaining agency all manufacturers warranties and guarantees for all signal equipment items listed in this document as well as any signal equipment listed in the plans except for state supplied equipment .
ensure that warranties and guarantees are consistent with those provided as customary trade practices or as otherwise specified in the plans standard specifications supplemental specifications or special provisions .
ensure and state that manufacturers and suppliers warranties and guarantees are transferable to the agency or user that is responsible for traffic signal maintenance .
and said warranties and guarantees are continuous throughout their duration .
ensure equipment provided under this specification shall be warranted by the manufacturer to be free from defects in materials and workmanship for a minimum period of two years from date of receipt or one year from date of acceptance of installation .
the exception is the other materials stated in this specification which have longer warranty durations .
ensure the manufacturer will repair any faulty equipment during this period at no charge to the department for parts labor or shipping to and from the factory .
num type num controller assemblies a .
requirements for num controller cabinet assemblies use num controller units that meet the requirements of the following or are previously approved by tsef traffic electrical equipment specifications tees published by the state of california business transportation and housing agency department of transportation current edition and current addenda caltrans qualified products list qpl ensure the unit supplied is compatible with current gdot licensed firmware .
the following specifications augment the caltrans specifications and take precedence over conflicting caltrans specifications .
num .
inputoutput io and configuration the num controller shall be supplied in one of the following configurations as specified in the plans all modules are specified in tees but these configurations supersede the defined configurations in tees numl provide chassis numb singleboard cpu numa field io module numb front panel numxnum display numb numamp power supply and a numa module .
this unit is intended for interfacing in type nume or its cabinets and shall provide the default input and output configuration as shown in tables num num and num for its cabinets using a traffic signal application .
section numtraffic signal equipment num nume provide chassis nume singleboard cpu numa field io module numb front panel numxnum display numb numamp power supply and a numa module .
this unit is intended for interfacing in type nume or its cabinets and shall provide the default input and output configuration as shown in tables num num and num for its cabinets using a traffic signal application .
numlc provide chassis numb singleboard cpu numb field io module numb front panel numxnum display numb numamp power supply and a numa module .
this unit is intended for interfacing in its cabinets only and shall provide the default input and output configuration as shown in tables num num num and num for its cabinets using a traffic signal application .
num lb provide chassis numb single board cpu numa field io module numc front panel numb numamp power supply this unit is intended for interfacing in type nume or its cabinets where a user interface is not required and shall provide the default input and output configuration as shown in tables num num num and num for its cabinets using a traffic signal application .
num lnnum provide chassis numb singleboard cpu numb field io module numb front panel numxnum display numnb numamp power supply num nema interface module and a numa module .
this unit is intended for interfacing in nema ts num or nema ts num type num cabinets .
num lnnum provide chassis numb singleboard cpu numn field io module numb front panel numxnum display numnb numamp power supply and a numa module .
this unit is intended for interfacing in a nema ts num type num cabinet .
num .
power supply modules either the numa numb numna or numnb module shall be provided as required in the configuration requirements in the preceding item .
in addition to all requirements of the tees the power supplies shall be clearly marked as a numa numbnumna or numnb .
the vendor may supply a numa or numna power supply module in lieu of a numb or numnb as long as it is so marked and adds no additional cost to gdot .
num .
documentation include with each controller manuals that document the programming operation and maintenance of the unit .
include schematic drawings and pin assignment charts in the manuals for maintenance .
documentation shall include all components including communications modules .
specific reference is made to section num documentation in the caltrans tees concerning required documentation to be provided .
num .
testing provide for complete testing of unit before it is shipped .
if unit is shipped with applications firmware installed it must be tested with the application e.g .
traffic signal control .
if a random sample of greater than num percent of the units tested is rejected then the total shipment shall be rejected and vendor will be responsible for all costs to test and repair all units provided .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance see subsection num for compliance with caltrans qpl .
also see item num testing in section a above .
d. materials warranty see subsection num d for materials warranties .
num type num controller subassemblies a .
requirements for num controller subassemblies use num controller subassembly units that meet the requirements of the following or are previously approved by tsef section numtraffic signal equipment num traffic electrical equipment specifications tees published by the state of california business transportation and housing agency department of transportation current edition and current addenda caltrans qualified products list qpl the following specifications augment the caltrans specifications and take precedence over conflicting caltrans specifications .
num .
num numb module the num numb module may be supplied as a separate item to be used in all versions of the num controller .
the num numb module shall be supplied complete with the operating software .
ensure it contains the required files to be compatible with the current gdot applications software .
num .
num nume module the num nume module may be supplied as a separate item to be used in all versions of the num controller .
the num nume module shall be supplied complete with operating software .
ensure it contains the required files to be compatible with the current gdot applications software .
num .
num numa field io module the num numa field io module may be supplied as a separate item .
the num numa field io module shall consist of the field controller unit parallel inputoutput ports other module circuit functions includes muzzle jumper serial communication circuitry module connectors cnums cnums and cnums mounted on the module front plate vdc power supply numvdc to numvdc and required software .
ensure it contains any configuration jumpers to be compatible with current gdot applications software .
ensure the num numa field io module functions with a model numl or numlb controller assembly and is compatible with current gdot applications software .
num .
num numb field io module the num numb field io module may be supplied as a separate item and consist of the serial communication circuitry dc power supply and module connector nums mounted on the module front plate only .
ensure it contains any configuration jumpers to be compatible with current gdot applications software .
ensure the num numb field io module functions with a model num lc or numlnnum controller assembly and is compatible with current gdot applications software .
num .
num numn field io module the num numn field io module may be supplied as a separate item and provides a nema tsnumcompatible sdlc interface via serial port num .
ac power to the num unit and fault monitor logic output via num serial port num and output frame byte num bit num to the nema tsnum cabinet monitor unit cmu .
ensure it contains any configuration jumpers to be compatible with current gdot applications software .
ensure the num numn field io module functions with a model num lnnum controller assembly and is compatible with current gdot applications software .
num .
num numb front panel display module the num numb display module may be supplied as a separate item and provides a front panel assembly controller two keyboards aux switch alarm bell and an num line by num character display .
this assembly shall also include a panel with latch assembly and two tsd num hinge attaching devices assembly pcb external serial port connectors cpu active led indicator contrast adjustment knob and front panel harness .
ensure it contains any configuration jumpers to be compatible with current gdot applications software .
ensure the num numb front panel assembly module functions with models numl numlc numlnnum and num lnnum controller assemblies and is compatible with current gdot applications software .
ensure the hardware hinge attaching devices mate with existing num assemblies .
ensure the front panel harness is connected to the front panel via a removable connector .
ensure the front panel connector supports the aux switch .
num .
num numc front panel display module the num numc display module may be supplied as a separate item and provides a system serial port numlines isolated and vectored to connector cnums .
this assembly shall also include a panel with latch assembly and two tsd num hinge attaching devices assembly pcb external serial port connectors cpu active led indicator and front panel harness .
ensure it contains any configuration jumpers to be compatible with current gdot applications software .
ensure the num numb front panel assembly module functions with model numlb controller assembly and is compatible with current gdot applications software .
ensure the hardware hinge attaching devices mate with section numtraffic signal equipment num existing num assemblies .
ensure the front panel harness is connected to the front panel via a removable connector .
ensure the front panel connector supports the aux switch .
num .
num numb power supply module the num numb power supply module may be supplied as a separate item and is an independent self contained module .
ensure that it is vented and cooled by convection only .
provide module that slides into power supply compartment from the back of the chassis and is attached to the backplane mounting surface by its four tsd num devices .
ensure the module supplies at least num amperes of numvdc .
ensure the num numb power supply module is compatible with models numl numlb and numlc controller assemblies and is compatible with current gdot applications software .
ensure the connection harness ps num on existing units can be mated with the numb module supplied .
a num numa power supply module may be provided in place of a numb module as long as it is labeled as such and there is no additional cost to gdot .
ensure the module supplied is appropriately marked as a numb or numa module .
num .
num numnb power supply module the num numnb power supply module may be supplied as a separate item and is an independent self contained module .
ensure that it is vented and cooled by convection only .
provide module that slides into power supply compartment from the back of the chassis and is attached to the backplane mounting surface by its four tsd num devices .
ensure the module supplies at least num amperes of numvdc .
ensure the num numb power supply module is compatible with models num lnnum and num lnnum controller assemblies and is compatible with current gdot applications software .
ensure the connection harness ps num on existing units can be mated with the numb module supplied .
ensure the numnb power supply module supports the nema tsnum and tsnum standards .
a num numa power supply module may be provided in place of a numb module as long as it is labeled as such and there is no additional cost to gdot .
ensure the module supplied is appropriately marked as a numna or numnb module .
num .
num numb communications module the num numb communications module is supplied as a separate item .
the numb communications module is a dual asyncmodem serial module .
ensure the module supports both serial and modem fsk communications on both of two separate ports .
ensure the modem data baud rate supports num to num .
ensure the module is configured to support fsk communications on the cnums connection .
ensure it contains any configuration jumpers to be compatible with current gdot applications software .
num .
num numa communications module the num numa communications module may be supplied as a separate item .
the numa communications module is a dual async serial communications module .
ensure the module supports serial communications on both ports .
ensure it contains any configuration jumpers to be compatible with current gdot applications software .
num .
num num field io module the num num field io module may be supplied as a separate item .
the num field io module consists of the module chassis module power supply field control unit controller parallel inputoutput ports serial communications circuits and module connectors .
ensure the exnum connector is provided with appropriate mating connections to interface with either numb or numa communications modules .
ensure the num num field io module is provided with the appropriate mating connector to mate with the cnums connector on the num numb field io module .
ensure the num num field io module functions as part of a model num lnnum controller .
num .
num d panel the num d panel is supplied as a separate item .
the num d panel supports the inputs and outputs of the d connector provided on a num module which is also part of a model num lnnum .
ensure the d connector panel supports all num pins with a connecting ms d connector and terminal blocks .
ensure the num d panel provides adequate cable length to allow attachment in an existing nema cabinet .
ensure that the terminal blocks allow for two connections .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance see subsection num for compliance with caltrans qpl .
section numtraffic signal equipment num d. materials warranty see subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num cabinet assemblies a .
requirements in addition to the caltrans specifications ensure that the cabinet assembly conforms to the requirements listed below which take precedence over conflicting caltrans specifications .
num .
cabinet configuration supply cabinets in accordance with these specifications .
equip the cabinets with auxiliary equipment as follows a .
model numa cabinet lower input field termination panel num model num dc isolator in slot num of upper input file num flash transfer relays num model num flashers num auxiliary cabinet shelf to support communication devices num num position power strip num manual push button assembly b .
model nums cabinet nummodel num dc isolator in slot num of input file num flash transfer relays nummodel num flashers num auxiliary cabinet shelf to support communication devices num num position power strip num manual push button assembly numm base adapter installed base mount cabinets only numaluminum cover plate for cabinet bottom pole mount cabinets only c. model num cabinet numflash transfer relays nummodel num flasher num manual push button assembly d. model num cabinet with auxiliary output file for ramp metering operations num auxiliary equipment shelf num outputpda type num with model num num volt dc power supply with flash transfer relay num model num monitor unit numload switch model num num num position power strip num lower input field termination panel num detector test switch panel note include above components in cabinet at time of delivery .
other auxiliary cabinet components such as controllers monitors load switches etc .
will be ordered as separate items .
num .
finish section numtraffic signal equipment num use cabinets that have a bare aluminum finish see subsection num.a.num for controllercabinet minimum fabrication specifications .
num .
locks equip the main cabinet door with locks that accept no .
num corbin keys .
provide two sets of keys with each cabinet .
one set of keys is defined as one no .
num key and one police panel key .
num .
power equip the cabinet assemblies with a power distribution assembly to generate ac and dc power for the electronic components except the dc power for the controller units .
provide the model num and nums cabinets with a dc isolator for stop timeflash sense located in slot num of the input file .
num .
mounting equip the cabinets for pole or base mounting as specified in the plans .
a .
base mount supply model nums cabinets when specified as base mount with an m basemounting adapter installed .
b .
pole mount supply model nums or num cabinets when specified as pole mount with two exterior pole mounting brackets that allow for mounting on steel concrete and timber poles .
ensure that the bracket mounting holes are properly reinforced with metal plates of adequate size and strength welded longitudinally across the inside depth of the cabinet .
ensure that the exteriormounting bracket is shipped installed on the cabinet housing .
additionally provide an aluminum plate which covers the bottom cabinet opening .
num .
unused phase monitoring provide oddphase reds with ballast resistor numk num watt dummy loads .
do not wire the cabinet to monitor pedestrian yellow indications .
when auxiliary output file is used provide resistors for overlaps .
neatly lace label and bundle the wiring from the signal monitor for pedestrian yellow monitoring on the back panel .
num .
red monitoring provide a connector and terminal assembly designated as pnum for monitoring the absence of red as an integral part of the output file .
terminate the connector and ensure compatible with the cable and c connector of a type num conflict monitor unit capable of monitoring the absence of red .
provide the pin assignments of the pnum connector and terminal assemble with the cabinet plans .
ensure that the pnum connector is physically alike to the cable and connector of a type num conflict monitor unit to prevent the absence of red cable connector from being inserted into the pnum connector num degrees out of alignment .
submit details for programming of the unused red channels for approval .
num .
cabinet light include in each cabinet one fluorescent strip lighting fixture mounted inside the top front portion of the cabinet .
do not use screw in type fluorescent lamp .
the fixture includes a cool white lamp covered and operated by a normal power factor ul listed ballast .
install a dooractuated switch to turn on the cabinet light when either door is opened .
cabinet fan and light shall be fed from num amp equipment breaker .
num .
cabinet interlock do not install the interlock circuit as detailed in the caltrans specifications .
num .
cabinet drawer equip each model num numa and nums cabinet with an aluminum storage compartment mounted in the rack assembly with the approximate following dimensions num inches num mm wide num inches num mm long and num inches num mm deep .
mount this compartment directly under the type num controller .
provide a drawer with telescoping drawer guides to allow full extension from the rack assembly .
section numtraffic signal equipment num when extended the storage compartment opens to provide storage space for cabinet documentation and other miscellaneous items .
ensure that the storage compartment be of adequate construction to support a weight of num pounds num kg when extended .
provide a top for the storage compartment that has a nonslip plastic laminate attached which covers a minimum of num of the surface area of the top .
num .
auxiliary equipment shelf provide a shelf in each cabinet that provides a location to mount fiber modem dialup modem andor field hardened switch .
provide shelf in location that allows easy access to ac power outlets and communications links telephone interconnect .
locate shelf so as not block access to other equipment or modules including battery backup system .
num .
power strip equip each cabinet with a metal power strip minimum of num outlets to support ac power for external communications devices in cabinet .
provide metal strip that is mounted vertically on the rear rail .
ensure that the power strip may be used by block power supplies such that the block power supply does not block other outlets .
attach power strip to a permanent location that is easily accessible to devices in the rear of the cabinet .
provide hard wire connection to the cabinet ac power controlled by a num amp breaker .
do not use plug in power strips .
num .
surge protection equip each cabinet with devices to protect the control equipment from surges and over voltages .
design the surge protector panels to allow for adequate space for a wire connection and surge protector replacement without the removal of terminal blocks or panels .
provide surge protectors for the input sections as detailed below and as shown in the input terminal and surge arrestor detail .
supply surge protectors that meet the following specifications .
a. ac service input include a surge protection unit for each cabinet on the ac service input that meets or exceeds the following requirements provide a hybrid type power line surge protection device on the cabinet service panel .
install the protector between the applied line voltage and earth ground .
use a surge protector capable of reducing the effect of lightning transient voltages applied to the ac line that conforms to the following peak surge current for an num x num s waveform numa for num occurrences clamp voltage numa numv max maximum continuous operating current numv num hz numa series inductance ac lineac neutral num micro henries response time voltage never exceeds numv during surge spike suppression for num v spike num v deviation from sine wave at all phases angles between num and num degrees .
provide a protector that is modular and uses a num pin beau connector with the following terminals main line ac line first stage terminal main neutral ac neutral input terminal equipment line in ac line second stage input terminal numa equipment line out ac line second stage output terminal numa equipment neutral out neutral terminal to protected equipment gnd earth connection supply a protector that is epoxy encapsulated in a flameretardant material .
configure the equipment line out to provide power to the type num and to the num v power supply .
b. ac interconnect cable inputs section numtraffic signal equipment num use a surge protection device to protect each ac interconnect line as it enters the cabinet with a surge protection device that meets or exceeds the following requirements numelectrode gas tube type of surge arrestor striking voltage of num v dc with a minimum holder over voltage of numv dc a three terminal device one of which is connected to ground the other two are connected across each input respectively the units must meet the following minimum requirements impulse breakdown less than numv in less than num s at num kv s impulse breakdown balance num microsecond or less difference at num kv s impulse energy application withstands numa ac for one num second applied ten num times at three num minute intervals on either section current rating numa num x num s impulse capacitance num pf line to ground c. inductive loop detector inputs provide surge arrestors in the cabinet as shown in table num table num or table num for the applicable cabinet .
protect each inductive loop detector channel input by an external surge protection device that meets or exceeds the following requirements a threeterminal device two num of which are connected across the signal inputs of the detector with the third connected to the chassis ground to protect against common mode damage .
instantly clamps differential mode surges induced voltage across the loop detector input terminals via a semiconductor array .
the array appears as a low capacitance to the detector .
clamps common mode surges induced voltage between the loop leads and ground via solid state clamping devices .
withstand numa surge current occurrences of a num x num s waveform .
have the following clamp characteristics maximum break over voltage num v maximum onstage clamping voltage numv response time num ns offstage leakage current num a capacitance less than num pf ensure that the unit also meets the following minimum requirements peak surge current num times differential mode num a num x num ms common mode num a num x num ms estimated occurrences num num a response time num ns input capacitance num pf typical temperature num f to num f numº c to numº c mounting no .
num x numinch no .
num x num mm bolt clamp voltage num a diff .
mode num v max .
clamp voltage num a comm .
mode num v max .
d. signal load switches switchpacks section numtraffic signal equipment num provide the output of all switchpacks in all output files and outputpdas with metal oxide varistors mov tied from the ac positive field terminal to the chassis ground to protect switchpacks from surges on the ac output lines ensure that these movs meet or exceed these requirements steady state sinusoidal voltage rms rating at num to num hz of at least num v at num ºf num c steady state applied dc voltage rating of at least num v at num ºf num c transient energy rating is of at least num j for a single impulse of num s current waveform at num ºf num c peak current rating of num a for a single impulse of num s waveform with the rated continuous voltage applied varistor voltage of at least num v at numma of dc current applied for the duration of num s to nums clamping voltage of at least num v with an applied num s impulse of num a typical capacitance at a frequency of num to num mhz of num pf twoterminal device one of which is connected to the ac output of the signal load switch on the output file terminals backside of the field terminals with the other connected to ac neutral e. communication inputs protect low voltage communications input as it enters the cabinet with a solidstate surge protection unit that meets or exceeds these requirements dual pair numwire module with a printed circuit board connector double sided and gold plated for reliability ability to mate with and be installed in a numcircuit buchanan connector part number pcbnumbnums or tyco part number num or equivalent usable as two independent signal pairs the data circuits pass through the protection in a serial fashion cnum connector of the num controller that terminates on the line side of the unit communication field wires for this local side that terminate on the line side of the unit ground terminals connected to power ground ensure that the unit meets the following minimum requirements peak surge current num ka num x num s wave shape numa num x num s wave shape occurrences peak num typical response time numns voltage clamp numv line to line series resistance num total temperature num f num c to num f num f primary protector num element gas tube numka num x num s wave shape per side secondary protector silicon avalance num kw minimum f. low voltage dc inputs provide an external surge protection device for each low voltage dc input channel which meets the same requirements as the communication inputs with the following exception of the voltage clamp which shall be num v linetoline .
num .
type num signal monitors a .
introduction this specification sets forth the minimum requirements for a rackmountable sixteen channel solidstate num signal monitor for traffic cabinet assembly .
ensure that as a minimum the signal monitor complies with all section numtraffic signal equipment num specifications outlined in chapter num section num of the california tees august num .
where differences occur this specification governs .
ensure that the manufacturer of the unit is listed on the current california department of transportation caltrans qualified products list qpl for signal monitors .
provide a signal monitor that is capable of monitoring sixteen channels consisting of a green input a yellow input and a red input for each channel .
ensure that the unit also includes the enhanced monitoring functions described in subsection num.a.num .
b .
monitor functions except for conflict faults compute all fault timing for each channel individually .
num .
conflict monitoring ensure that the signal monitor is able to detect the presence of conflicting green or yellow signal voltages on the ac field terminals between two or more noncompatible channels .
a conflict fault conflict shall be a latching fault .
num .
conflict recognition time ensure the signal monitor shall trigger when voltages on any conflicting channels are present for more than num ms .
ensure that the signal monitor does not trigger when voltages on any conflicting channels are present for less than num ms .
conflicting signals sensed for more than num ms and less than num ms may or may not trigger the unit .
num .
numvdc monitoring vdc ensure that the signal monitor is able to detect that the cabinet num vdc supply has fallen below num vdc .
a numvdc failure vdc fail shall be a latching fault .
num .
numvdc recognition time ensure that the signal monitor shall trigger when the voltage on the numv input is below num vdc for more than num ms .
ensure that the signal monitor does not trigger when the voltage on the numv input is below num vdc for less than num ms. a voltage level of num vdc will be required to prevent the unit from triggering .
num .
controller watchdog monitoring ensure that the signal monitor triggers when the watchdog input does not toggle within the programmed time period wdt error .
ensure that the unit remains latched in the fault state until reset by the reset button an external reset input command or ac line voltage restoring from an ac line brownout event .
ensure that a reset resulting from an ac line brownout event does not clear the wdt error led .
a .
controller watchdog latch option ensure a programming option sets the watchdog monitoring function to a latching mode and that only a reset from the reset button or external reset input can clear a watchdog fault .
an ac line brownout condition will not reset the fault .
b .
controller watchdog recognition time ensure a programming option sets the maximum watchdog recognition time to num or num ms or num or num ms. c. controller watchdog enable switch provide an internal switch to disable the watchdog monitoring function .
mount the switch on the pcb and be clearly label wd enable onoff .
ensure that placement of the switch in the off position causes monitoring of the watchdog to be inhibited .
d. wdt error led control ensure that the wdt error led illuminates when the unit has been triggered by a watchdog fault .
ensure that it can only be cleared by a reset command from the front panel reset switch or external reset input .
if the watchdog monitoring function is inhibited due to the watchdog enable switch the wdt error led shall flash at a num hz rate .
num .
ac line monitoring a. ac line brownout recognition section numtraffic signal equipment num ensure that the signal monitor is able to detect that the ac line has fallen below num or num vac for greater than num or num ms .
this shall force the output relay to the deenergized fault state enable the stoptime output and cause the ac power led to flash at a num hz rate .
ensure that the unit maintains this state until the ac line voltage rises above num or num vac for greater than num or num ms .
provide a jumper option which will change the ac brownout dropout level to num or num vac and the restore level to num or num vac .
b. ac line powerup and brownout delay time when the ac line is greater than num or num volts after powerup or brownout restore ensure that the signal monitor holds the output relay in the deenergized fault state and enable the stoptime output for a period of not less than num or num seconds and not greater than num or num seconds .
ensure that this flash interval is terminated after at least num or num seconds if the signal monitor has detected at least five transitions of the watchdog input .
if the signal monitor does not detect five transitions of the watchdog input before num or num seconds ensure that the signal monitor goes to the fault state .
during this interval ensure that the ac power led flashes at a num hz rate .
num .
red fail monitoring ensure that the signal monitor is able to detect the absence of an active voltage on the green and yellow and red field signal inputs of a channel .
red fail fault red fail shall be a latching fault .
ensure that the red fail monitoring function is enabled for all channels except when the red enable input is not active or pin ee is active or special function num input is active or special function num input is active .
a .
red fail recognition time ensure the signal monitor triggers when an active voltage on one of the three inputs of a channel are absent for more than num ms .
ensure that the signal monitor does not trigger when an active voltage on one of the three inputs of a channel are absent for less than num ms .
channels without proper voltages sensed for more than num ms and less than num ms may or may not trigger the unit .
provide an option switch rf num which will change the fault recognition time to between num ms and num ms. b .
red interface cable fault ensure a programming option is provided such that operating without the red interface cable installed shall cause the signal monitor to enter the fault mode causing the output relay contacts to close and enabling the stoptime output to the controller .
to indicate this fault mode ensure that the red fail indicator is illuminated with all fault channel indicators off .
ensure that any red fail preemption control to the monitor uses the special function inputs num or num .
num .
dual indication monitoring ensure that the signal monitor is able to detect the presence of active voltage on the green and yellow green and red or yellow and red field signal inputs of a channel .
gyr dual indication fault dual ind shall be a latching fault .
ensure this function is enabled on a per channel basis using dip switches mounted on the pcb labeled chnum through chnum .
ensure that the gyr dual indication monitoring function is enabled for all selected channels except when the red enable input is not active or pin ee is active .
a. gy dual indication monitoring ensure that the signal monitor is able to detect the presence of active voltage on the green and yellow field signal inputs of a channel .
gy dual indication fault dual ind shall be a latching fault .
enable this function with a dip switch on the pcb labeled gy enable .
when the switch is in the on position monitor all channels for simultaneous active green and yellow inputs on a channel .
when selected by the gy enable switch ensure that the gy dual indication monitoring function is disabled when pin ee is active .
b. dual indication recognition time ensure that the signal monitor triggers when multiple inputs are active on a channel for more than num ms .
ensure that the signal monitor does not trigger when multiple inputs are active on a channel for less than num ms .
channels with multiple voltages active for more than num ms and less than num ms may or may not trigger the unit .
section numtraffic signal equipment num num .
clearance short or absent yellow monitoring ensure that the signal monitor is able to detect that a channel has not provided an adequate yellow clearance interval during a green to yellow to red sequence .
a sequence failure sequence shall be a latching fault .
ensure that this function is enabled on a per channel basis using dip switches mounted on the pcb labeled chnum through chnum .
ensure that the sequence monitoring function is enabled for all selected channels except when the red enable input is not active or pin ee is active .
num .
clearance recognition time ensure that the yellow clearance interval is num seconds num .
flickering indication detection ensure that the signal monitor provides a method of detecting conflict red fail and dual indication faults that result from intermittent or flickering field signal inputs that may not meet the duration requirements but continue to flicker for an extended period of time .
these flickering indications shall result in a latching fault with an indication illuminated along with the resulting conflict red fail or dual indication indicator .
provide an option switch to disable this option .
num .
configuration change monitoring on powerup reset and periodically during operation ensure that the signal monitor compares the current configuration settings with the previously stored value and if the settings have changed the signal monitor automatically logs the new setting .
ensure that these settings include the permissive diode matrix all switches all jumpers and the watchdog enable switch .
provide a programming option such that any change in the configuration parameters will cause the signal monitor to enter the fault mode causing the output relay contacts to close and enabling the stop time output to the controller .
to indicate this fault mode ensure that the pca indicator will flash at a num hz rate .
depressing the reset button for num full seconds is required to clear this fault and log the new configuration parameters .
if the programming option is not selected ensure that the unit does not set the fault mode but will still log the configuration change .
num .
program card ajar ensure that when the programming card is removed or not seated properly the signal monitor forces the output relay to the deenergized fault state enable the stoptime output and illuminate the pca led .
a reset command from the front panel reset switch or external reset input is required once the program card is in place .
num .
exit flash when the signal monitor exits the flash state output relay deenergized as a result of a reset command or ac line brownout restore ensure that the stop time output goes to the inactive state num or num ms before the output relay transfers to the energized state .
this transition will provide an early indication to the controller unit that the cabinet will transfer from flash to signal operation .
c. display functions ensure that it is possible to view the active channels for each individual color gyr during operation and when latched in a fault state .
when the signal monitor is latched in a fault state ensure that it is also be possible to view the active channels for each individual color and fault status for each channel for the current fault and the two previous faults .
num previous fault gyr display when the signal monitor has been triggered by a fault the channel status display will alternate between the channels which were involved in the fault fault status for num seconds and the field signals active at the time of the fault for num seconds .
the channels involved in the fault will flash their respective green yellow and red indicators simultaneously at a num hz rate for the num second interval .
the two previous faults may also be displayed individually .
this status is not reset by an ac line power interruption .
to enter this display mode remove the program card .
the sequence is as follows section numtraffic signal equipment num reset event pca led fault status leds channel status leds num single flash current fault status newest current field status num num double flash event num fault status event num field status num num triple flash event num fault status oldest event num field status repeats back to top d. event logging functions ensure that the signal monitor is capable of storing in nonvolatile memory a minimum of num events .
mark each event with the time and date of the event .
these events consist of fault events ac line events reset events and configuration change events .
provide a graphical means of displaying the signal states of all field inputs for num seconds prior to a fault trigger event .
provide the capability to assign a fourdigit identification number to the unit shall be provided .
upload the event logs to a pc using the serial port of the signal monitor and software provided by the manufacturer .
ensure each event log report contains the following information monitor id a four digit num id number assigned to the monitor .
time and date time and date of occurrence .
event number identifies the record number in the log .
event num is the most recent event .
num monitor status report cs ensure the current status report contains the following information fault type the fault type description .
field status the current gyr field status and field rms voltages if the monitor is not in the fault state or the latched field status and field rms voltages and fault channel status at the time of the fault .
cabinet temperature the current temperature if the monitor is not in the fault state or the latched temperature at the time of the fault .
ac line voltage the current ac line voltage if the monitor is not in the fault state or the ac line voltage at the time of the fault .
control input status the current state and rms voltages of the red enable input ee input and special function num and num inputs if the monitor is not in the fault state or the status latched at the time of the fault .
num previous fault log pf ensure the previous fault log contains the following information fault type the fault type description .
field status the latched field status with rms voltages and fault channel status at the time of the fault .
cabinet temperature the latched temperature at the time of the fault .
ac line voltage the ac line voltage at the time of the fault .
control input status the latched state of the red enable input ee input and special function num and num inputs at the time of the fault .
num ac line event log ac the ac line log shall contain the following information event type describes the type of ac line event that occurred .
powerupac on monitor performed a cold start interruptac line brownout level restoreac restored from brownout or interruption ac off no cold start ac line voltage the ac line voltage at the time of the event .
num monitor reset log mr section numtraffic signal equipment num ensure the monitor reset log contains the following information the monitor was reset from a fault by the front panel reset button or external reset input .
num configuration change log cf ensure the configuration change log contains the following information a .
program card matrix the permissive programming for each channel .
b. yellow disable jumpers the yellow disable programming for each channel .
c. dualsequence switches the switch programming for each channel .
d. option switches rf num rp disable gy enable sfnum polarity sequence timing minimum flash enable configuration fault enable red cable fault enable ac brownout timing .
e. watchdog programming watchdog enable watchdog latch and watchdog timing .
f. configuration crc a unique crc value which is based on the configuration of items a though e above .
indicate on the log which items have been changed since the last log entry .
num signal sequence log provide a log that graphically displays all field signal states for up to num seconds prior to the current fault trigger event .
ensure that the resolution of the display is at least num milliseconds .
e. communications functions num controller unit communications type a ensure that the signal monitor is compatible with the protocol of the current gdot licensed firmware for num controllers and central system control .
ensure the num conflict monitor supplied is able to communicate via a serial link .
to the num controller and then to a central system using the current licensed gdot central system software for reporting configuring and logging .
type b ensure that the signal monitor is compatible with the protocol of the current gdot licensed firmware for num controllers and central system control .
ensure the num conflict monitor supplied is able to communicate via a rjnum connector ethernet .
num personal computer communications have the manufacturer provide software to access the signal monitor status and event logs described in subsection num.a.num.d .
ensure this software operates with current version of microsoft windows or windows xptm f. hardware num red monitoring a .
red field inputs ensure that the signal monitor is capable of monitoring sixteen red field signals .
ensure that a red input is sensed active when the input voltage exceeds num vrms .
ensure that a red input is sensed not active when the input voltage is less than num vrms .
a red input may or may not be sensed active when the input voltage is between num vrms and num vrms .
b .
red enable input ensure that the red enable input provides an ac input to the unit which enables red monitoring dual indication monitoring and sequence monitoring when the input is sensed active .
ensure that the red enable input is sensed active when the input voltage exceeds num vrms .
ensure that the red enable input is sensed not active when the input voltage is less than num vrms .
the red enable input may or may not be sensed active when the input voltage is between num vrms and num vrms .
c. special function preemption inputs ensure that the special function preemption inputs num and num provide an ac input to the unit which disables only red fail monitoring lack of output when either input is sensed active .
section numtraffic signal equipment num ensure that a special function input is sensed active when the input voltage exceeds num vrms .
ensure that a special function input is sensed not active when the input voltage is less than num vrms .
a special function input may or may not be sensed active when the input voltage is between num vrms and num vrms .
use a pcb mounted switch to provide the option to invert the active status of the special function num input .
when the switch is in the on position ensure that the special function num input is sensed not active when the input voltage exceeds num vrms .
ensure that the special function num input is sensed active when the input voltage is less than num vrms .
the special function num input may or may not be sensed active when the input voltage is between num vrms and num vrms .
d. red interface connector this connector provides the required inputs for the unit to monitor the red field signal outputs .
ensure the connector is a num pin connector that mates with the pnum cable from the output file .
provide a high quality connector that is polarized to insure proper mating with the cable .
ensure ejector latches are included to facilitate removal and prevent the cable from inadvertently disconnecting .
ensure the unit shall function as a standard num signal monitor when the cable is disconnected .
use the pin assignments shown in table num .
table num num red interface connector pin function pin function num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num channelnum red num channel num red num chassis ground num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num special function num num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num special function num num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num channel num red num red enable a jumper option shall be provided to allow the connection of pin num to be made with chassis ground .
num front panel ensure the front panel is constructed of sheet aluminum with a minimum thickness of num in .
num mm and finished with an anodized coating .
ensure the model information shall be permanently displayed on the front surface .
a .
indicators ensure that all display indicators are mounted on the front panel of the signal monitor and are water clear tnum package super bright type leds .
ensure that all fault leds are red except the ac power indicator which is green .
provide a separate red yellow and green indicator for each channel .
label the indicators and provide the information as follows ac power ensure the ac power indicator flashes at a rate of num hz when the unit has detected a low voltage condition as described in subsection num.a.num .
ensure the ac power indicator flashes at a rate of num hz during the minimum flash interval as described in subsection num.a.num .
ensure that the indicator illuminates when the ac line voltage level is restored above the brownout level .
ensure the indicator extinguishes when the ac line voltage is less than num vac .
vdc failed ensure the vdc failed indicator illuminates when a numvdc fault condition is detected .
this indicator remains extinguished if the monitor has not been triggered by a numvdc fault .
section numtraffic signal equipment num wdt error ensure the wdt error indicator illuminates when a controller watchdog fault is detected .
ensure the wdt error indicator flashes on once every num seconds if the wd enable switch on the monitor is placed in the off position to disable watchdog monitoring or the ac line voltage is below the watchdog disable level .
conflict ensure that the conflict indicator illuminates when a conflicting signal fault is detected .
diagnostic ensure the diagnostic indicator illuminates when one of the following faults is detected internal watchdog fault memory test fault or internal power supply fault .
this indicator is intended to inform the service technician of a monitor hardware or firmware failure .
red fail ensure the red fail indicator illuminates when an absence of signal is detected on a channels .
ensure the red fail indicator flashes on once every two seconds if the red enable input is not active or a special function input is active or the ee input is active dual ind .
ensure the dual ind .
indicator illuminates when a gydual or gyrdual indication fault is detected on a channels .
clearance ensure the sequence indicator illuminates when the minimum yellow clearance time has not been met on a channels .
pca ensure the pca indicator illuminates if the program card is absent or not properly seated .
if the unit is in the diagnostic display mode ensure the pca indicator flashes on once twice or three times to indicate the fault event number being displayed .
see subsection num.a.num .
rp detect ensure the rp detect indicator illuminates when the unit has detected a conflict red fail or dual indication fault as a result of recurring pulse field inputs .
channel status ensure that during normal operation the num channel status indicators display all active signals red green and yellow .
in the fault mode ensure that the channel status indicators display all signals active at the time of the fault for six seconds and then indicate the channels involved in the fault for num seconds .
b .
front panel controlreset button provide a momentary spst control switch labeled reset on the unit front panel to reset the monitor circuitry to a nonfailed state .
position the switch on the front panel such that the switch can be operated while gripping the front panel handle .
ensure that a reset command issued from either the front panel button or external reset input is a onetime reset input to prevent the unit from constant reset due to a switch failure or constant external input and causes all led indicators to illuminate for num ms .
the reset button also provides control of the diagnostic display mode .
for a complete description of diagnostic display operation see subsection num.a.num .
section numtraffic signal equipment num c. serial communications connector use this connector to provide eianum serial communications .
ensure that it is a high quality num pin metal shell d subminiature type with female contacts .
refer to table num for pin assignments .
table num serial communications connector pin function num dcd num tx data num rx data num dtr data terminal ready num signal ground num dsr num dsr num cts num nc provide jumper options to allow the connection of pin num to be made with pin num and the connection of pin num to be made with pin num .
num electronics a. rms voltage sampling use high speed sampling techniques to determine the true rms value of the ac field inputs .
sample each ac input at least num times per cycle .
ensure that the rms voltage measurement is insensitive to phase frequency and waveform distortion .
b .
internal mpu watchdog use a microprocessor for all timing and control functions .
verify continuing operation of the microprocessor by an independent monitor circuit that forces the output relay to the deenergized fault state enable the stoptime output and illuminate the diagnostic indicator if a pulse is not received from the microprocessor within num ms .
if the microprocessor should resume operation ensure the signal monitor continues to operate .
ensure that this monitoring circuit is also configurable to latch in the fault state .
ensure the unit requires a powerup cycle to reset the circuit once it is triggered .
c. sockets in the interest of reliability ensure that only the prom memory device for the microprocessor firmware is socket mounted .
ensure that the prom memory socket is a precision screw machine type socket with a gold contact finish providing a reliable gas tight seal .
low insertion force sockets or sockets with wiper type contacts are not acceptable .
d. internal power supply use a builtin highefficiency switching power supply to generate all required internal voltages .
ensure that all supply voltages regulated .
failure of the internal power supply to provide proper operating voltages shall force the output relay to the deenergized fault state enable the stoptime output and illuminate the diagnostic indicator .
provide a user replaceable slow blow fuse for the ac line input .
ensure the unit is operational over the ac line voltage range of num vac to num vac .
e. eianum interface ensure the eianum port interface electronics is electrically isolated from all monitor electronics except chassis ground .
f. configuration parameters select userprogrammed configuration settings using pcb mounted switches or jumpers .
designs requiring a personal computer pc to program or verify the configuration parameters are not acceptable .
ensure that userprogrammed configuration settings that are transferred to memory are section numtraffic signal equipment num stored in a programmable readonly memory prom or eeprom .
designs using a battery to maintain configuration data are not acceptable .
g. field terminal inputs ensure that all num vac field terminal inputs provide an input impedance of numk numk ohms and be terminated with a discrete resistor having a power dissipation rating of num watts or greater and a voltage rating exceeding num volts .
h. component specifications ensure that all electrical components used in the signal monitor are rated by the component manufacturer to operate beyond the full unit operating temperature range of num f to num fnum c to num c. i .
printed circuit boards ensure that all printed circuit boards meet the requirements of the california traffic signal control equipment specifications january num plus the following requirements to enhance reliability all platedthrough holes and exposed circuit traces are plated with solder .
both sides of the printed circuit board are covered with a solder mask material .
the circuit reference designation for all components and the polarity of all capacitors and diodes are clearly marked adjacent to the component .
ensure that pin num for all integrated circuit packages is designated on both sides of all printed circuit boards .
all electrical mating surfaces are gold plated .
all printed circuit board assemblies are coated on both sides with a clear moistureproof and fungusproof sealant .
all components and wire harnesses are mounted to the pcb using plated holes .
piggy back connections or jumper wires are not acceptable .
num .
model num monitor unit provide model num monitor unit in accordance with caltrans tees and the following .
provide monitor that is on the caltrans qpl and provides the pin assignment as shown in table num .
the model num monitor unit shall reliably sense and cause a relay output contact failed state when monitoring the following a watchdog timer wdt timeout condition cabinet num vdc power supply below specified threshold a. wdt circuitry shall be provided to monitor a controller unit output line state routed to the monitor unit at its assigned pin .
the wdt circuitry shall sense any line state change and the time between the last change .
no state change for num num seconds shall cause a failed state .
the timer shall reset at each state change in a non failed state .
num only the unit reset or a wdt inactive due to the voltage sense shall reset the wdt from a failed state .
num a failed state caused by the wdt shall illuminate a front panel indicator light label wdt error .
the indicator shall remain on until unit reset issuance .
num the wdt circuitry shall sense the incoming vac line and when the voltage falls below num numvac for num num ms shall inhibit the wdt function .
when the wdt circuitry sensed the incoming vac line rise above num numvac for num numms the wdt shall become active .
a hysteresis between the voltage inhibit and the voltage active setting shall be a minimum of num volts .
b .
power supply monitor requirements num the monitor unit shall sense the cabinet num vdc power supply output voltage .
num voltages sensed at num vdc or below for a duration of num ms or longer shall cause a failded state .
num voltages sensed atnum vdc or above shall not cause a failed state .
num voltages sensed below num vdc for a duration of num ms or less shall not cause a failed state .
num all timing and voltages conditions other than those specified above may or may not cause a failed state .
section numtraffic signal equipment num num a failed state caused by sensing the power supply shall illuminate a front panel indicator light labeled vdc failed .
the indicator shall remain on until unit reset .
num only unit reset shall reset the power supply sense circuitry from a failed state .
c. failed state output circuits num an electromechanical relay shall be provided to switch an output circuit during a failed state .
the relay coil shall be energized in a non failed state .
num the relay contacts shall be rated for a minimum of num amperes at num vac and num operations .
contact opening closing time shall be num ms or less .
d. monitor unit reset num a momentary spst control switch labeled reset shall be provided on the unit front panel to reset the monitor unit circuitry to a non failed state .
the switch shall be so positioned on the front panel that the switch can be operated while gripping the front panel handle .
num the unit shall be provided with provision to drive an external nenumh light through a numk ohm ½ watt series resistor resident on unit num the pda type num wdt reset input shall not be sensed by the unit num the output relay contact for failed state shall be open .
table num pin assignments for model num monitor unit pin function num dc ground num wdt ext .
reset num wdt in num num vdc num ac num normally open circ .
num num ac num normally closed circ .
num num circ .
common num num num wdt lamp external note card connector keyed between pins num num and pins num num .
num .
model num dc isolator provide model num dc isolators that are in accordance with the latest version of caltrans specifications as referenced earlier in this section .
provide isolators that allow the num isolator input signal polarity to easily be inverted without the use of tools .
acceptable methods are removable jumpers or dip switches .
unacceptable methods are soldering or desoldering a diode or resistor .
output is off for input voltages greater than num volts output is on for voltages of less than num volts that have a duration of at least num to num ms optional num ms minimum output pulse width is num ms with a valid input can be disabled output is optically isolated open collector npn transistor capable of sinking num ma when on can register a new input within num ms of the old signal going away and section numtraffic signal equipment num output clamped on power up and down compatible with num controllers and latest version of caltrans tees including errata num .
model num switchpack provide model num switchpacks that are in accordance with the latest version of caltrans specifications as referenced earlier in this section .
num .
model num flasher unit provide model num flasher units that are in accordance with the latest version of caltrans specifications as referenced earlier in this section .
num .
flash transfer relay provide flash transfer relays that are in accordance with the latest version of caltrans specifications as referenced earlier in this section .
num .
cabinet model numa ensure surge protection conforms to table num required surge arrestors for model numa cabinet .
supply model numa lower input panel cabinets with housing type numb and all components as described in these specifications .
supply cabinets having two input files which conform to the caltrans specifications and configured to accept two num controllers in the top portion of the cabinet .
ensure the cabinet has two shelves provided for controllers .
configure the cabinet for dial up communications .
mount a two num circuit buchanan connector on the right side panel from rear door .
mount a phone jack with a rjnum connector above or to the right of the buchanan terminal block .
wire the phone jack to the buchanan and to the terminal block tbnum in accordance with figure num .
a manual jack shall be installed inside the cabinet .
the jack shall intermate with a three circuit num inch num mm diameter phone plug .
the tip and ring middle circuits of the jack shallbe connected to the logic ground and the interval advance inputs of controller unit .
when the manual hand cord is plugged into the jack and the pushbutton is pressed logic ground shall be connected to the interval advance input of the controller unit .
a manual on off switch shall be provided on the police panel which grounds the manual control enable cnum pin num input to the controller whenever the switch is in the on position and advance input cnum pin num .
a manual pushbutton with cord shall be provided .
the cord shall have a minimum length of num feet num m. it shall have a num inch num mm diameter three circuit plug connected to one end and a manual pushbutton enclosed in a hand held enclosure at the other end .
a complete cycle pushrelease of the manual pushbutton shall terminate the controller unit interval which is active except the vehicular yellow and all red clearance intervals .
cycling the push button during the vehicular yellow or all red clearance intervals shall not terminate the timing of those intervals .
num .
cabinet model numa with auxiliary output file ensure that this unit meets the requirements of subsection num.a.num above except that the cabinet is configured with an auxiliary output file .
additionally the field wiring terminals may be mounted on the rear of the input file .
num .
cabinet model nums base mount this unit meets the caltrans specification with the addition of approximately num additional inches num mm of cabinet height exclusive of the m base adapter .
configure the internal component layout so that the additional space is available in the bottom area of the cabinet cage .
ensure that the field wiring input panels and surge protection conform to table num model nums default input file assignment detail and table num required surge arrestors for model nums cabinet .
ensure that the cnum connector harness is provided with pins for all num inputs and outputs from the controller .
a manual jack shall be installed on the police panel .
the jack shall intermate with a three circuit num inch num mm diameter phone plug .
the tip and ring middle circuits of the jack shallbe connected to the logic ground and the interval advance inputs of controller unit .
when the manual hand cord is plugged into the jack and the pushbutton is pressed logic ground shall be connected to the interval advance input of the controller unit .
section numtraffic signal equipment num a manual on off switch shall be provided on the police panel which grounds the manual control enable cnum pin num input to the controller whenever the switch is in the on position a manual pushbutton with cord shall be provided .
the cord shall have a minimum length of num feet num m. it shall have a num inch num mm diameter three circuit plug connected to one end and a manual pushbutton enclosed in a hand held enclosure at the other end .
a complete cycle pushrelease of the manual pushbutton shall terminate the controller unit interval which is active except the vehicular yellow and all red clearance intervals .
cycling the push button during the vehicular yellow or all red clearance intervals shall not terminate the timing of those intervals .
num .
cabinet model nums pole mount ensure that this unit meets the requirements of subsection num.a.num above except that the cabinet is configured for pole mounting as specified in the general requirements for type num cabinet assemblies .
num .
cabinet model nums base mount with auxiliary output file ensure that this unit meets the requirements of subsection num.a.num above except that the cabinet is configured with an auxiliary output file .
additionally the field wiring terminals may be mounted on the rear of the input file .
num .
cabinet model num the model num cabinet is a compact cabinet with an output capacity of four vehicle phases plus two pedestrian phases the dimensions not to exceed num inches num mm deep x num inches num mm wide x num inches num mm high and its shipping weight not to exceed num pounds num kg .
supply the cabinet assembly with capacity for num twochannel slots in the input file .
ensure that the pin assignments of the cnum connector are compatible with the num controller as applicable according to the required number of inputoutputs .
ensure that the num cabinet uses standard type num input and output file units .
equip the cabinet with a cnum connector harness with field terminals protected with surge protectors for communication inputs as specified under communications inputs .
ensure that the cabinet has two fullsize doors to allow complete access from the front or back of the cabinet .
design the rack assembly to mount in caltrans standard rails to allow for a model num flasher .
provide a receptacle to accept the plug in power distribution assembly card guides and edge connectors for the input file card guides to support the conflict monitor and load switches and flash transfer relays .
due to the compact design of this cabinet assembly the department of transportation may accept a nonstandard type of power distribution assembly pda .
num .
cabinet model num with auxiliary output file for ramp metering operations the controller cabinet shall comply with the caltrans traffic signal equipment specifications num model num cabinet specifications chapter num .
do not use the february num amendments for specifications for the model numc cabinet .
do use the specification clarifications dated december num num .
provide cabinet configured as shown in figure num .
provide detector test switch panel .
before providing cabinet submit detector switch test panel design and mounting location for approval .
panel shall include one switch for each of the num detector inputs .
a .
the detector test switch panel shall be mounted in the cabinet on the rails .
the panel shall be fabricated from brushed aluminum .
b .
each switch will be labelled as to function .
the label shall be silkcreened on the test panel and be at least ¼ inch in height .
c. a three position switch shall be provided for each detector input .
the switch shall function as follows down momentary call is placed into the controller on the appropriate input in parallel with field input up lock call is placed into the controller on the appropriate input in parallel with field input .
center lock normal operation field output of detector is connected to the controller unit .
section numtraffic signal equipment num figure num typical num cabinet configuration b .
fabrication refer to subsection num.a.numfor controller cabinet minimum fabrication specifications .
c. acceptance refer to subsection num for compliance with caltrans qpl .
d. materials warranty refer subsection num.d for materials warranties .
section numtraffic signal equipment num table num num model num default input files assignment detail upper input file i slot num num num num num num num num num num num num num num type det det det det det det det det det dc dc dc channel num cnum pin num num num num num num num num num num num num num function phnum phnum phnum phnum call phnum phnum phnum phnum call phnum int adv phnum ped phnum ped flash field term tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tb num num nc tb num num tb num num nc channel num cnum pin num num num num num num num num num num num num num function phnum phnum phnum phnum call phnum phnum phnum phnum call phnum mce phnum ped phnum ped stop time field term tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num nc tbnum num tbnum num nc lower input file j slot num num num num num num num num num num num num num num type det det det det det det det det det tba tba dc channel num cnum pin num num num num num num num num num num num num num function phnum phnum phnum phnum call phnum phnum phnum phnum call phnum eva evb rr field term tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tb num num tb num num tb num num tb num num channel num cnum pin num num num num num num num num num num num num num function phnum phnum phnum phnum call phnum phnum phnum phnum call phnum evc evd field term tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tb num num section numtraffic signal equipment num note for a typical signal installation the model num cabinet is the design standard .
figure numwiring diagram for dialup communications table num required surge arrestors for model num cabinet field terminal block terminals required arrestor tbnum num section num.a.num.f tbnum num section num.a.num.f tbnum num terminal block only section num.a.num.f tbnum tbnum tbnum tbnum tbnum tbnum num section num.a.num.c terminal block tbnum red green yellow black num num num num num num num num num num buchanan terminal block section numtraffic signal equipment num table num model nums default input file assignment detail slot num num num num num num num num num num num num num num type det det det det det det det det dc tba tba dc dc dc channel num cnum pin num num num num num num num num num num num num num num function phnum phnum phnum phnum phnum phnum phnum phnum senum eva evb phnum ped phnum ped flash field term tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tb num num tb num num tb num num tb num num tb num num nc channel num cnum pin num num num num num num num num num num num num num num function phnum call phnum phnum call phnum phnum call phnum phnum call phnum rr evc evd phnum ped phnum ped stop time field term tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num nc table num required surge arrestors for model nums cabinet field terminal block terminals required arrestor tbnum num section num.a.num.f tbnum num section num.a.num.f tbnum num terminal block only section num.a.num.f tbnum tbnum tbnum num section num.a.num.c table num model num default input file assignment detail slot num num num num num num num num num num num num num num type det det det det det det det det det det det tba tba tba channel num cnum pin num num num num num num num num num num num num num num function lnum dnum lnum dnum lnum qnum lnum qnum lnum mla lnum mla lnum mla lnum mla lnum dnum field term tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num channel num cnum pin num num num num num num num num num num num num num num function lnum pnum lnum pnum lnum qnum lnum mlb lnum mlb lnum mlb lnum mlb lnum pnum field term tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num table num required surge arrestors for model num cabinet field terminal block terminals required arrestor tbnum tbnum tbnum num section num.a.num.c tbnum num section num.a.num.c section numtraffic signal equipment num table num num model num pda type num output file sp num sp num sp num cnum pin out conn func field term cnum pin out conn func field term cnum pin out conn func field term sp r num num cnum warn num tnum num num cnum lane num r tnum num num cnum lane num r tnum sp y num num cnum tnum num num cnum lane num y tnum num num cnum lane num y tnum sp g num num cnum warn num tnum num num cnum lane num g tnum num num cnum lane num g tnum table num num model num auxiliary output file sp num sp num sp num cnum pin out conn func field term cnum pin out conn func field term cnum pin out conn func field term sp r num num cnum lane num r anum num num cnum not used anum num num cnum not used anum sp y num num cnum lane num y anum num num cnum not used anum num num cnum not used anum sp g num num cnum lane num g anum num num cnum not used anum num num cnum not used anum sp num sp num sp num cnum pin out conn func field term cnum pin out conn func field term cnum pin out conn func field term sp r num num cnum not used anum num num cnum not used anum num num cnum not used anum sp y num num cnum not used anum num num cnum not used anum num num cnum not used anum sp g num num cnum not used anum num num cnum not used anum num num cnum not used anum section numtraffic signal equipment num num type its cabinet assemblies a .
requirements ensure that the cabinet assembly meets the requirements of the caltrans specifications as described in this document .
in addition to the caltrans specifications ensure that the cabinet assembly conforms to the requirements listed below which take precedence over conflicting caltrans specifications .
num .
cabinet configuration supply cabinets in accordance with the following information and table num. a .
cabinet traffic signal application series num num num door cabinet with p base ground mount num num door cabinet with num base num ground mount num num door cabinet with num base nums adaptor mount b .
cabinet traffic management application series num num num door cabinet with num base num ground mount num num door cabinet with num base nums adaptor mount table num its cabinet configurations items its cabinet versions num num num num num qty qty qty qty qty housing num cage num num num housing numcage num num num housing numtwo cage num num j panel cage num num num num j panel cage num num num service panel assembly with ac eg bus num num num num num rawclean ac power assembly num num num num num raw clean ac power extension num ac clean module assembly num dc powercomm assembly num num num num num dc powercomm extension num num num num cabinet shelf assembly num num num num num input assembly num num num num num six pack output assembly num num num fourteen pack output assembly num num num pda its assembly num num num num num controlserial bus harness num num num num num serial bus num harness num num num num num note input assembly shall include a model num siu .
output assembly shall include a model num siu model num amu and model num transfer relays .
the pda its traffic signal application shall include two model num flasher units model num cmu and two model num power supply units and attached harnesses .
the pda its traffic management system application shall include model num cmu and two model num power supply units and attached harnesses .
c. model num cabinet field termination panels section numtraffic signal equipment num num flash transfer relays num model num flashers specific equipment layout and other cabinet devices determined on a project specific basis d. model num cabinet nummodel num dc isolator num flash transfer relays nummodel num flashers e. model num cabinet nummodel num dc isolator numflash transfer relays nummodel num flasher numm base adapter installed base mount cabinets only numaluminum cover plate for cabinet bottom pole mount cabinets only model num cabinet specific equipment layout and additional cabinet equipment determined on a project specific basis .
model num cabinet specific equipment layout and additional cabinet equipment determined on a project specific basis .
numm base adapter installed base mount cabinets only numaluminum cover plate for cabinet bottom pole mount cabinets only note include above components in cabinet at time of delivery .
other auxiliary cabinet components such as controllers load switches etc .
will be ordered as separate items .
num .
finish use cabinets that have a bare aluminum finish see subsection num.a.num for controllercabinet minimum fabrication specifications .
num .
locks equip the main cabinet door with locks that accept no .
num corbin keys .
provide two sets of keys with each cabinet .
one set of keys is defined as one no .
num key and one police panel key .
num .
power equip the cabinet assemblies with an its power distribution assembly to generate ac and dc power for the electronic components except the dc power for the controller units .
num .
mounting equip the cabinets for pole or base mounting as specified in the plans .
a .
base mount supply model num and num cabinets when specified as base mount with a m basemounting adapter installed .
b .
pole mount supply model num and num cabinets when specified as pole mount with two exterior pole mounting brackets that allow for mounting on steel concrete and timber poles .
ensure that the bracket mounting holes are properly reinforced with metal plates of adequate size and strength welded longitudinally across the inside depth of the cabinet .
ensure that the exteriormounting bracket is shipped installed on the cabinet housing .
additionally provide an aluminum plate which covers the bottom cabinet opening .
num .
cabinet light include in each cabinet one fluorescent strip lighting fixture mounted inside the top front portion of the cabinet .
do not use a screw in type fluorescent lamp .
section numtraffic signal equipment num the fixture includes a cool white lamp covered and operated by a normal power factor ul listed ballast .
install a dooractuated switch to turn on the cabinet light when either door is opened .
num .
cabinet interlock do not install the interlock circuit as detailed in the caltrans specifications .
num .
cabinet drawer equip each model num num num num and num cabinet with an aluminum storage compartment mounted in the rack assembly with the approximate following dimensions num inches num mm wide num inches num mm long and num inches num mm deep .
mount this compartment directly under the type num controller .
provide a drawer with telescoping drawer guides to allow full extension from the rack assembly .
when extended the storage compartment opens to provide storage space for cabinet documentation and other miscellaneous items .
ensure that the storage compartment be of adequate construction to support a weight of num pounds num kg when extended .
provide a top for the storage compartment that has a nonslip plastic laminate attached which covers a minimum of num of the surface area of the top .
num .
test program supply each cabinet with a diagnostic test program which verifies the operation of the cabinet .
ensure that the program can test cabinet wiring related to the output file input file and police panel and flash switches .
in addition ensure that the program can check the operation of the siu amu and cmu by generating all possible conflicts in sequence .
num .
surge protection equip each cabinet with devices to protect the control equipment from surges and over voltages .
design the surge protector panels to allow for adequate space for a wire connection and surge protector replacement without the removal of terminal blocks or panels .
provide surge protectors for the input sections as detailed below and as shown in the input terminal and surge arrestor detail .
supply surge protectors that meet the following specifications .
a. ac service input include a surge protection unit for each cabinet on the ac service input that meets or exceeds the following requirements provide a hybrid type power line surge protection device on a service panel which plugs into a num pin beau connector which mounts on a service panel .
install the protector between the applied line voltage and earth ground .
use a surge protector capable of reducing the effect of lightning transient voltages applied to the ac line that conforms to the following peak surge current for an num x num s waveform numa for num occurrences clamp voltage numa numv max maximum continuous operating current numv num hz numa series inductance ac lineac neutral num microhenries response time voltage never exceeds numv during surge spike suppression for num v spike num v deviation from sine wave at all phases angles between num and num degrees .
provide a protector with the following terminals main line ac line first stage terminal section numtraffic signal equipment num main neutral ac neutral input terminal equipment line in ac line second stage input terminal numa equipment line out ac line second stage output terminal numa equipment neutral out neutral terminal to protected equipment gnd earth connection supply a protector that is epoxy encapsulated in a flameretardant material .
configure the equipment line out to provide power to the type num and to the num v power supply .
b. inductive loop detector inputs protect each inductive loop detector channel input by an external surge protection device that meets or exceeds the following requirements a threeterminal device two num of which are connected across the signal inputs of the detector with the third connected to the chassis ground to protect against common mode damage .
instantly clamps differential mode surges induced voltage across the loop detector input terminals via a semiconductor array .
the array appears as a low capacitance to the detector .
clamps common mode surges induced voltage between the loop leads and ground via solid state clamping devices .
withstand numa surge current occurrences of a num x num s waveform .
have the following clamp characteristics maximum break over voltage num v maximum onstage clamping voltage numv response time num ns offstage leakage current num a capacitance less than num pf ensure that the unit also meets the following minimum requirements peak surge current num times differential mode num a num x num ms common mode num a num x num ms estimated occurrences num num a response time num ns input capacitance num pf typical temperature num f to num f numº c to numº c mounting no .
num x numinch no .
num x num mm bolt clamp voltage num a diff .
mode num v max .
clamp voltage num a comm .. mode num v max .
c. signal load switches switchpacks provide the output of the switchpack in the output file with transient protection via the nine position transient protection device in the output file .
protect switchpacks from surges on the ac output lines .
ensure that the transient protectors meet or exceed these requirements steady state sinusoidal voltage rms rating at num to num hz of at least num v at num ºf num c steady state applied dc voltage rating of at least num v at num ºf num c transient energy rating is of at least num j for a single impulse of num s current waveform at num ºf num c peak current rating of num a for a single impulse of num s waveform with the rated continuous voltage applied varistor voltage of at least num v at numma of dc current applied for the duration of num s to nums section numtraffic signal equipment num clamping voltage of at least num v with an applied num s impulse of num a typical capacitance at a frequency of num to num mhz of num pf twoterminal device one of which is connected to the ac output of the signal load switch on the output file terminals backside of the field terminals with the other connected to ac neutral d. communication inputs protect low voltage communications input as it enters the cabinet with a solidstate surge protection unit that meets or exceeds these requirements dual pair numwire module with a printed circuit board connector double sided and gold plated for reliability ability to mate with and be installed in a numcircuit buchanan connector part number pcbibnums or tyco part number num or equivalent usable as two independent signal pairs the data circuits pass through the protection in a serial fashion cnum connector of the num controller that terminates on the line side of the unit communication field wires for this local side that terminate on the line side of the unit ground terminals connected to power ground ensure that the unit meets the following minimum requirements peak surge current num ka num x num s wave shape numa num x num s wave shape occurrences peak num typical response time numns voltage clamp numv line to line series resistance num total temperature num of num oc to num of num of primary protector num element gas tube numka num x num s wave shape per side secondary protector silicon avalance num kw minimum e. low voltage dc inputs provide an external surge protection device for each low voltage dc input channel which meets the same requirements as the communication inputs with the following exception of the voltage clamp which shall be num v linetoline .
num .
type num its cabinet monitor unit a .
introduction supply each cabinet with type num its cabinet monitor unit cmu .
ensure the type num cmu meets the caltrans tees specifications and functions as a unit with the a type num auxiliary monitor unit to provide the following monitoring functions cabinet power supplies conflicting channel monitor serial busnum and num error message num diagnostic error multiple channel inputs lack of signal inputs yellow clearance yellow plus red clearance police and power distribution switch monitor door switches and main contactor status circuit breakers flash unit output status and ac line level sense .
ensure the unit supplied is listed on the most recent california department of transportation qualified products list qpl .
b. configuration supply type num cmu capable of monitoring up to num physical load switch channels ryg plus num virtual channels for a total of num channels .
c. programming ensure complete programming of the type num cmu is by an interchangeable datakey nonvolatile memory device .
the datakey shall store all of the configuration parameters .
ensure the programming of the datakey can easily be accomplished by a pc and provide datakey and programming device with the delivery of the first unit section numtraffic signal equipment num ordered .
orders of multiple its cabinets require delivery or num programming device with pc software for every num cabinets .
d. logging ensure the type num cmu maintains a nonvolatile event log recording .
the complete intersection status as well as previous fault events ac line events configuration changes monitor resets cabinet temperature and true rms voltages for all field inputs .
a real time clock time shall stamp each log event with the time and date .
ensure a signal sequence history log is stored in nonvolatile memory .
the information stored in the signal sequence log shall provide graphic displays of up to num seconds of signal status prior to the fault trigger event with num ms resolution .
the type num cmu shall be provided with pc software that allows a review of status event log review and archival .
num .
type num its auxiliary monitor unit a .
introduction supply each its cabinet output assembly with a type num its auxiliary monitor unit amu .
ensure the type num cmu meets the caltrans tees specifications and functions with the a type num cabinet monitor unit to provide cabinet monitoring functions to perform the following monitoring functions cabinet power supplies conflicting channel monitor serial bus num and num error message num diagnostic error multiple channel inputs lack of signal inputs yellow clearance yellow plus red clearance police and power distribution switch monitor door switches and main contactor status circuit breakers flash unit output status and ac line level sense .
ensure the unit supplied is listed on the most recent california department of transportation qualified products list qpl .
the type num amu shall provide the field signal sensing .
b .
current monitoring supply type num amu capable of operating in a num channel mode or a num channel mode .
ensure the address select is correct for the output assembly in which the model num amu is installed .
c. diagnostics ensure the type num amu has self diagnostic tests that execute continuously to provide for correct operation to properly monitor the current for use with led signal heads .
num .
type num its serial interface unit a .
introduction supply each input and output assembly with a type num its serial interface unit siu .
ensure the type num its siu supplied meets the caltrans tees specifications .
ensure the unit supplied is listed on the most recent california department of transportation qualified products list qpl .
the type num its siu shall provide the interface between the num controller and the input and output files .
b. configuration supply type num siu capable of operating in all input and output modes .
provide a model num siu that is configured correctly for the input or output file for which it is supplied .
c. programming ensure programming of the type num siu is programmed by assembly mounted address jumpers and that no other setup is required .
d. diagnostics ensure the type num siu supplied has a complete set of internal diagnostics selftests run continuously to monitor critical components of the unit .
provide unit with a front panel led indicator that can be used to report the current inputoutput assembly address assignment of the unit for cabinet configuration verification .
ensure unite has a diagnostic eianum port on the front panel to interface with the siu num functions .
num .
model num dc isolator provide model num dc isolators that are in accordance with the latest version of caltrans specifications as referenced earlier in this section .
provide isolators that section numtraffic signal equipment num allow num isolator input signal polarity to easily be inverted without the use of tools .
acceptable methods are removable jumpers or dip switches .
unacceptable methods are soldering or desoldering a diode or resistor .
output is off for input voltages greater than num volts output is on for voltages of less than num volts that have a duration of at least num to num ms optional num ms minimum output pulse width is num ms with a valid input can be disabled output is optically isolated open collector npn transistor capable of sinking num ma when on can register a new input within num ms of the old signal going away and output clamped on power up and down num .
model num switchpack provide model num switchpacks that are in accordance with the latest version of caltrans specifications as referenced earlier in this section .
num .
model num flasher unit provide model num flasher units that are in accordance with the latest version of caltrans specifications as referenced earlier in this section .
num .
flash transfer relay provide flash transfer relays that are in accordance with the latest version of caltrans specifications as referenced earlier in this section .
num .
cabinet model num provide cabinet model num that meets the caltrans specification with the addition of surge protection as detailed in table num model num its cabinet default input files assignment detail table num required surge arrestors for model num its cabinet and table num model num num its cabinet default output file assignment detail .
supply model num with lower input panel cabinets with housing type num and all components as described in these specifications .
supply cabinets having two input files which conform to the caltrans specifications and configured to accept two num controllers in the top portion of the cabinet .
configure the cabinet for dial up communications .
mount a two num circuit buchanan connector on the right side panel from rear door .
mount a phone jack with a rjnum connector above or to the right of the buchanan terminal block .
wire the phone jack to the buchanan and to the terminal block tbnum in accordance with figure num .
num .
cabinet model num base mount this unit meets the caltrans specification with the addition of approximately num additional inches num mm of cabinet height exclusive of the m base adapter .
configure the internal component layout so that the additional space is available in the bottom area of the cabinet cage .
ensure that the field wiring input panels and surge protection conform to table num model num its cabinet default input file assignment detail table num required surge arrestors for model num cabinet and table num model num num default its cabinet default output file assignment .
num .
cabinet model num pole mount ensure that this unit meets the requirements of subsection num.a.num above except that the cabinet is configured for pole mounting as specified in the general requirements for type its cabinet assemblies .
num .
cabinet model num the model num cabinet configuration will be determined by the special provisions of the project .
ensure that the input and output port assignments are compatible with the num controller as applicable according to the required number of inputoutputs .
ensure that the num cabinet uses standard its cabinet input and output file units .
section numtraffic signal equipment num equip the cabinet with a cnum connector harness with field terminals protected with surge protectors for communication inputs as specified under communications inputs .
ensure that the cabinet has four fullsize doors to allow complete access from the front or back of the cabinet .
design the rack assembly to mount in caltrans standard rails to allow for a model num flasher .
provide a receptacle to accept the plug in power distribution assembly card guides and edge connectors for the input file card guides to support the conflict monitor and load switches and flash transfer relays .
b .
fabrication refer to subsection num.a.num for controller cabinet minimum fabrication specifications .
c. acceptance refer to subsection num for compliance with caltrans qpl .
d. materials warranty refer subsection num.d for materials warranties .
section numtraffic signal equipment num table num num model num its cabinet default input files assignment detail input file chan item file slot num num num num num num num num num num num num siu pin anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum siu bytebit num num num num num num num num num num num num siu input num num num num num num num num num num num num upper num input num num num num num num num num num num num num num port num num num num num num num num num num num num function ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det sp det num sp det num pd num det pre num pre num field term tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num siu pin bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum siu bytebit num num num num num num num num num num num num siu input num num num num num num num num num num num num num lower num input num num num num num num num num num num num num num port num num num num num num num num num num num num function ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det sp det num sp det num pd num det pre num pre num field term tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num siu pin bnum anum bnum anum siu bytebit num num num num opto siu input opto in num opto in num opto in num opto in num inputs num input num num num num num port num num num num function flsh sen mce int adv s t siu pin anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum siu bytebit num num num num num num num num num num num num siu input num num num num num num num num num num num num upper num input num num num num num num num num num num num num num port num num num num num num num num num num num num function ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det sp det num sp det num pd num det pre num spare num field term tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num siu pin bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum siu bytebit num num num num num num num num num num num num siu input num num num num num num num num num num num num num lower num input num num num num num num num num num num num num num port num num num num num num num num num num num num function ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det sp det num sp det num pd num det pre num spare num field term tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum num tbnum tbnum num tbnum num siu pin bnum anum bnum anum siu bytebit num num num num opto siu input opto in num opto in num opto in num opto in num inputs num input na na na na num port function section numtraffic signal equipment num table num num required surge arrestors for model num its cabinet field terminal block terminals required arrestors for model num cabinet tb num num section num.a.num.f tb num num section num.a.num.f tb num num section num.a.num.f tb num tb num tb num tb num tb num tb num num section num.a.num.c table num num model num num its cabinet default output file assignment detail switch pack item num num num num num num num num num num num num num num siu pin anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum siu byte bit num num num num num num num num num num num num num num siu output num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num output num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num output port num num num num num num num num num num num num num num amu pin cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum cnum amu channel num num num num num num num num num num num num num num field term trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num function ph num rd ph num rd pd num dw ph num rd ph num rd pd num dw ph num rd ph num rd pd num dw ph num rd ph num rd pd num dw ov a rd ov b rd siu pin bnum anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum anum siu byte bit num num num num num num num num num num num num num num siu output num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num output num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num output port num num num num num num num num num num num num num num amu pin bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum amu channel num num num num num num num num num num num num num num field term trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num function ph num yel ph num yel pd num pc ph num yel ph num yel pd num pc ph num yel ph num yel pd num pc ph num yel ph num yel pd num pc ov a yel ov b yel siu pin anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum anum bnum siu byte bit num num num num num num num num num num num num num num siu output num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num output num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num output port num num num num num num num num num num num num num num amu pin anum anum anum anum anum cnum cnum cnum anum anum anum anum anum anum amu channel num num num num num num num num num num num num num num field term trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum num trnum trnum num trnum num trnum num function ph num grn ph num grn pd num w ph num grn ph num grn pd num w ph num grn ph num grn pd num w ph num grn ph num grn pd num w o a grn o b grn section numtraffic signal equipment num note for a typical signal installation the model num cabinet is the design standard .
figure numwiring diagram for dialup communications terminal block tbnum red green yellow black num num num num num num num num num num buchanan terminal block section numtraffic signal equipment num table num num model num its cabinet default input files assignment detail file slot input file channel item num num num num num num num num num num num num siu pin anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum anum siu port num num num num num num num num num num num num siu in num num num num num num num num num num num num upper num in num num num num num num num num num num num num num port num num num num num num num num num num num num functio n ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det pre num pre num pd num det pd num det fld term tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num siu pin bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum bnum siu port num num num num num num num num num num num num siu in num num num num num num num num num num num num num lower num in num num num num num num num num num num num num num port num num num num num num num num num num num num functio n ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det ph num det pre num pre num pd num det pd num det fld term tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num tnum num siu pin bnum anum bnum anum siu port num num num num opto siu in opto in num opto in num opto in num opto in num num in num num num num num port num num num num functio n flsh sen mce int adv s t section numtraffic signal equipment num table num required surge arrestors for model num its cabinet field terminal block terminals required arrestor tbnum num section num.a.num.f tbnum num section num.a.num.f tbnum num terminal block only section num.a.num.f tbnum tbnum tbnum num section num.a.num.c section numtraffic signal equipment num num battery backup system a .
requirements this specification is for establishing the minimum requirements for a complete emergency battery backup system for use with light emitting diode traffic signal modules at intersections with num cabinets .
the battery backup system bbs shall include but not be limited to the following invertercharger power transfer relay batteries a separate manually operated nonelectric bypass switch and all necessary hardware and interconnect wiring .
the bbs shall be capable of providing power for full runtime operation for an led only intersection all colors red yellow green and pedestrian heads or flashing mode operation and intersection red leds .
the bbs shall be designed for outdoor applications in accordance with the caltrans tees .
figure num battery backup block diagram num .
operation a .
the bbs shall provide a minimum two num hours of full runtime operation for an ledonly intersection minimum numwnumva active output capacity with num minimum inverter efficiency .
b .
the maximum transfer time allowed from disruption of normal utility line voltage to stabilized inverter line voltage from batteries shall be num milliseconds .
the same maximum allowable transfer time shall also apply when switching from inverter line voltage to utility line voltage .
c. the bbs shall include a manual bypass switch which provides capability to transfer the power service to disable the bbs and operate only from the power service provided .
the manual bypass switch shall be as shown in figure num .
invertercharger battery back up system bbs block diagram batteries transfer relay manual bypass switch spdt nonc contact closures energized whenever system is running on batteries connect to controller alarm input num spdt nonc contact closures energized whenever system is running on batteries and there is less than num battery spdt nonc contact closures energized whenever system has run on batteries for more than two hours model numa cabinet ac line power to cabinet utility line power note manual bypass switch will be external to invertercharger .
if transfer relay is external to inverter then the manual bypass switch and transfer switch may be incorporated together .
note transfer relay may be internal to the inverter .
section numtraffic signal equipment num figure num num manual bypass switch shown in normal bbs mode d. the bbs shall provide the user with numsets of normally open no and normally closed nc singlepole doublethrow spdt dry relay contact closures available on a panelmounted terminal block rated at a minimum numvnuma and labeled so as to identify each contact .
for typical configuration see figure num .
num the first set of no and nc contact closures shall be energized whenever the unit switches to battery power .
contact shall be labeled or marked on batt .
num the second set of no and nc contact closures shall be energized whenever the battery approaches approximately num of remaining useful capacity .
contact shall be labeled or marked low batt .
num the third set of no and nc contact closures shall be energized two hours after the unit switches to battery power .
contact shall be labeled or marked timer .
num relay contact activation shall be annunciated on the front panel via a visual indication .
this can be either discreet led or part of lcd screen etc .
figure num num relay contacts nonc available on panelmounted terminal block typ e. operating temperature for both the invertercharger power transfer relay and manual bypass switch shall be num c numf to num c num f. f. both the power transfer relay and manual bypass switch shall be rated at numvacnum amps minimum g. the bbs shall use a temperaturecompensated battery charging system .
the charging system shall compensate over a range of num num mv c num f per cell .
the temperature sensor shall be external to the invertercharger unit .
the temperature sensor shall come with num meters num feet of wire .
ensure temperature sensor can be mounted to battery with ring terminal to prevent losing connectivity .
section numtraffic signal equipment num h. batteries shall not be recharged when battery temperature exceeds num c num f num c num f. i. bbs shall bypass the utility line power whenever the utility line voltage is outside of the following voltage range numvac to numvac numvac .
j .
when utilizing battery power the bbs output voltage shall be between num vac and num vac pure sine wave output num thd numhz numhz .
k. bbs shall be compatible with caltrans model numa cabinets model nume controllers model num controllers and cabinet components for full time operation .
l. in cases of low below numvac or absent utility line power when the utility line power has been restored at above num vac num vac for more than num seconds the bbs shall transfer from battery backed inverter mode back to utility line mode .
m. n cases of high utility line power above numvac when the utility line power has been restored at below numvac num vac for more than num seconds the bbs shall transfer from battery backed inverter mode back to utility line mode n. bbs shall be equipped to prevent a malfunction feedback to the cabinet or from feeding back to the utility service .
o .
in the event of invertercharger failure battery failure or complete battery discharge the power transfer relay shall revert to the nc and deenergized state where utility line power is connected to the cabinet .
p. recharge time for the battery from protective lowcutoff to num or more of full battery charge capacity shall not exceed twenty num hours .
num .
mountingconfiguration note all references made to eia rail or eia num nummm rack shall conform to electronic industries standards eianumb racks panels and associated equipment with num universal spacing threaded holes .
a .
general num invertercharger unit shall be shelfmounted or rackmounted on a standard eia num rack .
if the invertercharger is mounted inside the numa cabinet configuration num a shelf shall be provided that supports the weight of the unit .
num power transfer relay and manual bypass switch shall be mounted on eia rail .
num all interconnect wiring shall be provided between power transfer relay bypass switch and cabinet terminal service block and shall be no less than num meters num of ul style num csa tew with the following characteristics awg rating num awg stranding num strands of num awg tinned copper rating num v num c pvc insulation num .
relay contact wiring provided for each set of nonc relay contact closure terminals shall be a minimum of num meters num feet of ul style num csa tew num awg wire same ratings as above except num strands of num awg tinned copper .
wiring shall be of adequate length for particular installation .
num .
figure num provides clarification as to how bbs power transfer relay and manual bypass switch are interconnected with model numa cabinets in order to ensure interchangeability between all bbs manufacturers .
section numtraffic signal equipment num figure num num bbs utility power connection diagram num all necessary hardware for mounting shelf angles rack etc shall be included in the bid price of the bbs .
all boltsfasteners and washers shall meet the following requirements screw type pan head phillips machine screw size and thread pitch num material num stainless steel type num stainless steel is acceptable as an alternate washer use one flat washer num stainless steel under the head of each num screw provided that the screws are properly tightened lock washers are unnecessary .
number of screws per hinge bracket minimum of six num screws per hinge bracket spaced evenly along bracket with one screw near each end .
num there shall be two num basic bbs mounting options a. configuration num the bbs invertercharger bypass switch and transfer relay only installed inside the numa cabinet with the batteries installed in the externally mounted cabinet .
see figure num for location of inverter in numa cabinet .
b. configuration num the entire bbs including batteries installed inside the externally mounted cabinet .
as a minimum these wires shall be provided in num meter num feet lengths as part of the interconnect wiring kit .
section numtraffic signal equipment num figure num bbs mounting diagram num external cabinet a .
the external cabinet shall be used for housing batteries andor bbs which includes invertercharger unit power transfer relay manually operated bypass switch any other control panels and all wiring and harnesses .
b .
the same invertercharger power transfer relay and manually operated bypass switch that fits inside a typical fully equipped caltrans model numa cabinet shall also be able to fit inside the externally mounted cabinet .
c. the external cabinet shall be a nema numr rated cabinet conforming to tees august num num chapter num section numhousings for the construction and finish of the cabinet .
the specific finish of the external cabinet shall match the finish of the numa cabinet .
antigraffiti paint shall not be used .
two separate mounting installations shall be used .
refer to the project plans for the appropriate mounting installation .
mounting installation type a shall be typically used for installing at locations with existing num cabinet .
this cabinet mounting installation shall attach the external cabinet to the side of the num cabinet in the relationship as shown in figure num .
type a mounting installation shall use fasteners that meet the following requirements total of num bolts per cabinet with num flat washers per bolt and num klock nut per bolt cabinet mounting bolts shall be num stainless steel hex head fully threaded num num x num washers shall be designed for num bolt num stainless steel num od round flat type klock washer shall be section numtraffic signal equipment num num stainless steel hex nut assembled with freespinning tooth washer num num screw size external cabinet to numa cabinet couplings shall provide a conduit for power connections between the numa cabinet and external cabinet .
the couplings shall consist of three parts and meet the following requirements num nylon insulated steel chase nipple num sealing steel locknut num nylon insulated steel bushing the external cabinet shall come provided with all bolts washers nuts and cabinetcabinet coupler fittings provided necessary for mounting the external cabinet to the numa cabinet .
mounting installation type b shall be typically used for locations where a new traffic controller cabinet and foundation are being installed .
this cabinet installation shall provide the external battery cabinet as a base mount cabinet on the same foundation as the num cabinet .
connections between the cabinets shall be through conduit in the cabinet base .
the external cabinet shall be installed in the same relationship as shown in figure num to the num cabinet .
the external cabinet shall be installed so that it is centered on the num inch left side of the num cabinet .
bolt bbs cabinet to prefab base .
bbs cabinet opening shall be larger than the prefab base opening .
d. the specific dimensions and details of the external battery cabinet shall be as shown in figures num through num .
figure num external bbs cabinet details external battery cabinet num in .
num mm num in .
num mm num in .
num mm side view top view model numa cabinet external battery cabinet front external battery cabinet section numtraffic signal equipment num e. four shelves shall be provided .
there shall be a minimum of nummm num clearance between shelves .
each shelf shall be a minimum of nummm num x nummm num and capable of supporting a minimum of numkg num lbs ..
shelf edges shall be turned down on all four sides for support and to provide a flat top surface .
shelves shall be predrilled with eia rail mounting holes .
shelves shall provide a vertical passageway for wring in the rear of the cabinet on both the left and right .
f. the bottom shelf shall be capable of being removed .
figure num external bbs cabinet details figure num eia rail for mounting inverter or ptr inside external bbs cabinet section numtraffic signal equipment num g. the external cabinet shall be ventilated through the use of louvered vents filter and one thermostatically controlled fan as per tees chapter num section numhousings .
the thermostat shall be accessible without removing the bbs controller .
h. external cabinet fan shall be ac operated from the same line output of the manual bypass switch that supplies power to the num cabinet .
a numposition terminal block shall be provided on the fan panel along with num meters num feet of connected hookup wire .
i .
the door shall be attached to the cabinet through the use of either a continuous stainless steel piano hinge or four twobolts per leaf hinges as per tees chapter num section num .
the door shall use a padlock clasp or latch and lock mechanisms as described in the tees in order to lock the door .
j .
two eia angle rails per detail c figure num along with all necessary mounting hardware num sets of num bolts and nuts with captive washers shall be provided with the external cabinet not installed .
rails shall be symmetric to allow for installation on either right or left sides of the cabinet .
mounting holes and bracket shall allow for eia rail installation at any location in the external cabinet .
the eia mounting angle nominal thickness shall be either num inch nummm plated steel or num inch nummm stainless steel .
k. eia rail mounting bracket shall be of continuous onepiece design bolted into the cabinet to provide adequate support for railmounted equipment .
see figure num. l. pressed in flushhead threaded screw posts shall be inserted into the front face of the cabinet enclosure top sill .
these threaded posts shall be used to mount both the fan panel and the eia railmounting bracket .
the screw posts shall be num thread size stud num inches in length .
refer to figure num front views for mounting detail .
num .
maintenance displays controls and diagnostics a .
the bbs shall include a display and or meter to indicate current battery charge status and conditions .
num the bbs shall provide voltmeter standard probe inputjacks and to read the exact battery voltage drop at the inverter input .
num the bbs shall include a num to num battery capacity led indicator .
b .
the bbs shall have lightning surge protection compliant with ieeeansi c.num .
c. the bbs shall be equipped with an integral system to prevent battery from destructive discharge and overcharge .
d. the bbs and batteries shall be easily replaced with all needed hardware and shall not require any special tools for installation .
figure num eia rail mounting bracket for mounting eia rails inside external bbs cabinet section numtraffic signal equipment num e. the bbs shall include a frontpanel event counter display to indicate the number of times the bbs was activated and a frontpanel hour meter to display the total number of hours the unit has operated on battery power .
both meters shall be resetable .
f. manufacturer shall include a set of equipment lists operation and maintenance manuals and boardlevel schematic and wiring diagrams of the bbs and the battery data sheets .
manual shall conform to tees august num num chapter num section num .
num .
battery system a .
individual batteries shall be num voltage rating numv type num group size num maximum num batteries shall be easily replaced and commercially available off the shelf .
b .
batteries used for bbs shall consist of num to num batteries with a cumulative minimum rated capacity of num amp hours .
c. batteries shall be deep cycle sealed prismatic leadcalcium based agmvrla absorbed glass mat valve regulated lead acid .
d. batteries shall be certified by the manufacturer to operate over a temperature range of num c numf to numc num f. e. the batteries shall be provided with appropriate interconnect wiring and corrosionresistant mounting trays andor brackets appropriate for the cabinet into which they will be installed .
f. batteries shall indicate maximum recharge data and recharging cycles .
g. battery harness num battery interconnect wiring shall be via twopart modular harness .
num part i shall be equipped with red and black num inch num cm cabling that can be permanently connected to the positive and negative posts of each battery .
each red and black pair shall be terminated into an anderson power pole connector or amp power series connector or equivalent style connector .
num part ii shall be equipped with the mating power pole style connector for the batteries and a single insulated power pole style connection to the invertercharger unit .
harness shall be fully insulated and constructed to allow batteries to be quickly and easily connected in any order to ensure proper polarity and circuit configuration .
num power pole style connectors may be either onepiece or twopiece .
if a twopiece connector is used a locking pin shall be used to prevent the connectors from separating .
num the length of the battery interconnect harness part ii shall be a minimum of num inches num cm from the invertercharger plug to the first battery in the string .
the lateral length of the harness between battery connectors shall be a minimum of num inches num cm .
num all battery interconnect harness wiring shall be ul style num csa tew or welding style cable or equivalent all of proper gauge with respect to design current and with sufficient strand count for flexibility and ease of handling .
num battery terminals shall be covered and insulated with molded boots so as to prevent accidental shorting .
b .
fabrication refer to subsection num.a.num for controller cabinet minimum fabrication specifications .. acceptancegeneral provisions num through num .
each bbs shall be manufactured in accordance with a manufacturer quality assurance qa program .
the qa program shall include two quality assurance procedures num design qa and num production qa .
the production qa shall include statistically controlled routine tests to ensure minimum performance levels of bbs units built to meet this specification and a documented process of how problems are to be resolved .
the manufacturer or an independent testing lab hired by the manufacturer shall perform design qualification testing on new bbs systems offered and when any major design change has been implemented on an existing design .
a major design change is defined as any modification material electrical physical or theoretical that changes any performance characteristics of the system or results in a different section numtraffic signal equipment num circuit configuration .
where a dispute arises in determining if a system is a new design or if the system has had a major design change the state will make the final determination if design qualification testing is required prior to production consideration .
production quality control tests shall be performed on each new system prior to shipment .
failure to meet this requirements shall be cause for rejection .
the manufacturer shall retain test results for seven years .
each bbs shall be given a minimum numhour burnin period to eliminate any premature failures .
each system shall be visually inspected for any exterior physical damage or assembly anomalies .
any defects shall be cause for rejection .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
manufacturers shall provide a two num year factoryrepair warranty for parts and labor on the bbs from date of acceptance by the department .
batteries shall be warranted for full replacement for two num years from date of purchase .
the warranty shall be included in the total bid price of the bbs .
num flashing beacon assembly a .
requirements this specification is for a flashing signal cabinet which consists of an aluminum cabinet containing a flasher assembly field connection terminal block surge arrestor and circuit breaker wired in a manner to operate flashing beacons .
refer to figure num .
note front view of cabinet door assembly not shown no scale figure numtypical flashing signal cabinet layout ac brkr arrestor nema flasher tb ac breaker section numtraffic signal equipment num num .
cabinet supply a nema type numr cabinet assembly manufactured of aluminum with a minimum thickness of num inches num mm .
ensure that the cabinet exterior has a smooth uniform bare aluminum finish with all joints between adjoining cabinet components sides and bottom continuously welded on the outside to prevent the intrusion of moisture and dust .
ensure that all welds are free of cracks blow holes and other irregularities .
supply a cabinet with the following exterior dimensions minimum maximum height num inches num mm num inches num mm width num inches num mm num inches num mm depth num inches num mm num inches num mm use a cabinet door that is double flanged on all four sides to prevent the entry of dirt and liquids when the door is open .
install a onepiece gasket formed around the door opening to insure a weather tight seal when the door is secured .
attach the door to the cabinet housing by a continuous tamper proof hinge .
equip each cabinet with a corbin num lock and one key .
police panel type locks are not acceptable .
install an aluminum back panel in the cabinet mounted on standoffs to facilitate mounting of internal components .
install exterior aluminum mounting brackets which extend a minimum of num inches num mm and a maximum of num inches num mm from the top and bottom of the cabinet .
use brackets that extend across the full width of the cabinet back on the top and bottom .
provide these brackets with holes for mounting to a flat surface with screws and vertical slots for banding to steel concrete or wooden signal poles .
num .
flasher unit supply a standard plug in two circuits nema flasher .
ensure that the flasher is of all solid state construction meets the requirements of the nema standards and is rated at a minimum of num a per circuit .
ensure that the flasher utilizes zero voltage turnon and turnoff current and is capable of dimming outputs .
num .
surge arrestor supply a flasher cabinet that incorporates an ac surge arrestor to protect the internal components from lighting and over voltages on the ac service input .
the requirements for the surge arrestor are two stage arrestor peak surge current num a peak surge voltage numka num v clamp voltage num v num ka continuous ac voltage num v ac rms response time num nsec operating temp .
num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc num .
circuit breaker include a num a circuit breaker in the cabinet .
the circuit breaker shall have the following characteristics .
thermal magnetic num pole num vac at num hz num a interrupting rating of numka at num vdc wire size num to num awg section numtraffic signal equipment num num mm din rail mounting num .
terminal block include a four position terminal block in the cabinet for making field connections .
properly label all field terminal connections .
num .
construction assemble the flasher assembly terminal block surge arrestor and circuit breaker in the cabinet as shown on the attached drawing .
wire all components together as a working unit thus requiring only field connections to and from the ac power and flashing beacons .
b .
fabrication refer to subsection num.a.num for controller cabinet minimum fabrication specifications .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num flashing signal cabinet with time clock a .
requirements this specification is for a flashing signal cabinet with time clock which consists of an aluminum cabinet containing a flasher assembly time clock field connection terminal block surge arrestor and circuit breaker wired in a manner to operate school flashing beacons .
refer to figure num .
num .
cabinet supply a nema type numr cabinet assembly that is manufactured of aluminum with a minimum thickness of num inches num mm .
ensure that the cabinet exterior has a smooth uniform natural aluminum finish and that all joints between adjoining cabinet components sides and bottom are continuously welded on the outside to prevent the intrusion of moisture and dust .
ensure that all welds are free of cracks blow holes and other irregularities .
the exterior dimensions of the cabinet are as follows minimum maximum height num inches num mm num inches num mm width num inches num mm num inches num mm depth num inches num mm num inches nummm supply a cabinet door that is double flanged on all four sides to prevent the entry of dirt and liquids when the door is open .
use a onepiece gasket that is formed around the door opening to insure a weather tight seal when the door is secured .
attach the door to the cabinet housing with a continuous tamper proof hinge .
provide each cabinet with a corbin num lock and one key .
police panel type locks are not acceptable .
supply each cabinet with an aluminum back panel mounted on standoffs to facilitate mounting of internal components .
supply cabinets with exterior aluminum mounting brackets which extend a minimum of num inches num mm and a maximum of num inches num mm from the top and bottom of the cabinet .
section numtraffic signal equipment num use brackets that extend across the full width of the cabinet back on the top and bottom .
provide these brackets with holes for mounting to a flat surface with screws and vertical slots for banding to steel concrete or wooden signal poles .
note front view of cabinet door assembly not shown no scale figure numtypical flashing cabinet with time clock cabinet layout num .
flasher unit supply a standard plug in two circuits nema flasher .
ensure that the flasher is of all solid state construction meets the requirements of the nema standards and is rated at a minimum of num a per circuit .
ensure that the flasher utilizes zero voltage turnon and turnoff current and be capable of dimming outputs .
num .
time switch supply a time switch that meets the requirements of subsection num of this specification .
num .
surge arrestor supply flasher cabinets that incorporate an ac surge arrestor to protect the internal components from lighting and over voltages on the ac service input .
the requirements of the surge arrestor are as follows two stage arrestor peak surge current num a peak surge voltage numka num v clamp voltage num v num ka continuous ac voltage num v ac rms response time num nsec operating temp .
num ºf to num ºf num ºc to num ºc num .
circuit breaker include a num a circuit breaker in each cabinet .
the circuit breaker shall have the following characteristics .
thermal magnetic num pole num vac at num hz num a interrupting rating of numka at num vdc wire size num to num awg arrestor time clock tb nema flsher ac brkr section numtraffic signal equipment num num mm din rail mounting num .
terminal block include a four position terminal block in each cabinet for making field connections .
properly label all field terminal connections .
num .
construction assemble the flasher assembly terminal block surge arrestor and circuit breaker in the cabinet as shown on the attached drawing .
wire all components together as a working unit thus requiring only field connections of the ac power and flashing beacons .
b .
fabrication refer to subsection num .. num.a.num for controller cabinet minimum fabrication specifications .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num time clock a .
requirements supply time clocks that are single circuit calendar programmable solid state fully selfcontained units rtc ap num or eltec tcnum or equivalent that meet the following specifications num .
alphanumeric liquid crystal display .
num .
automatic daylight savings time and leap year compensation .
changes in the daylight savings time program made through the keypad do not require hardware modification .
num .
minimum twentyfour num hour capacitive back up .
battery back up is not acceptable .
num keypad entry programming without the use of any external devices such as a pc external programming unit another time switch etc .
num .
operate on num to num v ac num hz line current .
num .
spdt relay output rated at num a .
num .
maximum size of num inches num mm wide num inches num mm high and num inches num mm deep .
num .
a programming manual is to be included with each unit .
num .
ability to do program transfer from unit to unit .
include program transfer cable with unit .
num .
ability to run minimum six num different day plans and minimum twenty five num different annual exception plans.temperature range of numº f numº c numº f numº c. b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
section numtraffic signal equipment num num self tuning loop detector a .
requirements this specification sets forth the minimum acceptable design operational and functional performance requirements for multichannel inductive loop vehicle detection systems .
num .
general requirements a .
mounting ensure that the unit is configured for rack mount insertion into a nema ts l or ts num card rack andor caltrans type num cabinet input file .
b .
environmental ensure that the unit is in full compliance with the environmental tests transient tests and size requirements of nema standard tsl section num tsnum section num and the california type num specifications .
provide documentation from an independent laboratory which certifies that the unit is in compliance with the above specifications .
c. led indicator ensure that each channel includes two high visibility led indicators one for the detect state and the second to indicate the status of the fault monitor .
d. phase indicator ensure that each channel has an erasable writeon pad to aid in identification of the associated phase or function .
num .
operational requirements a. tuning supply units that are fully digital and selftuning .
ensure that each channel of the unit can automatically tune to any loop and lead in combination within two num seconds of application of power or when a reset signal is received .
ensure that the tuning circuit is designed so that drift caused by environmental changes or changes in applied power does not cause false actuations .
b. scanning supply units that sequentially scan each channel only one channel energized at any given time to eliminate crosstalk from multiple loops in adjacent lanes andor allow overlapped loops for directional control andor allow use of multiconductor homerun cable when connected to the same detector unit .
c. sensitivity setting ensure that each channel is equipped with front panel selectable sensitivity settings in presence and pulse modes .
d. frequency supply units that have a minimum of three switch selectable operating frequencies .
e. inductance range ensure that each channel can tune to an inductive load from num to num microhenries with a q factor num. f. grounded loops ensure that each channel can continue to operate with poor quality loop systems qnum including those that have a single point short to ground .
g. fault monitoring supply units that constantly monitor the operation of each channel .
ensure that the unit detects shorted loops open circuit loops or sudden changes in inductance num of nominal .
ensure that each type of fault is indicated on a fault led by a unique sequence of flashes until the fault is rectified .
section numtraffic signal equipment num ensure that while the channel is in the fault condition the channel output remains in the detect state .
when the fault is rectified the fault led continues to emit the sequence signifying the last fault detected but the detect led and output returns to normal operation .
h. failsafe output ensure that each channel output generates a continuous solid state output to the controller when power to the detector is removed .
i .
operational modes supply units with each channel selectable for either pulse or presence modes and that meet the following requirements pulse mode this setting provides a single output pulse num ms num in response to a vehicle entering the loop .
if a vehicle remains in the sensing zone in excess of two num seconds the unit tunes out said vehicle .
the channel is then capable of detecting another vehicle entering the same detection zone .
presence mode the presence hold time is a minimum of four num minutes for small vehicles motorcycles and a minimum of sixty num minutes for automobiles .
ensure that the unit tunes out of continuous peak hour traffic over long or multiple small loops as long as there is vehicle motion in the sensing zone every ten num minutes .
j. resets ensure that the channels are manually resettable by removing the power momentarily .
ensure that the channels reset remotely when the voltage on pin c falls below num v dc for a period lnum s and that the unit resumes normal operation within four num seconds after the application of power or after a reset signal of lnum s. k. field tuning ensure that field adjustments to the operation of the detector do not require the use of a meter circuit changes special software or any substitutions modifications or additions to the unit .
num .
performance requirements if testing should be required provide the department with a test unit andor software within ten num calendar days of the request .
should the unit fail to meet the design andor performance requirements of this specification the unit will be rejected .
ensure that the units meet the following requirements a .
capable of detecting passage holding presence and accurately counting all types of licensed motor vehicles when connected in various loop configurations and leadin combinations without detecting vehicles in adjacent lanes .
typical loop configurations with leadin of num feet num m to num feet num m are num feet x num feet num m x num m num feet x num feet num m x num m num feet x num feet num m x num m standard or quadrupole b .
capable of responding to an inductance change of num and sense vehicles at speeds of up to num mph num kmh .
c. not detect vehicles moving or stopped at distances greater than three feet for any loop perimeter .
d. detect all vehicles over multiple turn andor multiple loops that may he connected in series parallel or seriesparallel with homerun lengths from num feet num m to num feet num m. num .
optional features section numtraffic signal equipment num in addition to the requirements listed in the previous sections the units may be requested with any combination of the following optional features a .
option num timing features delay extension when this option is specified ensure that the unit incorporates the following features num delay timing minimum selectable delay time of num to num seconds in minimum numsecond increments for each channel .
num extension timing minimum selectable extension time of num to num seconds in minimum numsecond increments for each channel .
b .
option num advanced features when the option for advanced features is specified supply units that incorporate the following advanced features num serial port interface when the serial port interface is specified equip the detector with a front and rear panel rs num port for the transmission of data .
provide windows num compatible software for interfacing with the detector .
num pc interface ensure that pc software when connected directly to the unit through the front panel rs num port provides a screen to display the following loop system operating characteristics on a per channel basis for system setup data collection and diagnostics .
loop status loop inductance h loop frequency khz inductance change nh l fault occurrence date time vehicle count num speed volume occupancy the software when connected directly to the unit is capable of collecting and storing speed volume and occupancy data from each detector channel .
the software allows assignment of looptoloop distances to enable accurate speed and vehicle length measurements .
the speed volume and occupancy information is uploaded and stored in the vendorsupplied software .
upon request supply the necessary informationprotocols to allow the department to write custom software to retrieve speed volume and occupancy data .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
section numtraffic signal equipment num num loop sealant a .
requirements furnish and install loop sealant according to subsection num polyurethane sealant for inductive loops .
for a list of sources see qpl num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num vehicle signal heads a .
requirements supply vehicle signal heads that are num inches num mm in diameter for traffic signal control applications .
for ramp metering systems supply both num inches num mm and num inches num mm as per the plans .
ensure that the num inch nummm or num inch num mm polycarbonate vehicle signal heads meet the current ite specification on vehicle traffic control signal heads with the following modifications and or clarifications num .
unless otherwise approved by the engineer or as noted on the plans supply signal heads with the following exterior color scheme signal housing highway yellow .
front face including doors and visors flat black num .
provide housing and housing door that are one piece injection molded ultraviolet and heat stabilized polycarbonate resin with the color impregnated in the material .
num .
terminate the wiring from each signal section in the top section of the head assembly .
ensure that the cable jacket is a minimum of num inches inside the signal head assembly .
num .
provide the appropriate vehicle signal led signal in each section either circular or arrow module .
num .
provide an effective seal with the led module to make the assembly weather tight .
num .
mount one aluminum reinforcing support plate in the top of the red section of each three and four section signal head for the installation of mounting hardware .
num .
all five section heads or heads equipped with numway mounting hardware shall have aluminum mounting support plates installed in the top and bottom of the red sectionsections for mounting hardware .
num .
install a support plate between each section of all signal heads .
place these plates such that there is a plate in the bottom of andor top of any sections where sections adjoin to another section .
num .
provide signal heads that use stainless steel hardware and are weather tight .
ensure signal heads that are supplied are sealed for mounting in all possible configurations .
num .
provide signal heads that have housing door that positively latches using two eyebolts and wing nuts .
ensure the signal door has hinge lugs molded on one side and two latch jaws are molded on the other side .
num .
provide signal heads that provide a positive method of holding the lens such that the lens does not rotate .
ensure the lens is weather tight .
lens clips which do not apply firm pressure to the lens gasket to avoid rotation are not acceptable .
when constructing side by side signal sections ensure that both doors can open at the same time butterfly .
when doors are open ensure that the door will remain attached to housing .
ensure bottom section has drainage holes .
section numtraffic signal equipment num b .
fabrication refer to ite standards for material composition and finish specifications .
c. acceptance refer to ite standards for material composition finish specifications and wind loading requirements .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num pedestrian signal head a .
requirements provide each section with a visor encompassing the top and sides of the signal face of a size and shape adequate to shield the lens from external lighted sources .
an acceptable option is a zcrate or louver type visor for mounting over the pedestrian signal face .
construct the housing of one piece cast aluminum alloy with two integrally hinge lugs screw slots and openings at each end .
construct the door of one piece cast aluminum alloy with two hinge lugs cast on top of the door and two latch points cast on the bottom .
provide hinge pins of stainless steel to attach the door to the housing and two eye bolts and wing nuts on the other side of the door .
ensure that the door is provided with a neoprene gasket capable of making a weather resistant dustproof seal when closed .
supply pedestrian signal heads with a black face and a yellow body unless otherwise specified on the plans .
ensure that pedestrian indications are distinguishable to the pedestrian both day and night and at all distances from num feet num m to the full width of the areas to be crossed .
use symbols that are num inches num mm high .
use only internal illumination .
ensure that when illuminated the hand symbol is portland orange and the person symbol is lunar white meeting the ite standards .
ensure that an opaque material obscures all areas of the face or lens except for the message .
ensure that when not illuminated the symbols are not to be distinguishable by pedestrians at the far end of the crosswalk they control .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num optically programmed signal head a .
requirements supply signal heads that permit the visibility zone of the indication to be determined optically and require no hoods or louvers .
the projected indication may be selectively visible or veiled anywhere within num degrees of the optical axis .
ensure that no indication results from external illumination and that one light unit does not illuminate a second .
the components of the optical system include the lamp lamp collar optical limiterdiffuser and objective lens .
section numtraffic signal equipment num ensure that the optical system accommodates projection of diverse selected indications to separate portions of the roadway such that only one indication will be simultaneously apparent to any viewer .
ensure that the projected indication conforms to ite transmittance and chromaticity standards .
num .
construction a .
provide an led lamp module that is a direct replacement for the incandescent lamp .
ensure the lamp modules are on the latest caltrans qpl for led programmed visibility modules .
ensure the unit provided operates over the voltage range of num to num vac and the temperature range of num c num f to num c num f. provide modules that conform to the applicable portions of section num .
ensure the unit provides a minimum luminous intensity of num candela and does not exceed num watts at num c num f. couple the lamp to the diffusing element with a collar including a specular inner surface .
the diffusing element may be discrete or integral with the convex surface of the optical limiter .
b .
supply an optical limiter with an accessible imaging surface at focus on the optical axis for objects num to num feet num to num m distance and permit an effective veiling mask to be variously applied as determined by the desired visibility zone .
ensure that the optical limiter is provided with positive indexing means and is composed of heatresistant glass .
c. ensure that the objective lens is a highresolution planar incremental lens hermetically sealed within a flat laminate of weather resistant acrylic or approved equal .
supply a lens that is symmetrical in outline and that may be rotated to any numdegree orientation about the optical axis without displacing the primary image .
num .
mounting a .
supply signals that mount to standard num inch num mm fittings as a single section as a multiple section face or in combination with other signals .
provide signal sections with an adjustable connection that permits incremental tilting from num to num degrees above or below the horizontal while maintaining a common vertical axis through couplers and mounting .
ensure that terminal connections permit external adjustment about the mounting axis in numdegree increments .
b .
ensure that the signal is mountable with ordinary tools and capable of being serviced with no tools .
supply attachments such as back plates or adapters that conform and readily fasten to existing mounting surfaces without affecting water and light integrity of the signal .
supply heads with tristuds for mounting .
num .
electrical supply lamp fixtures that comprise a separately accessible housing and integral lamp support indexed ceramic socket and selfaligning quick release lamp retainer .
ensure that electrical connection between case and lamp housing can be accomplished with an interlock assembly which disconnects lamp holder when opened .
include a covered terminal block for clip or screw attachment of lead wires for each signal section .
use concealed no .
num awg stranded and coded wires to interconnect all sections to permit field connection within any section .
num .
photo controls ensure that each signal includes integral means for regulating its intensity between limits as a function of the individual background illumination .
ensure that lamp intensity is not less than num of uncontrolled intensity at num num lux and reduces to num num of maximum at less than num lux .
ensure that response is proportional and essentially instantaneous to any detectable increase of illumination from darkness to num num lux and damped for any decrease from num num lux .
ensure that the intensity controller is comprised of an integrated directional light sensing and regulating device interposed between lamp and line wires .
ensure that it is compatible with num hz input and responsive within the range num to num v ac .
section numtraffic signal equipment num output may be phase controlled but ensure that the device provides nominal terminal impedance of num open circuit and a corresponding holding current .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num led signal modules a .
requirements this specification covers type num light emitting diode led red green and yellow modules for vehicle signals for both circular and arrow indications .
it also covers led pedestrian hand person signal modules .
num .
general requirements all modules ensure that type num led signal module include a led circuit board with leds and required circuit components num inch num mm num awg wire leads with strain relief and spade terminals a rigid housing and a one piece neoprene gasket .
supply type num led signal modules that are watertight when mounted in the traffic signal housing .
submit life data on the leds from the led signal module manufacturer to calculate the expected useful life .
supply modules with permanent markings of date of manufacture and date of installation .
ensure that the type num led signal modules utilize the same mounting hardware that is used to secure the incandescent lens and gasket assembly .
num .
optical all modules provide test data from an independent laboratory to verify that the performance of the product meets current ite requirements .
ensure that the individual leds are wired such that a catastrophic failure of one led will result in the loss of not more than num of the signal module light output .
the failure of a single led in a string or cluster of leds causes loss of light from only that led not the entire string or indication .
provide control circuitry that prevents the current flow through the leds in the off state to avoid any false indications as may be perceived by the human eye during daytime and nighttime hours .
ensure that the led signal module is operationally compatible with existing or new supplied conflict monitors nema tsnum nema tsnum model num model num its cabinet cmu and amu ..
ensure that the led signal module is operationally compatible with existing or new supplied load switches .
num .
electrical all modules supply led signal modules that operate over the temperature range of num ºf to num ºf num c to num ºc .
ensure that the power factor is num or greater at nominal rated voltage at num ºf num c after num minutes of operation .
provide modules that do not exceed the maximum power consumption as shown in table num .
section numtraffic signal equipment num table num maximum power consumption in watts at num c num f num c num f vehicle indications red yellow green temperature num c num c num c num c num c num c num inch num mm circular num num num num num num num inch num mm circular num num num num num num num inch num mm arrow num num num num num num pedestrian indications hand man temperature num c num c num c num c num c num c num inch num mm num num num num ensure that the total harmonic distortion thd is less than num at rated voltage at num ºf num c and that all led traffic signal modules are in compliance with fcc noise regulations .
ensure that the led signal modules operate on line voltage num v ac nominal and are able to operate over the voltage range of num v ac to num v ac .
power supply must be integral to the module .
provide transient voltage suppression rated at num w for num millisecond and fusing with a maximum rating of num a to minimize the effect and repair cost of an extreme over voltage situation or other failure mode .
ensure the lens of the modules that are polymeric and are not frosted have a surface coating to provide front surface abrasion resistance .
ensure the red and yellow section module lens are tinted to correspond with the wavelength chromaticity of the led .
ensure green section modules are clear .
ensure the modules allow a reduction of the intensity of the light output in response to an input from the traffic signal controller .
ensure the minimum light output when dimmed is not less than num of the minimum maintained luminous intensity as defined in the applicable signal head module .
num .
circular signal modules supply led circular signal modules that fit in standard incandescent vehicle traffic signal housings and meet the performance specification of the ite vehicle traffic control signal heads led circular signal supplement .
in case of conflict this specification shall govern .
before delivery of any modules supply certification that module is to be in compliance with these specifications .
in addition substantiating documentation must be supplied from an independent test laboratory to show the product has passed design qualification testing in accordance with section num of the ite vehicle traffic control signal heads led circular signal supplement .
ensure the report includes a minimum maintained luminous intensity chart for the module being provided that uses the same horizontal and vertical angles as shown in table num of the ite vehicle traffic control signal heads led circular signal supplement .
ensure all modules are provided with a signed copy of the production and test and inspection as detailed in section num of the ite vehicle traffic control signal heads led circular signal supplement .
supply lenses for that are made of ultraviolet stabilized polycarbonate .
ensure that the external lens surface is smooth with no raised features to minimize the collection of dirt diesel smoke and other particulate contaminates and to facilitate periodic cleaning .
ensure that circular signal modules have prominent and permanent markings to designate the proper orientation of the signal module in the traffic signal housing .
this marking should be an up arrow or the word up or top .
ensure circular signal module meets the photometric requirements as indicated and described in the ite vtcsh led circular signal supplement .
supply red and yellow leds that utilize allngap technology either as absorbing substrate or ts transparent substrate and do not exhibit degradation of more than num of their initial light intensity following accelerated life testing operating at num f num c and num humidity for num hours .
algaas technology is not acceptable .
supply green leds that utilize gallium nitride technology .
section numtraffic signal equipment num num .
vehicle arrow signal modules supply led arrow signal modules that fit in standard incandescent vehicle traffic signal housings and meet the performance specification of ite vehicle traffic control signal led vehicle arrow traffic signal supplement .
ensure that arrow signal modules provided are omni directional and marked as od so that they may be rotated at any angle .
ensure the arrow modules photometrics support the luminous intensity as indicated in table num .
before delivery of any modules supply certification that module is to be in compliance with these specifications .
in addition substantiating documentation must be supplied from an independent test laboratory to show the product has passed design qualification testing in accordance with section num of the ite vehicle traffic control signal heads led circular signal supplement .
ensure the report includes a minimum maintained luminous intensity chart for the module being provided that uses the same horizontal and vertical angles as shown in table num of the ite vehicle traffic control signal heads led vehicle arrow traffic signal supplement .
ensure all modules are provided with a signed copy of the production and test and inspection as detailed in section num of the ite vehicle traffic control signal heads led vehicle arrow traffic signal supplement .
supply lenses for that are made of ultraviolet stabilized polycarbonate .
ensure that the external lens surface is smooth with no raised features to minimize the collection of dirt diesel smoke and other particulate contaminates and to facilitate periodic cleaning .
supply red and yellow leds that utilize allngap technology either as absorbing substrate or ts transparent substrate and do not exhibit degradation of more than num of their initial light intensity following accelerated life testing operating at num f num c and num humidity for num hours .
algaas technology is not acceptable .
supply green leds that utilize gallium nitride technology .
supply led arrow signal modules that fit in standard incandescent vehicle traffic signal housings and meet the ite vehicle traffic control signal heads part num light emitting diode led vehicle traffic signal modules .
use table num for all references to minimum maintained intensity values .
ensure the led arrow modules meet the required luminous intensity as shown in table num .
section numtraffic signal equipment num table num minimum maintained luminous intensity values for arrow led indications angle angle ver hor num inch num mm ver hor num inch num mm or red yellow green or red yellow green num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num .
pedestrian signal modules supply led pedestrian traffic signal modules that fit in standard pedestrian one section signal head manufactured in accordance with the ite pedestrian traffic control signal indications ptcsi housings and meet the ite pedestrian traffic signal modules specification .
ensure that the pedestrian indications for the hand and man are filled in so as to provide a solid indication .
do not supply pedestrian indications for the hand and man that are outlines .
section numtraffic signal equipment num ensure that pedestrian signal modules have prominent and permanent markings to designate the proper orientation of the signal module in the pedestrian signal housing .
this marking should be an up arrow or the word up or top .
ensure pedestrian signal module meets the photometric requirements as indicated and described in the ite ptcsi led pedestrian traffic signal module specification .
supply portland orange leds that utilize allngap technology either as absorbing substrate or ts transparent substrate and do not exhibit degradation of more than num of their initial light intensity following accelerated life testing operating at num f num c and num humidity for num hours .
algaas technology is not acceptable .
supply white leds that utilize ingan technology .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty ensure that led traffic signal modules and led pedestrian modules are performance warranted to be in compliance with the minimum intensity values as shown in table num .
provide independent laboratory test results indicating that led indications satisfy the minimum intensity standards for led traffic signal modules measured at num v ac and num ºf num c for a period of five num years .
ensure that the manufacturers name part number date code and electrical characteristics of the led signal module is visible on the assembly and that each led signal module is identified for warranty purposes .
num led pedestrian and countdown signal module a .
requirements this specification covers led traffic signal module designed as a retrofit replacement for the message bearing surface of nominal num x num num mm x num mm traffic signal housing built to the ptsci standard .
the message bearing surface of the module consists of an overlapping hand and man symbols with a numerical display of numbers from num to num .
num .
general requirements ensure that the unit supplied meets the applicable portions of section num of this specification .
ensure that the message numbers num to num are a minimum of num inches num mm in height and consist of two rows of leds .
ensure the module fits in the pedestrian signal housing without modification to the housing and requires no special tools for installation .
supply led signal modules that are watertight when mounted in the traffic signal housing .
supply life data from the led signal module manufacturer to calculate the expected useful life supply modules with permanent markings for date of manufacture and date of installation .
num .
optical provide test data from an independent laboratory to verify that the performance of the product meets current ite requirements .
ensure that the individual leds are wired such that a catastrophic failure of one led will result in the loss of not more than num of the signal module light output .
the failure of a single led in a string causes loss of light from only that led not the entire string or indication .
provide control circuitry that prevents the current flow through the leds in the off state to avoid any false indications as may be perceived by the human eye during daytime and nighttime hours .
section numtraffic signal equipment num ensure that the led signal module is operationally compatible with existing or new supplied conflict monitors nema tsnum nema tsnum model num model num its cabinet cmu and amu .
ensure that the led signal module is operationally compatible with existing or new supplied load switches .
ensure that the intensity of the led signal module does not vary by more than num over the allowable voltage range as specified in the electrical section below .
ensure that the led signal modules maintain not less than num of the required intensity as defined by the ite intensity standards for led traffic signal modules .
ensure that each module provides an average luminous of at least num candela per square meter of lighting surface for the hand and num candela per square meter for the man symbol .
ensure this over the temperature range of num ºf to num ºf num c to num c at num v ac when new and after four num years of field installation .
provide an exterior lens which is uniform and frosted to reduce sun phantom effect .
num .
electrical supply led signal modules that operate over the temperature range of num ºf to num ºf num c to num ºc .
ensure that the power factor is num or greater at nominal rated voltage at num ºf num c after num minutes of operation .
ensure that the total harmonic distortion thd is less than num at rated voltage at num ºf num c and that all led traffic signal modules are in compliance with fcc noise regulations .
ensure that the led signal modules operate on line voltage num v ac nominal and are able to operate over the voltage range of num v ac to num v ac .
provide transient voltage suppression rated at num w for num millisecond and fusing with a maximum rating of num a to minimize the effect and repair cost of an extreme over voltage situation or other failure mode .
ensure the modules allow a reduction of the intensity of the light output in response to an input from the traffic signal controller .
ensure the minimum light output when dimmed is not less than num of the minimum maintained luminous intensity as defined in the applicable ite signal head module .
num .
operation supply led modules which start counting when the flashing dont walk indication starts and will countdown to num when the steady dont walk signal turns on .
ensure that the countdown numbers remain continuously illuminated through the flashing dont walk interval .
ensure that the unit maintains a consistent countdown during a short power failure i.e .
traffic controller does not restart .
ensure that if traffic controller restarts that the countdown timer display is turned off until one full pedestrian clearance cycle is timed .
ensure that the unit will turn off the counter if the steady dont walk display starts while the countdown timer is displaying a number other than num .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty ensure that led traffic signal modules and led pedestrian modules are performance warranted to be in compliance with the latest ite and caltrans minimum intensity standards for led traffic signal modules measured at num v ac and num ºf num c for a period of five num years .
ensure that the manufacturers name part number date code and electrical characteristics of the led signal module is visible on the assembly and that each led signal module is identified for warranty purposes .
section numtraffic signal equipment num num blankout signs a .
requirements ensure that each sign provides a clearly visible and definable legend for num feet with ample safety factors .
provide hardware to mount the sign on standard num inch num mm pipe brackets or to mount directly to signal mast arms or span wire or as outlined in the plans .
ensure led blankout signs conform to the requirements of section num for led modules and optical requirements .
supply blankout signs capable of displaying one message at a time in one direction .
num .
case use a case formed from aluminum extrusion fnume and a special aluminum door frame angle .
for alloy numtnum ensure that the wall is at least num inches thick and the corners and joints are at least num inches num mm thick .
use filler arc for all welding .
ensure all hinges and fastening hardware nuts bolts fasteners on the housing and internal components are stainless steel use a brtype takeapart door hinge and draw bolt .
furnish one pnum num inch num mm hub on the top surface .
prime the entire case with zinc chromate bake the inside with two coats of nonyellowing white and paint the outside with two coats of highway yellow .
num .
electrical ensure that all blankout signs are led and conform to current ite standards .
supply all signs with the necessary mounting hardware to provide for mounting as shown on the plans .
provide mounting for one way or two way configurations .
obtain approval for messages and letter dimensions from the engineer .
num .
sun phantom screen attach to each sign a heavyduty aluminum louvertype sun phantom screen covering the entire sign face .
slant the louvers down enough to eliminate the sun glare without obstructing the view of the sign face .
num .
painting paint the signal surfaces inside and out with two coats of ovenbaked enamel in addition to the primer coat .
paint the nonilluminated portions of the signal face black .
paint the housings brackets fittings etc .
highway yellow .
num .
lens use a fabricated threesection plexiglas lens clear face with or without legend which can accept a silkscreened legend on the first surface .
provide a thickness of at least num inches num mm .
num .
legend acceptable legends are as follows text no left turn no right turn signal ahead no turns symbols no left turn symbol no right turn symbol b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numtraffic signal equipment num c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num laneuse control signal a .
requirements ensure that all signals are led and conform to current ite standards .
supply all signals with the necessary mounting hardware to provide for mounting as shown on the plans .
provide mounting for one way or two way configurations .
num .
general requirements a .
weight ensure that oneway units weigh not more than num pounds num kg and twoway units weigh not more than num pounds num kg regardless of messages .
b .
color ensure that the color of laneuse control signal indications is clearly visible for num mile num km at all times under normal atmospheric conditions .
provide laneuse control signals with a visibility angle of a minimum of num degrees .
c. housing ensure that the housing of each signal is polycarbonate or a onepiece corrosion resistant aluminum alloy die casting or equal and meets current related astm specifications .
ensure that all configurations are balanced to provide a plumb hanging unit .
ensure that all components are readily and easily accessible from the open door .
d. housing door ensure that the housing door is onepiece corrosion resistant aluminum or polycarbonate and meets current related astm specifications .
provide two substantial door hinges with stainless steel hinge pins .
ensure hinges are on the left side of each section with a latch boss on the right side .
provide stainless steel dual eye bolt latches or similar approved devices to securely close and latch the housing door .
equip the housing or door with a continuous molded neoprene gasket to make the interior of the unit dustproof and waterproof .
e. wiring provide each signal housing with a complete terminal board .
ensure that one side of terminal strip accommodates socket leads and the other side accommodates field wires .
ensure that the terminal board provides totally separate wiring of each symbol .
ensure each lamp is separately wired to a terminal block located in each housing .
provide each lamp holder socket with colorcoded leads .
for combination symbols colorcode socket leads separately to distinguish between red x yellow x or downward arrow symbols .
provide leads that are no .
num awg type thw num v ac and fixture wire with num ºf num c thermoplastic insulation .
f. visors provide visors not less than num inches num mm long for multiple unit and num inches num mm long for single unit signals for each signal face .
ensure that the visors are constructed of sheet aluminum or polycarbonate and encompass the top and sides of each section .
g. painting section numtraffic signal equipment num paint all signal surfaces inside and out with two coats of oven baked enamel in addition to the primer coat .
paint the insides of the visors flat black .
the nonilluminated portions of the signal face black or dark gray and all housings brackets and fittings highway yellow .
h. hardware and fittings supply all necessary fittings pipe brackets hangers hubs etc .
for the type of mounting specified .
ensure all fittings are aluminum or galvanized coated to prevent rust and corrosion .
i .
sun phantom screen provide each signal face with a screen which substantially counteracts sun phantom effect .
num .
signal display ensure that the symbols which are on an opaque black or dark gray background meet ite requirements and are blacked out when not illuminated .
num .
led optical system a .
ensure that the leds supplied for the lane use control signal meet the specifications for a type module as required in section num .
ensure that each separate color indication in a sign face is illuminated by independent leds b .
ensure that the green arrow indication does not utilize the same termination points as any x indication .
c. ensure that total power required for any single indication does not exceed num w. d. ensure that all modules are contained behind a water tight signal face or lens assembly .
e. ensure that the entire optical system is weatherproof and is not vulnerable to extremes in temperature or moisture .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num pedestrian push button station a .
requirements ensure that pedestrian push buttons are of tamperproof construction and consist of a direct push type button and single momentary contact switch in cast aluminum housing .
the pushbutton cover shall also be of cast aluminum .
the housing and cover shall be free of voids pits dents molding sand excessive foundry grinding marks .
exterior surface shall be smooth and cosmetically acceptable free of molding fins cracks and other exterior blemishes .
provide housing and cover with an alodine conversion coating so as to provide a proper base for paint adhesion .
finish the housing with baked enamel and paint the push button housing and pedestrian heads highway yellow unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
the assembly shall be capable of being mounted to a flat or curved surface .
ensure the assembly includes the appropriate sign as shown in the plan details .
ensure that any screws or bolts are stainless steel and vandal proof .
provide the unit with a num inch num mm threaded opening with plug .
ensure that the assembly is weatherproof and so constructed that when properly installed it will be impossible to receive an electrical shock under any weather condition .
section numtraffic signal equipment num ensure that pedestrian pushbuttons are integrated with a sign as shown in the standard details .
provide the sign size as indicated on the plans .
gdot will allow an adapter of cast aluminum .
gdot will allow one of three options num .
the use of a num inch num mm by num inch num mm cast aluminum plate adapter to upgrade existing push button station num inch num mm by num inch num mm .
num .
push button station assembly num inch num mm by num inch num mm sign wround pushbutton adapter .
num .
the use of a num inch num mm by num inch num mm cast aluminum plate adapter to upgrade existing push button station num inch num mm by num inch num mm .
ensure that the pedestrian push button sign adapter plate is diecast aluminum and separate such that it is interchangeable .
ensure that the pedestrian push button sign adapter assembly be diecast aluminum and attached prior to shipping .
the plate shall be finished with highway yellow baked enamel paint unless otherwise specified by the engineer .
ensure the button assembly is configured to be a mechanical switch with ball and num inch num mm mushroom plunger .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection numd for materials warranties .
num signal head back plate a .
requirements ensure that each back plate is designed to properly shield a traffic signal head from background distractions for better visibility .
design the back plates to extend beyond the signal head to a minimum of num inches num mm on all sides and have all corners rounded with minimum num inch num mm radii .
construct the back plates from uv stabilized polycarbonate or abs plastic material with a finished color of flat black .
ensure that polycarbonate back plates are at least num inches num mm thick abs back plates are at least num inches num mm thick .
design the back plates with predrilled holes to provide for simple attachment to the specified brand size and configuration of traffic signal head with all mounting hardware included .
ensure that the back plates do not interfere with the signal mounting hardware .
ensure that the back plates include louvers .
ensure back plates project a rectangular appearance at night by having a num inch num mm yellow retroreflective strip along the back plate perimeter .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
section numtraffic signal equipment num d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num signal head visors a .
requirements typically visors are one piece tunnel type and removable unless specified otherwise in the signal plans .
ensure that visors are polycarbonate and at least num inches num mm deep for num inch num mm heads .
special angle visors are full circle with the long side at least num inches num mm deep .
ensure that visors provide a positive method of attaching to the door of the signal head that do not allow rotation .
an acceptable method is to provide tabs that use stainless steel screws .
unless otherwise specified by the engineer provide black signal head visors .
if special tools are required for visor adjustment provide one set per project .
coordinate delivery of tools with district signal engineer .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num signal head louvers a .
requirements ensure that louvers with the vanes oriented vertically are directional with a numdegree cutoff right of center .
rotating the louver num degrees will produce a numdegree cutoff left of center .
provide twelveinch num mm louvers with num vanes .
finish all louvered surfaces in flat black .
ensure that programmable louvers are directional with a numdegree cutoff and that all louver surfaces have a flat black finish .
ensure that the units can be installed and programmed in accordance with the manufacturers instruction on visors that are recommended by the manufacturer .
have the programmable louver display approved by the engineer prior to placing the signal in stop and go operation .
if special tools are required for louver adjustment provide one set per project .
coordinate delivery of tools with district signal engineer .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
section numtraffic signal equipment num num hardware for mast arm mounting a .
requirements ensure that signal heads are rigidly mounted to the mast arm .
provide mounting hardware that is in accordance with the following num .
adjustability ensure the mounting bracket is completely adjustable such that it allows rotational adjustment about the bracket axis vertical adjustment rotational adjustment about the mast arm and rotational adjustment from the vertical plane .
num .
attachment ensure the bracket is provided with aircraft grade galvanized steel cables with stainless steel fastening hardware and make a minimum of two wraps around to fasten the bracket to the arm .
ensure the bracket is easily adjustable to fit all sizes of round elliptical or other shaped structure without special tools or equipment .
num .
signalsign accommodations ensure the bracket attaches to the signal or sign to assure maximum rigidity .
when clamping the signal top and bottom ensure a standard bracket accommodates all major signal manufacturers signal for num num and num section signal head configurations .
num .
wiring all electrical wiring shall be completely concealed with the bracket .
the vertical support shall be a gusseted c shaped extruded aluminum tube to accommodate the signal cable regardless of vertical positioning of the tube .
num .
materials the upper and lower arms shall be cast num aluminum or equivalent .
the lower arm shall be internally threaded to accommodate the threaded vertical support tube .
ensure the lower arm is furnished with plastic covers which slide and snap into place .
both arms shall have num tooth serrations cast into the arm to assure a positive lock with signal housing and shall be secured about their rotational axis with setscrews .
ensure the arms have a tribolt arrangement for attachment to the signal housing .
ensure the vertical support is gusseted tube extruded from numtnum aluminum .
ensure the tube includes a vinyl closure strip .
ensure the mast arm clamp assembly is cast from num aluminum alloy or equivalent .
provide an assembly that allows for num degrees of rotation with no internal bracing obstructing the center opening .
provide two aircraft grade galvanized steel cables that have minimum tensile strength of num psi num mpa .
ensure that each bracket is complete with all necessary bolt washers gaskets and miscellaneous items to allow assembly of the signal to the bracket and the bracket to the mast arm .
ensure all aluminum parts have an aldine finish .
all non stainless steel parts shall have a yellow zinc dichromate or galvanize finish .
this item will be approved upon submittal of catalog cuts .
refer to standard detail drawings for additional information .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection numd for materials warranties .
section numtraffic signal equipment num num hardware for signal head pole mounting a .
requirements ensure this item consists of hardware adequate for the specific mounting .
as a minimum provide the following hardware .
num ½ inch pipe nipples of die cast aluminum that are a minimum of num inches num mm and threaded with num ½ inch nps threads on either end .
on the upper and lower arm there shall be a serrated num tooth boss with set screw .
use a tristud adaptor to attach the signal housing to the mounting hardware .
the upper arm shall have a neoprene gasket to provide weather tight fit .
hub plates for pole mounting shall be provided and they shall be appropriate for the particular mounting round or flat .
hardware shall die cast aluminum alloy num or extruded .
all die cast parts shall be cleaned in an alkaline cleaning compound extruded parts shall have an alodine conversion coating to provide proper base for paint adhesion .
the assembly is to be painted federal yellow and baked in an oven .
ensure the assembly is provided with all required hardware .
all other hardware shall be stainless steel .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance ensure that this item consists of hardware as shown in the standard details .
this item will be approved upon submittal of catalog cuts .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num balance adjuster a .
requirements ensure this item consists of hardware that is cast from num stainless steel or num ductile iron or equivalent .
ensure castings are free of voids pits dents molding sand and excessive grinding marks .
exterior surface shall be cosmetically acceptable and free of molding fins cracks and other exterior blemishes .
all hardware shall be supplied and be stainless steel or galvanized .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance ensure this item consists of hardware as shown in the standard details .
this item will be approved upon submittal of catalog cuts .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num hardware for mounting pedestrian head a .
requirements ensure this item meets the same criteria as num.a and is in accordance with the standard details .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numtraffic signal equipment num c. acceptance ensure this item consists of hardware as shown in the standard details .
this item will be approved upon submittal of catalog cuts .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num pedestal pole a .
requirements the pedestal poles support vehicle signal heads pedestrian signal heads ivds and push button .
furnish pedestal poles according to type and overall length .
pedestal pole for vehicle display for one lane ramp metering operation shall be constructed to support one num num mm signal head and one num num mm signal head assembly as shown in the plans .
pedestal pole for ramp meter advance warning sign and flashing beacon shall be constructed to meet the sign manufacturers structural requirements .
pedestal pole mounting adapter shall rigidly attach to the sign cases structural bracing .
cable entrance to the sign case shall be through the inside of the pole .
num .
ensure that all poles are made of one continuous piece of bare finish spun aluminum from top to base connection for the entire height of the pole .
the shaft of appropriate shape may or may not be uniformly tapered from butt to tip .
a pole used to support only a traffic signal may be tapered .
num .
fabricate pole caps when required of cast material and secure in place with setscrews .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num pedestal pole base a .
requirements ensure that all design radii are smooth and intact .
ensure that the exterior surface finish is smooth and cosmetically acceptable by being free of molding fins cracks and other exterior blemishes .
fabricate from new aluminum ingot .
do not use scrap materials .
minimum requirements are as follows aluminum alloy no .
num elongation in num in .
num mm num tensile strength ksi mpa num num brinell hardness num yeild strength ksi mpa num num shear strength ksi mpa num num section numtraffic signal equipment num num .
ensure this item consists of square cast aluminum with bare finish and has a minimum weight of num pounds num kg .
thread the upper end to receive a num inch num mm national pipe thread npt pipe shaft .
num .
design the base so that it may be fastened to a foundation with four num num inch num mm anchor bolts located num degrees apart on the bottom of the base .
provide slots in the bottom of the base num inch num mm wide and num inches num mm long measured along the circumference of the bolt circle allowing a proper fit even if the bolts are placed slightly off center .
num .
design the base to accommodate bolt circles of a minimum of num inches num mm through a maximum of num inches num mm and anchor bolts with a minimum of num inches num mm through num inch num mm diameter .
num .
design the base with a removable plastic door .
ensure that the door opening is free of burrs and sharp edges and is no less that num inches num mm square .
attach the door to the base using one socket button head screw to prevent unauthorized entry .
num .
ensure that the base meets or exceeds current aashto breakaway requirements .
provide test reports from an fhwa approved independent laboratory certifying that the base has been tested and meets all applicable requirements .
in addition supply a statement of certification from the fhwa stating such tests have been accepted and approved .
num .
in order to prove structural soundness provide a certification from a recognized independent structural laboratory certifying that the base will withstand a bending moment of num ftlbs num num nm .
num .
ensure that the door is injection molded from abs plastic to deter vandalism and theft and has the following properties test astm method value tensile yield num inches num mm dnum num psi num num kpa flexural yield dnum num psi num num kpa rockwell hardness dnum num r scale notched izod dnum num ftlb.in .
num nmmm num .
ensure that the door exhibits the following properties has an edge thickness of num inches num mm and a minimum thickness of num inches num mm contains flameretardant material meeting or exceeding underwriters laboratories ul num test h.b gray aluminum tone in color unless otherwise specified contains ultraviolet inhibitors and stabilizers for protection against uv degradation is injection molded with a smooth front finish has flat and straight surfaces without blisters buckling or warping have reinforcing ribs contains two num injection molded lugs on the bottom of the door with slots of the proper width and depth to fit the base door opening .
num .
supply the base with a set of four num anchor bolts num inch num mm diameter by num inches num mm in length material per astm a numa numm galvanized per astm a numa numm .
supply num hex nut and num flat washer with each bolt .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numtraffic signal equipment num num pedestal pole foundation anchor assembly a .
requirements provide foundation anchor assembly that is num inches num mm in diameter by num inches num mm with a single helical blade and a square fixed baseplate with combination underside holthead retainer and dirt scrappers allowing flush mount with the ground .
provide baseplate that is steel and conforms to astm anum material .
provide pipe with helical blade that is manufactured from astm anumerw grade b steel .
ensure num inch pipe has num inch num mm by num inch nummm entrance hole num inches below the steel plate .
ensure the anchor assembly is hot dipped galvanized finish after fabrication and complies with astm anum .
ensure base plate has four slotted mounting holes to fit bolt circles from num ¾ inch nummm to num ¾ inch num mm .
provide num slotted mounting hole with a ¾ inch keyhole slot to permit bolt installation and replacement from the top surface without digging under the baseplate .
ensure assembly is furnished with quantity of four ¾ inchnum mm numnc x num inchnum mm square head galvanized astm num anchor bolts quantity of four ¾ inchnum mm plain flat galvanized washers quantity of four num inchnum mm thick galvanized plate washers and quantity of four ¾ inch num mm galvanized hex nuts .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num timber poles a .
requirements ensure that all timber poles meet the requirements of section num .
poles must be inspected and tested by the gdot office of materials and hammer stamped by the inspector .
ensure that all poles have a brand or stamp num feet num m from the butt that notes the type wood date of manufacture manufacturer class and length .
ensure that all timber poles that have guy attachments or support span wire or arms that suspend signal heads over the roadway or sidewalk are class ii .
poles that support loop leadin messenger or communications cable that does not have guy attachments may be class iv size .
section numtraffic signal equipment num ensure that all poles meet the requirements in the table below unless otherwise noted on the traffic signal plans or list of materials .
minimum circumference class nominal length ft m at num feet num m from butt in .
mm ii num num num num ii num num num num ii num num num num ii num num num num ii num num num num iv num num num num iv num num num num iv num num num num iv num num num num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num traffic signal pull box a .
requirements ensure traffic signal pull boxes are matched assemblies consisting of boxes and covers from the same manufacturer .
for all pull boxes except types num and num use pull boxes manufactured in a single unit for the full depth required in the size in an open bottom configuration .
do not use stacked pull boxes .
for pull boxes types num and num use stacked pull boxes as shown in the plans where the top unit is open bottom and the bottom unit is closed bottom manufacture .
in the bottom unit provide a drain hole .
provide pull boxes that are nonmetalic and gray or tan color .
ensure that pull boxes meet all requirements of ansi num num or current edition tier num .
provide compliance test documentation .
provide a ¼inch num mm galvanized wire mesh between the gravel base and the open bottom box or closed bottom box drain hole for all pull box types .
use type num pull boxes num inches x num inches num mm x num mm for loop leadins .
when loop leadins and splices and other cables are required use type num pull boxes num inches x num inches num mm x num mm or type num pull boxes num inches x num inches num mm x num mm .. use type num nums num nums num and num pull boxes for fiber optic cable .
furnish one piece covers for all pull boxes except types num nums and num .
furnish twopiece covers for types num nums and num .
furnish covers with a skidresistant surface with a minimum coefficient of friction of num when tested in accordance with astm cnum .
furnish covers with stainless steel holddown bolts minimum size num .
furnish covers with the logo traffic signal for pull box types num num and num and with other pull box types when installed for traffic signal cabling at a traffic signal .
section numtraffic signal equipment num unless otherwise shown in the plans or installed for traffic signal cabling at a traffic signal furnish covers with the logo gdot communications for pull box types num nums num nums num and num .
furnish pull box types num num num and num with factoryinstalled cable racks and rack hooks .
cable racks and rack hooks shall be hotdipped galvanized steel .
each cable rack rail shall be minimum num inches num mm in length with rack hook mounting holes on the entire length .
install two racks on each of the pull box long side walls .
for type num and num pull boxes only each cable rack rail may be comprised of two minimum num inch num mm units installed on the stacked box side walls .
mount cable racks to the side walls using minimum num stainless steel hardware .
furnish a minimum of four rack hooks minimum num inch length num mm per pull box .
furnish an additional four rack hooks for each through cable stored in the pull box .
furnish an additional two rack hooks for each splice closure stored in the pull box .
furnish types num and num pull boxes with factoryinstalled nonmetallic conduit terminators for sch .
num and sdrnum numinch num mm of the quantity and location as shown in the plans or for a different conduit size if shown in the plans .
terminator bodies shall be manufactured from highimpact polystyrene or approved equivalent .
when joining conduits of dissimilar materials furnish an airtight and watertight conduit adhesive intended for direct contact underground use .
refer to the standard detail drawings and the traffic signal design manual for further information .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num prefabricated controller cabinet base a .
requirements provide controller cabinet bases that are precast polymer concrete and grey in color .
ensure the prefabricated controller cabinet base has the correct bolt pattern for the cabinets to be installed .
provide prefabricated controller cabinet bases with unc inserts as shown on plans .
unc inserts shall be stainless steel and be designed for a minimum of num foot pounds num nm of torque .
ensure that prefabricated controller cabinet bases are designed to withstand wind loading of num mph num kmh with the cabinets as shown in the plans mounted .
ensure that prefabricated controller cabinet bases are designed for a minimum static vertical load of num pounds num kgover a num inch num mm by num inch num mm by num inch num mm thick distribution plate and withstand a tested load of num pounds num kg .
ensure that prefabricated controller cabinet bases are designed for a minimum lateral load of num pounds num kg over an num inch num mm by num inch num mm by num inch num mm steel plate applied to the longest side and shall withstand a tested load of num pounds num kg .
the prefabricated controller cabinet base shall withstand a num footpound impact administered with a numpound weight having a c tup without puncture or splitting in accordance with astm dnum .
the prefabricated controller cabinet base shall meet the requirement of astm dnum section num procedure num .
provide a copy of all test reports from a certified lab along with the materials certification package .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numtraffic signal equipment num c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num loop leadin cable a .
requirements ensure that loop detector leadin cable is no .
num awg numpair shielded cable that meets imsa specification num .
ensure that identification markings are stamped on the jacket .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num loop detector wire a .
requirements ensure that loop detector wire meets imsa specification num num and is num awg .
for special applications loop detection wire that meets imsa specification num num awg may be used as directed by the engineer .
stamp identification markings on the cable jacket .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num aerial duct signal cable a .
requirements ensure that aerial or duct conduit no .
num awg stranded numconductor with black polyethylene pe jacket and num v ac rating meets imsa specification num .
use conductors that are straight not twisted pairs .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
section numtraffic signal equipment num c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num selfsupporting twisted pair aerial signal communications cable a .
requirements ensure that selfsupporting figure eight aerial signal communications cable no .
num awg stranded numpair conductors is rated at num v ac and meet imsa specification num .
use conductors that are twisted pairs with copper tape shield under a black pe jacket .
ensure that messenger strand is num inch num mm numstrand and conforms to astm a num siemensmartin grade or better with a class a coating .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num underground feeder cable type uf a .
requirements ensure that underground feeder cable type uf wground has two num conductors with pvcnylon jacket and a minimum num v ac rating per ul num .
twoconductor no .
num awg wire may be used .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num messenger guy strand span wire a .
requirements ensure that all messenger and guy strand span wire conforms to astm a num extra high strength grade or better with a class a coating numwire span wire .
ensure ¼inch num mm messenger guy strand shall be used to support interconnect cable or as tether spans .
messenger guy strand num inch num mm shall be used only where it is essential to match an existing numinch num mm span wire that will not be replaced as part of a new installation .
ensure all span wire for signal heads blank out sign optically programmed heads lane control signs standard aerial or sidewalk guys uses a minimum messenger guy strand num inch num mm as a minimum size .
section numtraffic signal equipment num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num power disconnect box a .
requirements ensure that all power disconnect boxes are nema numr num v ac num amp phase nummetal nonfused num pole .
ensure the disconnect box is supplied with a padlock keyed as per directions of district signal engineer .
provide power disconnect box that is not fused and does not have a circuit breaker .
supply with a service grounding kit .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num cable ties a .
requirements ensure that all cable ties are nylon ultraviolet resistant black and consist of the following as a minimum nominal length num inches num mm width num inches num mm tensile strength num pounds num kg b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
section numtraffic signal equipment num num lashing rod a. requirementsensure that all lashing rods are sized in accordance with messenger and cables diameters to be supported .
provide lashing rods that are of the same material as the messenger or guy strand .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num stainless steel lashing wire a .
requirements provide lashing wire that is type num stainless steel with num inch num mm diameter .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num guy guards a .
requirements ensure that all guy guards are high impact resistant pvc with ultraviolet stabilizers added for retention of color .
ensure that insulators attach to the guy so that they can not easily be removed .
use guy guards which are yellow unless otherwise directed .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num guy strain insulators a .
requirements ensure guy strain insulators are protected from the environment including the effects of voltage ultraviolet rays and acid rain by a fully bonded electrically tackfree and impenetrable silicone rubber sheath .
each insulator shall be ul proof tested and permanently marked to show date of test .
section numtraffic signal equipment num b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num universal closure kit a .
requirements supply a universal signal closure kit to seal the signal head at either the top or bottom .
ensure that the kit will fit any manufacturers signal head top or bottom without the use of special tools or modification .
num .
ensure that the gasket is num durometer neoprene .
num .
ensure that closure cap is injection molded abs plastic .
the plastic is to be loaded with uv stabilizers .
num .
ensure that adapter bar is made so that it will secure the closure cap and compensate for varying thickness of signal heads .
num .
provide two num nummm screws to fit any manufacturers signal head .
ensure that one screw is num inches num mm in length and the second screw is num inch num mm in length .
num .
pack each assembly in a clear plastic bag .
mark the bag with the manufacturers name and part number .
include the universal signal closure kit in a package containing the span wire clamp and tristud wire entrance fitting .
num .
ensure that the closure cap is molded to closely match the color of the signal head federal yellow .
the adapter bar and screws are to be zinc plated steel .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num cast aluminum span wire clamp a .
requirements provide span wire clamps that are cast from aluminum alloy num or equivalent free of voids pits dents molding sand and excessive foundry grinding marks .
ensure that all design radii are smooth and intact .
provide an exterior surface finish that is smooth and cosmetically acceptable free of molding fins cracks and other exterior blemishes .
ensure that span wire clamps are fabricated from aluminum ingot with minimum requirements as follows aluminum alloy no .
num yield strength ksi mpa num num tensile strength ksi mpa num num brinell hardness num elongating in num inches num mm num section numtraffic signal equipment num num .
ensure that the span wire clamp can accommodate cables num inch num mm to num inch num mm diameter .
num .
ensure that the weight is less than num pounds num kg with hardware .
num .
ensure that the span wire clamp have a minimum overall length of num inches num mm .
num .
ensure that the span wire clamp have a centerline dimension from cable to clevis pin of num inches num mm num inches num mm .
num .
ensure that the span wire clamp have a cast aluminum cable bar to protect the cable when tightening the ubolts .
num .
ensure that the span wire clamp have a mounting opening of num inches num mm num inches num mm .
num .
ensure that the span wire clamp have num inch num mm num npt ubolts with num inch num mm lock washers and nuts .
num .
ensure that the clevis pin are num inch num mm diameter with a length of num inches num mm and secured with a hump back stainless steel cotter pin .
num .
ensure that the clamp and cable bar have an alodine num conversion coating to help resists oxidation .
num .
ensure that the clevis pin and hardware are galvanized per astm numa numm or stainless steel .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num cast aluminum tristud span wire entrance fitting a .
requirements ensure that the tristud span wire entrance fittings are cast from aluminum alloy num or equivalent free of voids pits dents molding sand and excessive foundry grinding marks .
ensure that the all design radii are smooth and intact .
ensure that the exterior surface finish is smooth and cosmetically acceptable free of molding fin cracks and other exterior blemishes .
ensure that the material is fabricated from aluminum ingot with minimum requirements as follows aluminum alloy no .
num yield strength ksi mpa num num tensile strength ksi mpa num num brinell hardness num elongation in num inches num mm num num .
ensure that the tristud span wire entrance fitting has a mounting support at the top of the wire entrance num inches num mm thick num inches num mm .
num .
ensure that the tristud span wire entrance fitting weight is not less than num pounds num kg with hardware .
num .
ensure that the mounting support has at least six num clevis openings for adjustment with suspension bracing between every two num openings .
num .
ensure that the tristud span wire entrance has a minimum of num inch num mm diameter throughout for wire access and that wire access is free of burrs and casting webs .
num .
ensure that the wire entrance opening is recessed and has a neoprene grommet with sealed membrane sections .
num .
ensure that the signal head attachment end is serrated and has a minimum of numsignal head centering bosses extending num inches num mm from the serrations .
section numtraffic signal equipment num num .
ensure that the serrations have a numtooth design to match the signal head .
num .
ensure that three num stainless steel studs are cast into the wire entrance fitting .
ensure that the studs are num inches num mm and extend num inches num mm num inches num mm beyond the serrations .
provide each tristud span wire entrance fitting with a tristud hardware kit .
num .
ensure that the tristud span wire entrance fitting has an alodine conversion coating to provide a proper base for paint adhesion .
ensure that the assembly matches display housing per plans and baked in a drying oven after painting .
num .
ensure that the all hardware is galvanized or stainless steel .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num bull rings a .
requirements provide bull rings that are galvanized weldless steel num inch num mm diameter .
submit catalog cuts for approval .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
num ramp meter enforcement device a .
requirements for each metered lane provide one ramp meter enforcement device mounted on the back of one signal per lane and wired directly to the red signal display refer to num.l .
this installation shall include a red num led array allngap pixel housing num aluminum powder coated swivel bracket num inch lens with an aluminum hood .
mounted and adjusted as per the plans .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
section numtraffic signal equipment num num vinyl electrical tape a .
requirements ensure electrical tape used is flame retardant cold and weather resistant .
provide tape that is rated for num volts and for use between num f num c and num f num c. ensure tape is num inches num mm thick and meets the requirements of ul num and milinum .
provide tape that remains flexible with abrasion resistance .
b .
fabrication general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty refer to subsection num.d for materials warranties .
section numwireless communications equipment num general description this section provides specifications for a variety of wireless communications equipment .
this work consists of furnishing materials and installing a wireless radio communications system with all necessary hardware in accordance with the plans and special provisions to provide a data link between subscriber intelligent transportation system its or signal field devices and master radio units connected to the fiber optic network .
this specification includes the following radio systems spread spectrum serial and frequency shift keying fsk radio systems with bidirectional full duplex communications between two lineof sight antennas using license free frequency hopping spread spectrum technology operating in the num mhz frequency broadband ethernet ieee num point to point and point to multipoint radio systems operating in the num ghz and num ghz unlicensed bands as well as the licensed num ghz spectrum wimax ieee num point to multipoint radio systems operating in the num num ghz range numgnumg cellular router this work includes all test periods warranties and guarantees as designated in subsequent sections and response to maintenance and operational issues as described in subsequent sections .
the contractor shall apply for obtain and pay for all utility services fcc licensing requirements and pole attachment permits that are necessary for the wireless communications installation and operation required in the plans .
the contractor shall maintain these utility services until final acceptance of the communications system .
upon final acceptance make an orderly and uninterrupted transfer of these services and permits to the department local government or other jurisdiction that will be responsible for subsequent maintenance and operation .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numcontrol of materials section numchangeable message signs section numstrain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies section numwireless communications equipment num section numtraffic signal installation section numelectrical wire cable and conduit section nummast arm assemblies section numelectrical wire and cable section numelectrical conduit section numtraffic signal equipment section numfiber optic system section num cctv section num detection systems section numcommunications and electronic equipment b. referenced documents national electrical manufacturers association nema traffic control systems standards no .
ts num nema traffic control systems standards no .
tsnum national electrical code nec national electrical safety code nesc num submittals the following charts provide the contractor with an outline of the submittal requirements for the equipment and components for the following pay items .
this chart is to be used as a guide and does not relieve the contractor from submitting additional information to form a complete submittal package .
provide submittal data for all equipment materials test procedures and routine maintenance procedures required for these items as required in these special provisions .
section numwireless communications equipment num for each piece of wireless system equipment submit to the engineer for approval two num hard copies of the manufacturers descriptive literature catalog cuts technical data operational documentation service and maintenance documentation and all other materials required within these specifications and an electronic copy of all material which includes but is not limited to all the aforementioned documents .
electronic documents shall be placed on a cd as adobe pdf documents and delivered to the engineer .
products appearing on the qualified products list qpl are exempt from normal submittal process .
these products have been evaluated by the office of traffic operations and have proven their capability of meeting the applicable georgia department of transportation specification .
any of these products may be used without submitting catalogue cuts sampling or pretesting .
the contractor shall submit a letter to the engineer stating which qpl items they will use .
the engineer andor department designee must ascertain that the construction item is the same material identified on the qpl and will acknowledge receipt of these items in the project diary or as required by the construction manual .
it is the contractors responsibility to verify all wireless radio links and frequencies prior to installation of wireless radio products .
provide all necessary equipment and personnel to test the ability to use frequency hopping spread spectrum wireless broadband wireless ethernet wimax radio wireless communications or cellular coverage of a specific carrier at a site specific location as determined in the plans .
contractors site survey or studies shall be completed by qualified technicians applicable to the wireless technology being deployed .
equipment shall be specific to the application and frequencies being implemented and shall study a broad range of wireless frequency spectrums .
the site survey or study shall allow the obtainment of the following results for the site specific locations signal strength dbm fade margin db sn ratio data integrity poll test and a complete frequency spectrum scan .
the wireless links shall be shown on drawings that depict elevation changes and obstacles that identify any objects that may interfere with the wireless signal .
final locations and type of antennas and any necessary repeater stations are to be approved by the engineer .
the study shall be conducted well in advance of the installation so that prudent decisions on the applicable technology can be made .
the contractor shall supply the engineer with all spectrum study reports and recommendations or concerns as to the use of the wireless technology of all applicable sites on the project .
submittal requirements table material specification reference catalog cut cuts mfg detail .
specification shop drng drawings lab test report installation proced .
mainten .
proced .
test plan test reports training schedule warranty submittal due date calendar days after ntp spread spectrum transceiver fsk rsnum num x x x x x x x x num days spread spectrum transceiver rs num num x x x x x x x x num days wireless radio repeater station num x x x x x x x x num days num mhz antennas power divider spd num num x x x x num days broadband ethernet radio num x x x x x x x x num days broadband ethernet radio antennas power divider spd num .num x x x x num days wimax base station and subscriber units poe injector as applicable num .num x x x x x x x x num days numgnumg cellular router num x x x x x x x x num days training and warranties x x num days section numwireless communications equipment num provide asbuilt documentation of all wireless installations showing mounting locations mounting heights serial numbers and model numbers of all wireless equipment used .
num materials this section shall summarize device specific material requirements for each wireless radio system .
ensure that all wireless equipment and materials of this specification meet all of the following general requirements as well as the devicespecific material requirements .
a .
requirements general submit to the engineer material specifications information on all materials proposed for use on the project .
written approval of all wireless equipment submittals is required from the state traffic signal engineer prior to beginning any work on the wireless communication installation .
all equipment furnished shall be new and meet the requirements of the most recent editions andor standards of the following underwriters laboratory incorporated ul electronic industries association eia national electric code nec american society of testing and materials astm american national standards institute ansi international municipal signal association imsa national electrical manufacturers association nema applicable standards specifications and regulations of the georgia department of transportation traffic signal electrical facility navigator support tsef num e. confederate avenue building num atlanta ga num b .
fabrication general general provisions num through num .
c. acceptance general general provisions num through num .
d. materials warranty general provide all manufacturers warranties and guarantees for all wireless equipment purchased and turned over to the department as part of this contract .
ensure that warranties and guarantees are consistent with those provided as customary trade practices or as otherwise specified in the plans standard specifications supplemental specifications or special provisions .
ensure that manufacturers and suppliers warranties and guarantees are transferable to the agency or user that is responsible for wireless network maintenance are continuous throughout their duration and state that they are subject to such transfer .
ensure equipment provided under this specification shall be warranted by the manufacturer to be free from defects in materials and workmanship for a period of a minimum of three years from project final acceptance .
ensure the manufacturer will repair any faulty equipment during this period at no charge to the department for parts labor or shipping to and from the factory .
section numwireless communications equipment num num spread spectrum wireless radio transceiver unit with fsk and rs num connection type a type b type c provide a wireless communications radio for point to point or point to multipoint to support fsk communications using num wire full duplex or num wire half duplex and rs num serial communications .
both interfaces are provided on the unit but only one interface is required to be active in each application .
this unit is to be supplied with power supply and configuration software .
a .
requirements furnish a spread spectrum wireless radio unit with all necessary hardware excluding antennae to provide a data link between field devices i.e .
traffic signal controllers dynamic message signs etc .. radio unit will use a bidirectional full duplex communications channel between two lineofsight or near lineofsight antennas using license free frequency hopping spread spectrum technology operating in the num mhz frequency band .
num .
nummhz wireless radio unit furnish license free num mhz radio modems with configuration software .
design radio modems to work in point topoint pointtomultipoint configurations .
ensure the spread spectrum wireless radio meets the following minimum requirements license free ism num mhz spread spectrum radio band frequency hopping spread spectrum technology direct sequence spread spectrum technology is not acceptable bidirectional full duplex programmable radio frequency rf output levels of nummw to num watt rsnum interface capable of operating from num bps to num kbps with num or num bit format or num bps fsk num or numwire bell num standard systems configurations dbnumf connector for rsnum port and rj num for the fsk port or approved equivalent builtin storeandforward single radio repeater no back to back radios setups are allowed to accomplish this function num bit encryption receiver sensitivity of numdbm num ber antenna port reverse polarity threaded normalized connectorfemale rp tncf antenna connector front panel indicators for power transmit data receive data data port indicator rssi indicator operating temperature of num to num degrees f num to num degrees c at num to num humidity power supply requirements type a wall adaptor num vac ulcsa wall cube plug in module with num vdc num amp nominal output .
type b powered from the signal cabinet input rack through the edge connector in standard num input file type c power will be supplied through the backplane printed circuit board of the num controller ensure that the wireless radio unit is a fully functional field device i.e .
connected equipment does not require any field device modifications with regards to hardware or software .
num .
type a radio shelf mounted num mhz spread spectrum radio this unit shall be supplied as a shelf mounted radio with all cabling and power supplies necessary to mount on a cabinet shelf and plug into a wall unit receptacle .
section numwireless communications equipment num num .
type b radio rack mounted num mhz spread spectrum radio this unit is to be supplied such that it may be installed in standard num input file or nema tsnum ts num standard detector rack .
the rack will provide power for the unit .
the rack mount unit shall not use any other backplane signals on the rack .
num .
type c radio num mounted num mhz spread spectrum radio this unit is to be plugged into the num communications slot to provide wireless communication for the controller .
this unit will support all num numa communications module functionality as well as providing radio modem functions .
num .
configuration software all types furnish units with a window based software program that uses a gui graphical user interface to provide remote programming radio configuration remote maintenance diagnostics and spectrum analyzer features .
provide nocost configuration and diagnostic software that can be upgraded in the future at no additional charge .
ensure the radio modem is configurable from a single location i.e .
master radio location via supplied software no extra cost .
furnish software supplied with drivers to allow easy setup with all industry standard traffic signal controllers including num controllers containing custom software written specifically for the georgia department of transportation .
ensure the supplied software contains prewritten drivers for industry standard radar and video detection packages and dynamic message sign controllers .
num spread spectrum wireless radio transceiver unit with rs num connection provide wireless communications point to point or point to multipoint to support rs num serial communications .
this unit is to be supplied with power supply and configuration software .
a .
requirements furnish a spread spectrum wireless radio unit with all necessary hardware excluding antennae to provide a data link between field devices i.e .
traffic signal controllers dynamic message signs etc .. radio unit will use a bidirectional full duplex communications channel between two lineofsight or near lineofsight antennas using license free frequency hopping spread spectrum technology operating in the num mhz frequency band .
num .
nummhz wireless radio unit furnish license free nummhz radio modems with configuration software .
design radio modems to work in point topoint and pointtomultipoint configurations .
ensure the spread spectrum wireless radio meets the following minimum requirements license free ism num mhz spread spectrum radio band frequency hopping spread spectrum technology direct sequence spread spectrum technology is not acceptable bidirectional full duplex programmable radio frequency rf output levels of nummw to num watt rsnum interface capable of operating from num bps to num kbps with num or num bit format dbnumf connector for rsnum port or approved equivalent num bit cyclic redundancy check crc error checking with auto retransmit builtin storeandforward single radio repeater no back to back radios setups are allowed to accomplish this function num bit encryption receiver sensitivity of numdbm num ber antenna port reverse polarity threaded normalized connectorfemale rp tncf antenna connector front panel indicators power transmit data section numwireless communications equipment num receive data rssi indicator operating temperature of num to num degrees f num to num degrees c at num to num humidity power supply requirements wall adaptor num vac ulcsa wall cube plug in module with num vdc num amp nominal output .
num .
configuration software furnish units with a window based software program that uses a gui graphical user interface to provide remote programming radio configuration remote maintenance diagnostics and spectrum analyzer features .
provide nocost configuration and diagnostic software that can be upgraded in the future at no additional charge .
ensure the radio modem is configurable from a single location i.e .
master radio location via supplied software provided with the radio unit at no extra cost .
furnish software supplied with drivers to allow easy setup with all industry standard its equipment .
num self contained wireless radio transceiver repeater station provide wireless communications point to point or point to multipoint .
radio modem repeater station to extend the range of communications within the system .
the unit is to be furnished in its own cabinet with all necessary hardware and includes power supply and configuration software .
a .
requirements furnish an operational wireless repeater radio system complete with a nemanumx enclosure for mounting on a pole .
furnish a wireless radio unit with all necessary hardware including antenna mounting hardware and cabinet to provide a data link between field devices i.e .
traffic signal controllers dynamic message signs etc .. radio unit will use a bi directional full duplex communications channel between two lineofsight or near lineofsight antennas using licensed or license free wireless technology as determined by the radio type .
the repeater function shall also allow for a communications drop to a local device at the repeater location .
num .
repeater unit furnish licensed or license free radio modems with configuration software for the repeater location .
design radio modems to work in pointtopoint and pointtomultipoint configurations as determined by the application being repeated .
ensure the wireless radio meets the requirements of the radio signal that it is repeating as detailed in other sections of this specification .
the repeater station shall include a nemanumx rated cabinet enclosure antennas and all cabling required to repeat the wireless signal num .
cabinet furnish the cabinet shell constructed from unpainted aluminum .
ensure that all nonaluminum hardware on the cabinet is stainless steel or an approved noncorrosive alternate .
ensure that all electrical components and circuit breakers are sized according to the wireless radio manufacturer specifications .
ensure that the cabinet surge protection meets the requirements of section num section a part num surge protection .
ensure that all components are arranged for easy access during servicing .
provide sufficient size so that the equipment installed will not occupy more than num percent of the total cabinet volume .
provide enclosure latching hardware which will allow for external locking capability .
num .
antenna furnish and install a directional antenna and coaxial cable to specifications in this specification and applicable to the technology being repeated .
the antenna shall not have a voltage standing wave ratio vswr rating more than num nominal vswr ratio of num preferred or shall adhere to the requirements of the antenna as outlined in this specification .
furnish and install surge protection devices installed in line between each antenna and the radio modem inside the cabinet .
ensure the surge protection device is compatible with the equipment and meets the minimum specifications of the applicable radio surge protection device .
section numwireless communications equipment num num .
configuration software furnish units with a window based software program that uses a gui graphical user interface to provide remote programming radio configuration remote maintenance diagnostics and spectrum analyzer features .
provide at no additional cost to the department configuration and diagnostic software that can be upgraded in the future at no additional charge .
ensure the radio modem is configurable from a single location i.e .
master radio location via supplied software no extra cost .
furnish software supplied with drivers to allow easy setup with all industry standard traffic signal controllers including num controllers containing custom software written specifically for the georgia department of transportation .
ensure the supplied software contains prewritten drivers for industry standard radar and video detection packages and dynamic message sign controllers or as directed by the engineer .
num num mhz directional radio antenna yagi and connecting cable provide wireless communications antenna with connecting cables including surge protection to the radio unit .
a .
requirements furnish a directional antenna that will interface with a radio unit .
included with this item are the cables to connect with the radio unit and surge protection .
num .
yagi directional antenna furnish an antenna that meets the following minimum specifications frequency range compatible with supplied radio in num mhz spectrum nominal gain num dbd or numdbi or approved equivalent front to back ratio num db horizontal beamwidth at half power points num degree vertical beamwidth at half power points num degree power rating uhf frequency num watts lightning protection dc ground termination coaxial pigtail with a standard ntype female connector rated wind velocity num mph num kph rated wind velocity with .num inch radial ice num mph num kph projected wind surface area flat plane equivalent num ftsq .
num msq number elements num for a nominal num db gain num for a nominal num db gain allows for vertical or horizontal polarization vswr num maximum furnish mounting hardware to secure the antenna to the metal pole or wood pole as recommended by the manufacturer of the antenna and as approved by the engineer .
num .
coaxial cable furnish a lmr num cable or equivalent antenna coaxial cable to provide a link between the antenna and the lightning arrestor that meets the following minimum specifications .
section numwireless communications equipment num attenuation db per num feet num mhz num db power rating num mhz num kw center conductor num copper clad aluminum dielectric cellular pe num shield aluminum tape num tinned copper braid num jacket black uv protected polyethylene bend radius num with less than num ohm impedance change at bend impedance num ohms capacitance per foot num pfft end connectors standard ntype male connectors on both ends num .
lightning arrestor furnish a lightning arrestor installed in line between each antenna and its designated radio modem inside the equipment cabinet .
furnish a lightning arrestor that meets the following minimum specifications surge numka iec num numus waveform num joules turnon num vdc num num ns for numkv ns insertion loss num db over frequency range temperature num to num degrees f storageoperating num degrees fnum c to num c storageoperating num c vibration numg up to numhz utilizes ulnumb listed gas tube throughput energy num uj for numka num s waveform throughput voltage num vpk vswr num frequency range num mhz to num mhz max power vhf numw uhf low numw nummhz to numghz numw multistrike capability low strike throughput energy standard ntype female connector on both the surge side and protected side connectors num num mhz omni directional radio antenna and connecting cable provide wireless communications antenna with connecting cables including surge protection to the radio unit .
a .
requirements furnish an omni directional antenna that will interface with a radio unit .
included with this item are the cables to connect with the radio unit and surge protection .
num .
omni directional antenna furnish an omni directional antenna that will allow the system to function as designed .
furnish numdb or numdb antennas that meet the following minimum specifications frequency range compatible with supplied radio in num mhz spectrum nominal gain typical gains of num or num db dependent upon gain needed for application termination standard ntype female connector impedance num ohms vswr num section numwireless communications equipment num vertical beam width num db num degrees num db num degrees lightning protection dc ground power rating uhf frequency num watts rated wind velocity num mph num kph shall be of solid single piece construction mount in a vertical direction and limit to vertically polarized rf systems furnish mounting hardware to secure the antenna to the metal concrete or wood pole as recommended by the manufacturer of the antenna and as approved by the engineer .
num .
coaxial cable furnish a lmr num cable or antenna coaxial cable to provide a link between the antenna and the lightning arrestor that meets the following minimum specifications .
attenuation db per num feet num mhz num db power rating num mhz num kw center conductor num copper clad aluminum dielectric cellular pe num shield aluminum tape num tinned copper braid num jacket black uv protected polyethylene bend radius num with less than num ohm impedance change at bend impedance num ohms capacitance per foot num pfft end connectors standard ntype male connectors on both ends .
meet industry standard db loss when attaching connectors num .
lightning arrestor furnish a lightning arrestor installed in line between each antenna and its designated radio modem inside the equipment cabinet .
furnish a lightning surge protection device that meets the following minimum specifications surge numka iec num numus waveform num joules turnon num vdc num num ns for numkv ns insertion loss num db over frequency range temperature num to num degrees f storageoperating num degrees f num c to num c storageoperating num c vibration numg up to numhz utilizes ulnumb listed gas tube throughput energy num uj for numka num s waveform throughput voltage num vpk vswr num frequency range num mhz to num mhz max power vhf numw uhf low numw nummhz to numghz numw multistrike capability low strike throughput energy standard ntype female connector on both the surge side and protected side connectors num num mhz antenna power divider provide item splitting the radio antenna connection for locations where two antennas are required with one radio unit .
this item is to include a t splitter and two cables .
section numwireless communications equipment num a .
requirements furnish a t splitter for providing two separate antenna connections to one radio unit .
the splitter shall be weatherproof and provide for low insertion loss .
all connectors will be type n female .
the splitter shall be furnished with two num foot cables of lmr num cable or equal .
the cables will provide type n male connectors on either end .
these cables will provide a link between the antennas and the splitter .
num .
power divider furnish a two way weatherproof splitter with the following minimum characteristics .
power division numway frequency num num mhz dimensions less than num x num insertion loss num db max input power num watts impedance num ohm vswr ref .
to num ohm max num connectors n female num .
cables furnish two lmr num cable or equivalent antenna coaxial cable to provide a link between the antenna and the lightning arrestor that meets the following minimum specifications attenuation db per num feet num mhz num db power rating num mhz num kw center conductor num copper clad aluminum dielectric cellular pe num shield aluminum tape num tinned copper braid num jacket black uv protected polyethylene bend radius num with less than num ohm impedance change at bend impedance num ohms capacitance per foot num pfft end connectors standard ntype male connectors on both ends .
meet industry standard db loss for connectors num broadband wireless ethernet radio .
a .
requirements the broadband ethernet wireless radio network shall be designed as part of the communication system for the project and shall operate with minimal disruption to the device communications .
the manufacturer of the radio devices shall be able to provide various frequencies of num ghz and num ghz unlicensed as well as the licensed num ghz frequency as selected by the department .
all radios shall be supplied with the appropriate software and cabling necessary for full configuration of the radio system including serial and cat nume cables as necessary for programming and connection to local switches .
radios shall be configured in either pointtopoint or pointtomultipoint configuration as per the plans .
all antenna cable attenuation shall be respective and appropriately sized to the frequency being attenuated at industry standard .
should a power over ethernet poe radio be submitted by the contractor the contractor shall use the appropriate poe field switch as outlined in section num of the standard specifications .
should a switch not be available and a standalone poe injector is required the injector shall be supplied with an appropriate surge protection device to protect it from surging that is typical for plugin type devices .
submit to the department the surge protection device that will be used with the poe injector with the wireless radio submittal .
num .
radio general parameters .
the wireless broadband ethernet radios shall employ the following minimum equipment parameters section numwireless communications equipment num frequency selection dynamic frequency selection num mhz num mhz num mhz and num mhz channels radio frequency rf power up to num decibels adjusted dbm transmission rate minimum num mbps automatic fallback antenna connector type n ipnum weatherproof rating operating temperature num c to num c humidity num percent to num percent noncondensing modulation format direct sequence spread spectrum dsss andor orthogoral frequency division multiplexing ofdm certificationcompliance federal communications commission fcc part num standards compliance ieeenumabg network protocols transparent to num services and applications configuration and management telnet simple networking management protocol snmp secure shell ssh security advanced encryption standardaesccm num bits media access control macradius based authentication physical interface ethernet via rjnum num baset autosense autonegotiate power requirements standard power supply num vac or dc adapter or num to num vdc from a solar recharged battery .
poe products and injectors shall be reviewed and approved by the department .
num broadband wireless ethernet radio flat panel antenna a .
requirements the antenna system shall be able to operate on various frequencies of num ghz and num ghz unlicensed as well as the licensed num ghz frequency as selected by the department .
the antenna system shall be compatible with the wireless radios provided by the contractor .
all antennas shall be supplied with the appropriate cabling necessary for full configuration of the radio system including appropriately sized coaxial cable .
all antenna cable attenuation shall be respective and appropriately sized to the frequency being attenuated and adhere to the following minimum criteria antenna type flat panel housing uvstable white fiberglass housing with tilt swivel mast mount kit or approved equivalent .
connector type n female frequency num num ghz or num num ghz as selected by department beamwidth num degrees minimum polarization vertical or horizontal fb ratio num db cross polarization rejection num db impedence num ohm vswr num avg lightning protection dc ground antenna cable halfinch solid copper shield corrugated with type n connectors loss num dbnum ft. num broadband wireless ethernet radio omni directional antenna a .
requirements the antenna system shall be able to operate on various frequencies of num ghz and num ghz unlicensed as well as the licensed num ghz frequency as selected by the department .
the antenna system shall be compatible with the wireless radios provided by the contractor .
all antennas shall be supplied with the appropriate cabling necessary for full section numwireless communications equipment num configuration of the radio system including appropriately sized coaxial cable .
all antenna cable attenuation shall be respective and appropriately sized to the frequency being attenuated .
housing fiberglass housing with steel mounting brackets or approved equivalent .
connector type n female frequency num num ghz or num num ghz as selected by department beamwidth num degrees polarization vertical impedence num ohm vswr num avg lightning protection dc ground antenna cable halfinch solid copper shield corrugated with type n connectors loss num dbnum ft. num broadband wireless ethernet radio sectoral antenna a .
requirements the antenna system shall be able to operate on various frequencies of num ghz and num ghz unlicensed as well as the licensed num ghz frequency as selected by the department .
the antenna system shall be compatible with the wireless radios provided by the contractor .
all antennas shall be supplied with the appropriate cabling necessary for full configuration of the radio system including appropriately sized coaxial cable .
all antenna cable attenuation shall be respective and appropriately sized to the frequency being attenuated .
housing fiberglass housing with steel mounting brackets or approved equivalent .
connector type n female frequency num num ghz as selected by department beamwidth num degrees minimum polarization vertical impedence num ohm vswr num avg lightning protection dc ground antenna cable halfinch solid copper shield corrugated with type n connectors loss num dbnum ft. num broadband wireless ethernet radio power divider a .
requirements where a single radio is required to communicate with two radios a power divider shall be provided that meets the following requirements divider type twoway passive frequency range num num ghz or num num ghz as selected by department insertion loss num db over power division impedance num ohms vswr num typical power num w temperature num c to num c connectors n female section numwireless communications equipment num num wimax radio base station units a .
requirements the wimax radio system shall be via a num numghz numenum wimax base station wbs to multiple subscriber units su for intelligent transportation system its projects .
the intent of the wbs is to be installed in the field to support the multilink wireless communications wide area network wan .
ensure that the wbs provides wireless ethernet connectivity at transmission rates of up to num megabits per second from the remote its device installation location to the its network trunk interconnection point or fiber trunk point .
these requirements may be supplemented or amended by the requirements given elsewhere in the specifications or on the plans .
the wimax base station herein referred to as wbs shall be compliant with the nume standard and the product family shall be certified by the wimax forum certification wave num in the num num ghz frequency band .
the wbs must support three modes of operation num asn mode for mobility applications num standalone mode for fixed applications and num mobility capability in standalone mode without access service network asn gateway .
the standalone mode shall be completely layer num supporting layer num forwarding inside the base station .
the wbs shall support point to multipoint operation with a minimum support of num active subscribers per sector .
the wbs shall operate in the num num ghz frequency band and already certified for use by the fcc in this band .
the wbs shall be provided and configured as a complete system including antennas subscriber units and power over ethernet injectors as described herein .
ensure that the department its network administrator will be able to manage each wbs individually or as a groupcluster for switchrouter configuration performance monitoring and troubleshooting .
these specifications require additional minimum management intelligence i.e .
layer num typical of most current industrial ethernet router deployments .
ensure that the wbs includes layer num capability providing architecture standardization open connectivity i.e .
interoperability bandwidth management rate limiting security filtering and general integration management of an advanced ethernet switching architecture .
ensure that the wbs complies with all applicable of the following specifications and standards for wireless nume num ethernet communications including these minimum criteria num .
radio and modem frequency num mhz to num mhz ieeenum nume ofdma wimax forum wave num profile time division duplex tdd channel bandwidth mhz num num num num frequency resolution num mhz diversity support numxnum stcmimosm output power average num x num dbm modulation num fft points qpsk numqam numqam antennas connectors ntype num ohm lightning protected integrated or external sector or omni antenna network interfaces numbaset half full duplex ieee num csmacd environmental operating temperature numc to numc at num num humidity noncondensing weather protected ipnum fcc part num subpart b class a the wbs shall be capable of dynamic link adaptation automatically adjusting modulation level subchannels and mimo zones as well as static link adaptation .
the wbs shall be capable of an extended cell range mode where subscribers up to numkms away can connect to the base station extended ttgrtg period .
section numwireless communications equipment num the wbs shall support a mode where num of the bandwidth shall be capable in the uplink direction settable by the user network the wbs shall support a full layer num solution in standalone mode including over the air vlan support ethernet multicast support without the use of an external router .
throughput the wbs shall be able to provide num mbs net aggregate throughput in a num mhz channel security the wbs shall support authentication authorization and accounting aaa based authentication and aes num encryption .
ccmmode numbit aes ccm mode aes key wrap with numbit key the wbs antennas shall be supplied as part of the base station unit and not paid for separately .
it is the contractors responsibility to supply the antennas for the application with the wbs .
the antennas shall connect to the wbs directly in by rf cables with ntype connectors .
antenna type specifications and quantities will be based on final site specific designs .
antennas are to be tuned for the num num mhz frequency range or per the plans and specifications .
num wimax radio power over ethernet injector poe a .
requirements injectors are only to be supplied with approval from the department and must have all necessary surge protection devices supplied with the poe injector .
the standalone power injector shall have the following options for input power in to the power injector num vdc for distribution automation applications num vdc for substation application num vac for ac power applications numc to numc temperature rating ieee num and iec num compliance automatic detection of remote power devices overcurrent protection over and under voltage protection indicators for link activity and speeds num wimax radio subscriber unit a .
requirements the subscriber unit shall be manufactured from the same vendor as the wimax base station wbs .
the subscriber units shall conform to the following specifications be snmp vnum vnum and vnum compatible available in either integrated antenna and nonintegrated antenna form factors .
compatibility with wave num profile mimo operation mode tdd antenna diversity mode stcmrcmimo power source numvdc from external source using power over ethernet poe connectivity operating temperature numc to numc ethernet standard compliance ieee num csmacd local management telnet web browser remote configuration and software updates ftp authentication eapttls device xnum digital certificate section numwireless communications equipment num num numgnumg cellular router type a and type b provide an machinetomachine mnumm cellular router with secure socket layer ssl and ipsec vpn virtual private network functionality with embedded cellular modem technology for various cellular carriers .
the data shall be accessible via a public or private ip connection via vpn tunnel with ipsec ssl as well as ip passthrough .
the unit shall be compatible with existing core routers and its field equipment .
the unit shall incorporate a userfriendly software interface with remote management and the ability to read and display alarm reporting and system logs .
provide a unit with the following minimal criteria wireless interface evolutiondata only evdo rev .
a fallback to code division multiple access cdma numxrtt orhighspeed packet access hspa fallback to enhanced data rates for global evolution edge as selected by the department integrated wireless modem supports numgnumgnumg wireless cellular data networks .
department to determine carrier routing security ip passthrough vpn tunnel ip sec ssl encryption numdesaes num firewall mac address filteringaccess control list indicators power signal ethernet link activity power requirements ac numvac numhz with external adapter or dc num num num vdc as specified by the department environmental extended temperature range num c to num c num num humidity standards restriction of use of hazardous substances rohs compliant electromagnetic compatibility emc fcc part num type a cellular router minimum of one num dbnum rsnum serial port and one num num baset rjnum ethernet port type b cellular router minimum of four num num baset rjnum ethernet ports num construction requirements this section shall include typical construction requirements for installing and configuring wireless radio systems .
this specification only gives general requirements of the wireless radio installations .
it is the contractors responsibility to be fully certified and trained in the wireless technology application and the required installation of such devices by the manufacturer .
all antenna connections shall be manufacturerrated and secured from outside elements .
the contractor shall be experienced andor certified in proper cableconnector crimping and manufacturer sealing methods so as to ensure a watertight and corrosion resistant installation .
wrap all other exposed cable connections with self sealing tape for weatherproofing and moisture seal .
refer to subsection num of the specifications regarding proper conduct of the work .
num personnel all personal shall be fully trained and manufacturer certified in the wireless installation application .
num equipment use machinery such as trucks derricks bucket vehicles saws trenchers and other equipment necessary for the work and approved by the engineer prior to installation operations .
num preparation utility permits a .
application apply for obtain and pay for utility services fcc licensing and pole attachment permits for wireless communications operation required in the plans or required when the site survey is completed .
section numwireless communications equipment num b .
maintenance maintain these utility services until final acceptance of each installation .
after final acceptance transfer these services and permits to the department local government or jurisdiction responsible for maintenance and operation .
ensure that the transfer does not interrupt service .
c. utility location when installing aerial cable of any type ensure that overhead clearance and separation requirements conform to local utility company standards osha the nec and the nesc .
refer to the standard details drawings for further information on utility clearances .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
acquiring and disposing of equipment do not modify the existing its or signal equipment communication design and operation without the district traffic engineers written approval .
all communications equipment removed or replaced shall be returned to district traffic signal shops unless otherwise noted in the plans or as directed by the engineer .
b .
communications equipment modification and removal upon modification of any existing communications equipment responsibilities for maintenance operations and response to communications malfunction become the responsibility of the contractor unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
remove existing communications equipment that is not used in the final installation when the new communications is operational at the request of the plans or engineer .
carefully remove equipment to minimize damage and retain it in its original form .
c. wireless antennas provide and install each antenna in such a manner that avoids conflicts with other utilities or devices .
separation distances shall also be in accordance with the guidelines of the national electrical safety code and as specified in the antenna manufacturers recommendations .
secure the antenna mounting hardware to the pole or device and route the antenna cable such that no strain is placed on the coaxial or catnume cable connectors .
on wood pole installations bond the antenna mounting hardware to the pole ground using num awg bare copper wire using split bolt or decompression type fitting .
all antennas shall include appropriate surge protection devices and installed per the manufacturers recommendations .
all antenna mounts shall have graduated markings for correct horizontal and vertical aiming of the antenna .
these markings shall be recorded on asbuilt drawings as to aid maintenance personnel on correct alignment of the antennas .
d. power dividers provide and install antenna power divider at locations determined by site survey to require two antennas .
install power divider using galvanized rigid steel or stainless steel bracket .
provide power divider and cables in accordance with section num .
ensure all weather exposed rf connectors are sealed with a self sealing rubberized tape .
e. coaxial cable provide and install coaxial cable as specified in this specification and as directed by the manufacturer .
do not exceed the num inch num bend radius of the coaxial cable as it transverses from the cabinet to the antenna assembly .
connect the lightning arrestor to the coaxial cable in the equipment cabinet .
section numwireless communications equipment num f. lightning arrestor provide and install the lightning arrestor as specified in this specification and as directed by the manufacturer as part of the antenna .
properly ground and secure the arrestor in the cabinet and per manufacturer recommendations .
g. power cabling install all power and communications cabling neatly in the cabinet and on the pole .
provide drip loops and strain relief at all locations that are subject to high cable tension such as at entry points into and out of a pole .
permanently label all cables in the cabinet .
ensure the power supply for the radio system is not connected to the gfci receptacle circuitry located in the cabinet .
ensure the appropriate radio connecting cables configuration cable and radio antenna patch cable are provided and installed correctly and are protected from transient voltage by the appropriate surge protection .
h. self contained radio cabinets provide and install any self contained radio cabinet units as shown on the plans or determined by the site survey .
provide radio cabinet units as specified in section num .
install cabinet units at bottom of pole in accordance with utility locations and site survey .
provide electrical service to cabinet .
i .
documentation place a copy of all manufacturers equipment specifications instruction and maintenance manual in the equipment cabinet .
include required azimuths and directional aiming information for directional antennas including any offset from a direct bearing for the purpose of reducing received signal strength to sustainable levels .
j. configuration software furnish a window based software program that uses a gui graphical user interface to provide remote programming radio configuration remote maintenance diagnostics and spectrum analyzer features .
utilize this software during construction of the wireless system and turn over all software and configuration files to the engineer at system acceptance .
the configuration software shall be included in the cost of the wireless radio .
num quality acceptance the acceptance testing of the wireless systems shall consist of two phases num post installation wireless system site testing and num burnin period .
perform acceptance testing for all equipment hardware and work provided under this contract including each wireless pointtopoint and pointtomultipoint field installation .
perform all testing in the presence of the engineer .
submit all testing plans and documents to the engineer during the submittal phase of the wireless equipment .
post installation wireless system site testing develop detailed and thorough test procedures with full test plan descriptions measurement equipment and test results data sheets .
as part of the submittal data requirements submit these test plans to the engineer for approval .
the engineer will notify the contractor of the approval or disapproval of the test procedures only test procedures approved by the engineer can be used .
provide all necessary testing and measurement equipment or software necessary to measure wireless signal strength and throughput of the wireless radio link .
have a complete copy of all materials and equipment submissions and all documentary items on hand at all acceptance testing sessions .
demonstrate that the wireless system equipment hardware and installation meet all requirements of the contract and that connected devices are communicating across the wireless link appropriately .
this includes but not limited to construction methods materials equipment site assembly configuration environmental conditions performance grounding and attenuation tests signal strength and clarity .
wireless testing shall not commence until the individual device testing is accepted for equipment in which the wireless system is connected to .
the wireless testing shall only commence after all communication and device components of the project are in place and full foliage of trees and shrubs are present in order to replicate typical line of sight communication scenarios .
perform the postinstallation test as an onsite test of the complete field installation assembly of both the wireless device and field devices connected to it through the wire or fiber connected network switch .
acceptance testing at a given site can not begin until all work associated with that site is complete .
use a pc system wireless manufacturer software and connected device control software to demonstrate full communications to the connected devices on the wireless system through the wire or fiber connected switch .
demonstrate that the wireless radio technology is configured correctly and that the signal section numwireless communications equipment num passes through the network .
if streaming video is being broadcast through the wireless link provide the ability to show that the video signal passes through the wireless link with no interruption to frame rates .
burnin period a .
general requirements provide a numday burnin period for all work and equipment included in the contract and associated with the wireless equipment and link .
the burnin period shall consist of the field operation of the wireless system in a manner that is in full accordance with the wireless system requirements of the plans and specifications .
conduct only one num burnin period on the entire contract for all wireless devices .
commence with the burnin period only after meeting all of the following requirements all work required in all contract documents for the wireless system has been completed and inspected by the engineer .
successfully complete the postinstallation wireless system site testing .
commence with the burnin period upon written authorization by the department to commence .
terminate the burnin period num consecutive days thereafter unless an equipment malfunction occurs and it is determined through troubleshooting that the wireless equipment is at fault for the interruption of the device communication .
stop the burnin period for the length of time any equipment is defective .
after repairing the equipment so that it functions properly resume the burnin period at the point it was stopped .
successful completion and acceptance of the burnin period will be granted on the numst day unless any equipment has malfunctioned .
if any equipment has failed during the burnin period final acceptance will be withheld until all the equipment is functioning properly for num days after repair .
the burnin period shall restart after all equipment has been replacedrepaired and tested .
when a specific piece of equipment has malfunctioned more than three times during the num day burnin period replace that unit with a new unit at no cost to the department .
contractor responsibilities during the burnin period maintain all work under this contract in accordance with the specifications .
restore any work or equipment to proper operating condition within num hours after notification .
department responsibilities department responsibilities during the burnin period will be as follows expeditious notification of contractor upon failure or malfunction of equipment in the event that the contractor does not provide the services enumerated above under his contract responsibilities the department or its authorized agents may in the interest of public safety take emergency action to provide for adequate traffic control .
pay any costs incurred as a result of these emergency actions .
such action by the department will not void any guaranties or warranties or other obligations set forth in the contract .
burnin period acceptance the department will make burnin period acceptance after satisfactory completion of the required burnin period and on the basis of a comprehensive field inspection of the complete wireless system in accordance with the specifications .
upon burnin period acceptance but prior to final acceptance of the entire contract maintain the complete wireless system in accordance with the specifications num contractor warranty and maintenance a .
warranties provide manufacturers warranties or guarantees on electrical electronic or mechanical equipment furnished including all wireless radios modems antennas power dividers and all other devices supplied under this contract .
ensure that warranties andor guarantees are consistent with those provided as customary trade and industry standard practices or as otherwise specified in the plans standard specifications or special provisions .
section numwireless communications equipment num upon final acceptance transfer the manufacturer and contractor warranties or guarantees to the engineer .
ensure that warranties are continuous and state that they are subject to transfer .
acceptance or approval of the work does not waiver warranties or guarantees where required by the specifications .
final acceptance will not be granted until all warranties and guarantees are received .
b. guaranties repair andor replace all equipment and material supplied under these contract documents which has been determined by the engineer to not meet specifications .
the engineer reserves the sole right to determine suitability or unsuitability of the supplied equipment and material .
the contractor shall bear the total cost of delivery and transportation related to the repair and replacement of equipment and material throughout the duration of the contract unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num training provide training as required herein .
include with training all supplies equipment materials handouts travel and subsistence necessary to conduct the training .
provide training agenda at least two months prior to requesting to conduct training .
a .
requirements provide installation operations and maintenance training of the deployed wireless technology and applicable manufacturer software for up to num people .
include in this training both classroom training and handsontraining .
limit inshop training and field training to group sizes of four persons at a time .
conduct training in halfday sessions .
two halfday sessions may be held on the same day upon approval of the department .
the total training shall consist of at least num hours of training for each participant .
equipment provider is to determine the specific length of the training course but it may not be less than num hours .
provide a course content which includes as a minimum the following general theory of operation operation of wireless communications equipment programming of unit results of the site survey identifying potential disruptions discussion of warranties handson use of equipment request to conduct training at least thirty days prior to first training session .
the training schedule shall be approved by the engineer .
with request to conduct training provide a detailed course outline with training materials to be used .
arrange for and submit location of training for approval .
num measurement the price bid shall include furnishing installing system integration and testing of a wireless communications system including all radio chassis antennas antenna cables modules power cables power supplies manufacturer software licenses outdoor rated cat nume patch cords programming interface cables media and power converters if needed surge protection devices attachment hardware repeater cabinets if needed testing and training requirements and all work equipment and appurtenances as required to provide a fully functional wireless communications system .
the price bid shall also include all configuration software programming device cabling and system documentation to be turned over to the engineer including shop drawings operations and maintenance manuals wiring diagrams block diagrams and other material necessary to document the operation of the applicable wireless radio system .
this price shall be full compensation for all labor tools materials equipment and incidentals necessary to complete the work .
wireless training wireless radio training is measured as a lump sum for all supplies equipment materials handouts travel and subsistence necessary to conduct the training .
section numwireless communications equipment num num limits not applicable .
num payment payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing the items complete in place according to this specification .
payment includes all compensation for furnishing labor materials tools equipment and incidentals required to complete the work .
no payment will be made for individual items unless a pay item is included in the plans for the specific item .
payment will be made under item no .
num spread spectrum wireless transceiver with fsk rs num connection type _ per each item no .
num spread spectrum wireless transceiver with rs num connection per each item no .
num self contained wireless radio repeater station per each item no .
num num mhz directional radio antenna and connecting cable per each item no .
num num mhz omni directional radio antenna and connecting cable per each item no .
num num mhz antenna power divider per each item no .
num broadband wireless ethernet radio per each item no .
num broadband wireless ethernet radio flat panel antenna per each item no .
num broadband wireless ethernet radio omnidirectional antenna per each item no .
num broadband wireless ethernet radio sectoral antenna per each item no .
num broadband wireless ethernet radio power divider per each item no .
num wimax radio base station unit per each item no .
num wimax radio power over ethernet injector per each item no .
num wimax radio subscriber unit per each item no .
num numgnumg cellular router type _ per each item no .
num wireless training lump sum num section numrapid setting patching materials for portland cement concrete num general description this section includes the requirements for rapid setting patching materials used in portland cement concrete .
num related references a .
standard specifications section numepoxy resin adhesives b. referenced documents federal hazardous products labeling act qpl num num materials num rapid setting patching materials a .
general requirements num .
use rapid setting patching materials that have the following characteristics are nonmetallic .
have a color similar to portland cement concrete .
can be mixed and placed like concrete .
have accelerated hardening characteristics .
yield a permanent patch in concrete that can withstand traffic within num hours .
for a list of sources see qplnum .
num .
type i use type i to patch reinforced or nonreinforced horizontal portland cement concrete surfaces .
num .
type ii use type ii to patch only nonreinforced horizontal portland cement concrete surfaces .
num .
type iii use type iii to patch reinforced vertical or overhead portland cement concrete surfaces .
num .
classify type i type ii and type iii as follows a .
class a premixed use these materials as received by adding water or an activator solution according to the manufacturers instructions .
note do not add extra aggregate to class a patching material without approval from the office of materials and research .
aashto astm t num t num c numcnumm c numc numm c num c num section numrapid setting patching materials for portland cement concrete num b .
class b nonpremixed these materials contain no aggregate .
add aggregate fine andor coarse according to the manufacturers recommendations c. class b nonpremixed these materials contain no aggregate .
add aggregate fine andor coarse according to the manufacturers recommendations .
num .
type iv use elastomeric patching material to patch nonreinforced horizontal portland cement concrete surfaces .
num .
type v use twocomponent cross linked resins to patch nonreinforced horizontal portland cement concrete surfaces .
num .
type vi use cementitious rapid setting structural repair mortar to patch nonreinforced horizontal portland cement concrete surfaces .
b. phyiscal requirements num .
use type i type ii and type iii patching materials that have been evaluated by the national transportation product evaluation program ntpep or other approved test facility and meet the following requirements .
requirement measurement flow of mortar type i and type ii type iii num minimum num to num flexural strength minimum num psi num mpa in num hours compression strength minimum num hours num psi num mpa num hours num psi num mpa num days moisture cure num psi num mpa absorption maximum num shear bond minimum num psi num mpa in num hours freeze thaw durability factor num of the reference concrete after num freezethaw cycles total chlorides type i and type iii type ii num lbyd³ num kgm³ maximum no limits c. fabrication num .
packaging a .
package this material in strong moistureproof paper bags or other suitable containers that can withstand shipping normal handling and storage without breaking .
b .
clearly label each container of the components of a patching system with the following information component designation if two components .
manufacturers batch number .
mixing ratio and directions .
potential hazards and precautions displayed according to the federal hazardous products labeling act .
d. acceptance num .
follow the mixing instructions of the manufacturer to create test specimens .
num .
aircure all test specimens except for the numday moisture cure cubes .
section numrapid setting patching materials for portland cement concrete num num .
test types i ii and iii using the following methods test method flow of mortar astm c num flexural strength aashto t num compressive strength astm c numc numm or c numc numm whichever is applicable absorption astm c num shear bond strength see subsection num.d acceptance step num rapid freeze thaw astm c num total chlorides aashto t num num .
shear bond strength a .
place a type ii epoxy resin adhesive meeting the requirements of section num on the surface of a cured mortar bar num x num x num in num x num x num mm .
b .
cast a num x num x num in num x num x num mm rapidsetting material patch in the center of the mortar base .
c. aircure the test sample for num hours .
d. saw the mortar bar base and the cured rapid setting material patch into num in num mm segments for testing .
e. use a holding device and plunger to apply a load at a rate of num in num mm per minute to the patch until the patch fails .
f. read the load in pounds newtons on the plunger .
g. calculate the shear bond strength in pounds per square inch by dividing the load in pounds by the interfacial area of the patch in square inches .
calculate the metric equivalent for shear bond strength in mpa by dividing the load in newtons by gravitational acceleration num ms² .
num .
use type iv type v and type vi patching materials that have been evaluated by ntpep and received a subjective field rating of num on an ascending scale from num to num .
num .
the department will reject a patching system that meets all the requirements of this specification but does not work as required in actual use .
e. materials warranty ensure that the material has a minimum storage life of at least num year under conditions of num to num f num to num c and maximum relative humidity of num percent .
section numfiber optic system num general description this work includes the installation of fiber optic cable and equipment including but not limited to cable interconnect patch cords fdc interconnect cablespig tails any cable related hardware connectors splices closures temporary systems testing training or any other fiber optic product as specified on the plans or noted in any other section of these specifications .
provide all equipment and materials of like kind and function to be of the exact same manufacture model revision firmware etc .
provide all equipment materials and work in accordance with all manufacturers recommendations .
num definitions general provisions num through num .
section numfiber optic system num num related references a .
standard specifications section num traffic control section num strain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies section num traffic signal installation section num electrical wire cable and conduit section num communication and electronic equipment section num system integration b. referenced documents ensure fiber optic cable and equipment meet the requirements in the following documents num .
optical fiber standards a. eiatianumaaaaa detail specification for num m core diameternum m cladding diameter class ia graded index multimode optical fibers current edition b. eiatia numcaab detail specification for class iva dispersionunshifted singlemode optical fibers with low water peak current edition c. itut g.numd transmission media characteristics recommendations g.numg.num for singlemode fibers d. telcordia grnumcore generic requirements for optical fiber and cable current edition num .
fiber optic cable and component standards a. telcordia grnumcore generic requirements for optical fiber and cable current edition b. eiatianumb.num optical fiber cabling components standard current edition c. eiatianumb optical fiber cable color coding standard current edition d. rus num cfr num united states department of agriculture rural utilities service rus standard num cfr num current edition e. telcordia grnum issue num generic requirements for singlemode optical fiber connectors current edition f. eiatianumxx fiber optic connector intermateability standards focis where xx specifies the fiber optic connector type i.e .
st sc lc etc .
current edition g. national electrical code section num num .
fiber optic installation standards and practices a .
building industry consulting service international bicsi telecommunications distribution methods manual tdmm current edition b. bicsi customerowned outside plant methods manual current edition c. society of cable telecommunications engineers scte recommended practices for optical fiber construction and testing current edition d. osha regulations standardsnum cfr num occupational safety and health administration standards section numfiber optic system num e. ansiieee cnum national electrical safety code f. ansinfpanum national electrical code num .
fiber optic measurement and testing standards a. eia standard fopii test condition num b. telcordia grnumcore issue num generic requirements for optical time domain reflectometer otdr type equipment current edition c. applicable flame tests ul num and ul num nonplenum applications d. applicable flame test ul num nfpa num plenum applications e. eiatianumx standard test procedures for fiber optic systems current edition f. eiatianum ofstpnum optical power loss measurements for installed singlemode fiber cable plant g. eiatianuma ofstpnuma optical power loss measurements for installed multimode fiber cable plant num submittals prior to any work obtain approval from the engineer for the products and procedures to be used on the project .
use only equipment and materials that meet the requirements of these minimum specifications and are on the departments qualified products list qpl products appearing on the qualified products list qpl are exempt from normal submittal requirements .
these products have been evaluated by the office of traffic operations and have proven their capability of meeting the appropriate georgia department of transportation specification .
any of these products may be used without submitting catalogue cuts sampling or pretesting .
the contractor shall submit a letter to the engineer stating which qpl items they will use .
the engineer andor department designee must ascertain that the construction item is the same material identified on the appropriate qpl and will acknowledge receipt of these items in the project diary or as required by the construction manual .
submit submittal data for test procedures and routine maintenance procedures required for the items furnished under this specification within sixty num calendar days after the notice to proceed and prior to any installation unless noted otherwise in the contract documents .
submit to the engineer service and maintenance documentation for each item furnished under this specification .
provide two num bound hard copies and an electronic copy as pdf documents .
a .
cable certification prior to installing any fiber optic cable on the project provide detailed information for the cable type cable manufacturer fiber content design and installation procedure to the engineer .
request approval by certification from an independent testing third party laboratory that certifies the fiber optic cable is the same as that on the departments qpl .
b. aerial and underground splice closures certification provide certification from an independent testing laboratory that certifies that the splice closures are identical to those on the departments qpl .
c. fiber distribution center fdc certification provide certification from an independent testing laboratory that certifies that the fiber distribution centers provided are identical to those on the departments qpl section numfiber optic system num d. fiber optic test documentation within num days from the ntp provide the date time and location of any tests required by this specification see num to the engineer at least num hours before performing the test .
provide two copies of documentation of the test results to the engineer within num working days of completion of the test for review and approval or else retest the represented fiber optic cable and provide the documentation within num working days of the retest .
bind the test documentation and include the following num .
otdr setup cable fiber identification a .
cable id b .
cable location begin and end point c. endtoend cable length in kilometers calculated from cable markings d. fiber id including tube and fiber color e. operator name f. date time num .
otdr test parameters information to be recorded on each trace a. wavelength b. pulse width c. refractory index d. range e. scale num .
test results a. otdr test total fiber trace distance in kilometers splice loss attenuation in db per km events num db trace analysis detailing all events exceeding num db provide otdr traces meeting telcordia grnumcore issue num data format requirements .
with advance approval by the engineer an alternative format may be used providing a licensed copy of the software is provided to the department at no additional cost to the department .
provide all traces in electronic format to the engineer .
at a minimum ensure the data includes cable id fiber number buffer tube fdc port fiber distance test wave length attenuation in db per km .
obtain data requirements for each project from the engineer .
b .
power meter end to end attenuation test perform this test on each fiber link using test procedures described in document eiatia num sections num numa .
for each test document length number and type of splices and connectors for each test document link attenuation provide test data to the engineer in excel or compatible spreadsheet form and on a cd .
e. asbuilt documentation section numfiber optic system num the asbuilt documentation shall meet all requirements in the section num specifications .
in addition to those requirements the asbuilt documents shall include final splicing and fiber allocation details for every splice location .
num materials furnish and install all fiber optic parts materials components and equipment consistent and compliant with the latest version or edition of the standards and industry practices specified in section num.b .
if a conflict of difference exists between the requirements contained in the specified standards and practices and the requirements contained in these specifications use the most stringent material requirement for this contract .
notify the engineer of any such conflicts or differences prior to procurement of materials and components .
a .
fiber optic cable ensure all fiber optic related products conform to this specification .
install apply inspect and use those products in accordance with the manufacturers standard operating and installation procedures and this specification .
ensure optical fiber used in both outside and inside plant cable conforms to the requirements specified herein as well as the industry standards and practices listed in section num .
ensure all fiber optic cable on this project comes from a currently isonum certified manufacturer who is regularly engaged in the production of this material using the processes noted within this specification .
all outside plant fiber optic cable used on each individual project shall be from only one manufacturer and manufacturer production batch .
use only cable that is new manufactured no more than eight months prior to the project notice to proceed and of current design and manufacture .
ensure that single mode optical fiber used in cables meets eiatia numcaab detail specification for class iva dispersionunshifted singlemode optical fibers with low water peak current edition and itut g.numd transmission media characteristics recommendations g.numg.num for singlemode fibers ensure that all optical fibers in the cable are usable fibers .
the fiber optic cable type configuration and installation method will be detailed on the plans drawings details specifications and in the pay items .
ensure cable and cable installation conforms to all requirements within the plans and specifications .
b .
outside plant osp cable this section sets forth the general standards for fabrication and design of outside plant fiber optic cable .
num .
osp cable construction a .
general requirements ensure osp cable is an accepted product of the united states department of agriculture rural utilities service rus as meeting the requirements of num cfr num .
only use optical fibers that are placed inside a loose gelfree buffer tube .
b .
buffer tubes ensure each buffer tube contains num fibers for all fiber optic cables unless specified otherwise .
ensure fibers can not adhere to the inside of the buffer tube .
ensure the fibers utilize dry waterblocking materials and construction .
ensure the fiber optic cable includes loose buffer tubes that isolate internal optical fibers from outside forces and provides protection from outside forces and provide protection from physical damage as well as water ingress and migration .
c. cable core protect the cable core with a water blocking material .
ensure water blocking material is non nutritive to fungus electrically nonconductive and homogenous .
d. strength members use a central antibuckling member consisting of a glass reinforced plastic rod to prevent buckling of the cable .
use high tensile strength aramid fiberglass or a combination of aramid and fiberglass yarns to provide tensile strength .
e. ensure color scheme meets eiatianumb color coding of fiber optic cable .
section numfiber optic system num f. cable jacket include in the cable at least one ripcord under the sheath for easy sheath removal .
g. helically strand the high tensile strength yarns evenly around the cable core .
h. sheath all dielectric cables with medium density polyethylene .
ensure the minimum nominal jacket thickness is num in num mm .
apply jacketing material directly over the tensile strength members and waterblocking compound .
ensure the polyethylene contains sufficient carbon black to provide ultraviolet light protection and prevent the growth of fungus .
i .
ensure the jacket or sheath is free of holes splits and blisters .
j .
ensure the cable jacket contains no metal elements and is of a consistent thickness .
k. marking mark cable jackets using the following template unless otherwise shown in the plans l. manufacturers name optical cable year telephone handset symbol ga dot description m. for description of singlemode cable use xxf sm where xx denotes the fiber count n. mark the cable length every meter every num ft if marking the cable in english units .
ensure the cable length markings are within num of the actual cable length .
o .
provide cable marking that is contrasting in color to the cable jacket .
provide cable marking with character heights of approximately num in num mm .
num .
additional requirements for loose tube cable a .
use only cable that is all dielectric loose tube design .
ensure buffer tubes are stranded around a central member using the reverse oscillation or sz stranding process .
num .
cable performance ensure all osp cable meets or exceeds the requirements of the fiber optic test procedure fotp criteria referenced in num cfr num .
upon the request of the department provide certification from an independent testing laboratory certifying the cable conforms to the specifications and test procedures .
a .
pulling tension ensure the cable can withstand a maximum pulling tension of num lbf num kn during installation short term and num lbf num n installed long term .
b .
temperature range provide only osp cable designed to endure exposure to shipping storage and operating temperatures of num f to num f num c to num c. provide only osp cable designed to endure exposure to installation temperatures of num f to num f num c to num c. c. inside plant ip cable this section sets forth the general standards for fabrication and design of inside plant fiber optic cable .
num .
ip cable construction a .
strength members for the strength member use a high modulus u.s. manufactured aramid yarn .
ensure nontoxic nonirritant talc is applied to the yarn to allow the yarns to be easily separated from the fibers and the jacket .
for all ip cables used in plenum structures use only ip cable that meets nec ulnum requirements for plenum rated cables .
b .
cable jacket ensure the jacket to be continuous free from pinholes splits blisters or other imperfections .
ensure the jacket is smooth as is consistent with the best commercial practice .
ensure the jacket provides the cable with a tough flexible protective coating able to withstand the stresses expected in installation and service .
c. use yellow cable jackets for single mode .
section numfiber optic system num d. design the cable jacket for easy removal without damage to the optical fibers by incorporating a ripcord under each cable jacket .
ensure that a nontoxic nonirritant talc is applied to the aramidfiberglass yarns to allow the yarns to be easily separated from the fibers and the jacket .
e. ensure the nominal thickness of the cable outer jacket is sufficient to provide adequate cable protection while meeting the mechanical flammability and environmental test requirements of this document over the life of the cable .
f. color use color coded individual fibers for identification .
ensure color coding complies with eiatianumb optical fiber cable color coding as stated in num.b.num.e .
g. marking mark the outer cable jacket at least every num ft num m with the manufacturers name or ul file number date of manufacture fiber type flame rating ul symbol and sequential length marking e.g .
num micron type ofnr ul .
use print color that contrasts to the color of the jacket and is permanent and legible for the life of the cable .
num .
fabrication by cable type a. interconnect cables use interconnect cable to connect the distribution panels of a fiber optic cable plant with the actual electronic devices .
fabricate interconnect cable by surrounding the num m tight buffered fibers with layered u.s. manufactured aramid yarns and a jacket of pvc or copolymer depending on nec requirements .
use the aramid yarns as tensile strength members .
b. fdc interconnect cable use this cable to splice a factory connectorized multifiber pigtail cable on to an osp cable end routing that cable within an fdc and its splice cabinet and connecting to the termination panels of the fdc .
construct fdc interconnect cable of num m tight buffered fiber single mode or multimode optical fiber surrounded with u.s. manufactured aramid fibers and jacketed with flame retardant jacket material .
match the fiber count and buffer tube configuration of the fdc interconnect cable to be exactly equivalent to the osp cable being terminated in the fdc unless additional fibers using other buffer tube colors are required for an fdc that is larger than the op cable .
use a yellow exterior jacket for the fdc interconnect cable for singlemode .
num .
temperature range a .
ensure the cable is designed to endure exposure to a storage temperature range of num f to num f num c to num c while stored on the original shipping reel .
ensure riser cables are designed to endure an operating temperature range of num f to num f num c to num c. ensure plenum cables are designed to endure an operating temperature range of num f to num f num c to num c. num .
crush resistance requirements a .
ensure the cable can withstand a minimum compressive load of num plf num nm applied uniformly over the length of the compressive plate .
use only cable that has been tested in accordance with fotpnum compressive loading resistance of fiber optic cables .
num .
impact resistance requirements a .
use only cable that can withstand a minimum of num impact cycles .
use only cable that has been tested in accordance with fotpnum repeated impact testing of fiber optic cables and cable assemblies .
num .
flammability a .
use only cables that are ullisted in accordance with nec article num .
use only riser cables ofnr that pass ulnum .
use only plenum cables ofnp that pass ulnum .
d. patch cords and fdc interconnect cables pig tails num .
patch cords section numfiber optic system num use patch cords consisting of a length of fiber optic cable terminated on both ends .
for all ip cables used in plenum structures use only ip cable that meets nec ulnum requirements for plenum rated cables .
a .
fabrication ensure all factory preconnectorized assemblies adhere to the applicable cable cordage and fiber specifications stated in these specifications .
b .
ensure all inside plant ip patch cords meet nec jacketing requirements .
c. use orange outer jackets for multimode and yellow jackets for single mode .
d. use connector boots of two num colors for all duplex patch cords zip cord or round .
use white or off white for one leg of the duplex cord nonprinted zip leg and red for the opposite leg printed zip leg of the duplex cord .
e. for all assemblies for outside plant osp where loose tube is used include a fanout kit installed at each connectorized end .
f. no splices of any type are allowed within a patch cord assembly .
g. factory testing fully test each assembly and place those test results on a test tag for each mated pair of connectors .
attach the tag to one end of each pair within the assembly .
h. individually package each assembly within a plastic bag and clearly mark on the outside of that bag the submitted manufacturers part number .
num .
factory connectorized fdc interconnect cablespig tails a .
use fdc interconnect cablespig tails consisting of a length of fiber optic cable of one single fiber terminated on one end .
use only fdc interconnect cablespig tails with factory installed connectors in accordance with subsection num.f .
provide fdc interconnect cablespig tails with num micron tubing or num mm fan out tubing as required for the application .
use fdc interconnect cablespig tails with num micron tubing only when fully enclosed within an fdc .
ensure that the other end of the cable is properly prepared for splicing to another cable .
provide fdc interconnect cablepig tail in conformity with the same construction and testing requirements as patch cords .
e. drop cable assembly outside plant drop cable assembly is defined as a connectorized fiber optic cable drop cable and appropriate fan out if required used for connectivity between a primary fiber trunk or feeder cable and field devices such as signal controllers closed circuit television cameras video detection system cameras changeable message signs etc .
num .
general requirements provide a loose tube design drop cable in the drop cable assembly meeting the requirements for outside plant cable as specified in subsection num.b .
provide the drop cable assembly type multimode singlemode or hybrid and fiber count specified in the plans .
num .
assembly fabrication provide a drop cable assembly as specified in the plans and meeting the following requirements .
use only drop cables that are factory preterminated use spliceon factoryconnectorized pigtailsfdc interconnect cables or are included in preterminated fdcs .
for factory preterminated drop cable assemblies label each individual fiber with its drop cable fiber number num num etc .
on a selflaminating clear overwrapping label on the fanout tubing within num in .
num mm of the terminating fiber connector .
a. preterminated drop cable assembly install preterminated drop cable assemblies with loose tube design fiber optic cable factoryinstalled fiber optic connectors in accordance with subsection num.f on each drop cable fiber and factoryassembled fan outs with num mm fan out tubing .
section numfiber optic system num b. fieldspliced drop cable assembly install fieldspliced drop cable assemblies with loose tube design fiber optic cable fusion spliced factoryconnectorized pigtailsfdc interconnect cables in accordance with subsection num.d and subsection num.f on each drop cable fiber .
c. fan out loose tube cable design install fieldinstalled fan outs with num mm fan out tubing in accordance with subsection num.j .
additionally secure the fan out tubing to the main cable sheath in a hard epoxy plug transition that extends a minimum of num in num mm onto the cable and num in num mm onto the num mm tubing .
f. fiber optic connectors furnish and install lc compatible connectors unless otherwise specified use ceramic ferrule ultra polish connectors upc for singlemode applications for all connector types .
install connectors as per manufacturer application and recommendations including proper termination to the outertubing .
use upc connectors rated for an operating temperature of num f to num f num c to num c. use only factoryinstalled upc connectors for all applications except where shown in the plans for specifically permitted applications in accordance with num.e.num .
use factoryinstalled upc connectors installed with a thermalset heatcured epoxy and machine polished mating face .
do not use fieldinstalled fiber optic connectors .
where barrel couplers are used in passive termination applications such as fdcs use only st compatible ceramicinsert couplers .
use only manufacturer recommended singlemode couplers for singlemode connector applications .
provide dust caps for both sides of couplers at all times until permanent connector installation .
provide connectors listed below that do not exceed the maximum loss listed for each connector .
connector type installation max .
loss typical loss optical return loss singlemode factory num db num db num db g. splice closure underground num .
use provide closures designed for use under the most severe conditions such as moisture vibration impact cable stress and flex temperature extremes .
ensure splice closures meet or exceed minimum physical requirements listed in the following subsection num .
physical requirements a .
use cylindrical closures or rectangular dome type closures with cable entries at one end only and sealed one piece highdensity polyethylene dome bodies .
b .
ensure splice closures are suitable for ecb or pull box applications as shown in the plans .
c. ensure splice closures prevent the intrusion of water without the use of encapsulate .
d. ensure splice closure cable entry ends have flexible thermoplastic rubber end seals with pretemplate cable ports .
e. the closure size shown in the plans specifies the number of splices to be accommodated by the closure .
with the closure provide all materials to accommodate the number of splices specified by the closure size including splice tray storage and organizing materials .
f. provide splice closures capable of accommodating splice organizer trays that accept mechanical fusion or multifiber array splices .
use splice closures having provisions for storing fiber splices in an orderly manner mountings for splice organizer assemblies and space for excess or nonspliced fiber .
use splice organizers that are reenterable and resealable .
g. use only ul rated splice cases .
where high fiber count num to num splice cases are required use cases that have an external pressurization port for optional pressurization .
section numfiber optic system num h. provide splice closures that do not require the use of specialized tools equipment or additional parts for reentry and subsequent reassembly .
i .
provide splice closures with provisions for controlling fiber bend radii to a minimum of num in num mm .
h. splice closure aerial num .
use a .
provide splice closures designed for use in aerial applications and conform to the requirements below num .
physical requirements a .
use cylindrical closures or rectangular dome type closures with cable entries at one end only and sealed one piece highdensity polyethylene dome bodies .
provide splice closures designed for free breathing splice protection without the use of encapsulate .
provide splice closures designed as fully assembled weather tight closures .
ensure splice closure cable entry ends have flexible thermoplastic rubber end seals with pretemplate cable ports .
b .
provide splice closures utilizing corrosion resistant aluminum or stainless steel hardware .
provide splice closures designed in such a way as to allow complete splice access after closure placement without requiring removal of the closure or electrical bonds from the cable .
provide splice closures suitable for straight butt or branch splices .
provide splice closures that include provisions for strain relief both around the cable jacket and to internal cable strength members .
provide aerial closures designed in such a manner that shall eliminate the need for drip collars and sealing collars .
c. the closure size shown in the plans specifies the number of splices to be accommodated by the closure .
with the closure provide all materials to accommodate the number of splices specified by the closure size including splice tray storage and organizing materials .
d. ensure all closures are the appropriate size to accommodate the number and type of fiber cables used and fit within the space available .
num .
optical fiber organizer the fiber organizer is a system that holds splice or organizer trays in such a way as to protect and support cable splices within an environmentally protected area .
provide organizer trays capable of storing all common splices fusion and mechanical in all configurations butt inline and branch with up to four branch cables .
ensure all trays are completely reenterable .
ensure organizers themselves accept a minimum of four trays and provide bonding and grounding hardware .
i .
mechanical lab splice insertion loss single mode num db operating temperature num f to num f num c to num c j .
fiber distribution center fdc num .
use rackmount wallmount or preterminated fdcs as specified in the plans .
use rackmount wallmount or pre terminated fdcs in all field cabinets including all types of its and traffic signal cabinets unless specifically excepted in the plans .
section numfiber optic system num num .
use rackmount and wallmount fdcs and fdc splice cabinets with enclosures and mounting components of metallic construction .
use fdc interconnect cable for all op cable terminations in rackmount and wallmount fdcs unless otherwise specified in the plans .
num .
use fdcs that fit standard num inch eia equipment racks or cabinets .
num .
use rackmount fdcs of specified sizes numfiber through numfiber having frontopening swingout drawers for access to fiber splicing trays and fiber termination couplers .
when closed ensure swingout drawers provide dusttight seals completely enclosing fiber splicing trays fiber termination couplers and connecting ends of fiber patch cords connected to couplers .
num .
use rackmount fdcs of specified sizes numfiber through numfiber having fixedmounted frontfacing fiber termination couplers accessible behind a removable transparent plastic dust cover .
num .
use fdcs that are sized to fit within the available space of the cabinet .
num .
use rackmount fdcs of specified sizes numfiber through numfiber that include a separate fdc splice cabinet installed adjacent to the fdc .
alternately rackmount fdcs with splice cabinets integral to the overall fdc enclosure but contained in a separated compartment either above or below the fdc termination couplers .
num .
provide rackmount or wallmount fdcs with appropriate quantities of couplers panels splice trays organizers factoryconnectorized pigtailsfdc interconnect cables and ancillary materials to terminate the number of fibers as specified by the fdc size regardless of the cable size to be terminated as shown in the plans .
use only fdc interconnect cables for fdcs numfiber and larger .
where factory preterminated drop cable assemblies are permitted and to be used do not provide splice trays .
num .
use preterminated fdcs that are factory manufactured assemblies of fiber optic drop cable with factoryinstalled fiber connectors and integral ruggedized fiber connector enclosures .
use preterminated fdcs of the sizes specified in the plans .
use ruggedized fiber connector enclosures of thermally stable rigid plastic housings fully potted with a thermally stable epoxy filling that encapsulates the drop cable fan out fibers and connector bodies .
use permanent labels on the enclosure with contrasting color to identify each connector body by its associated fiber number .
num .
for fdcs of all types provide couplers with dust caps in accordance num.f .
use only lc compatible couplers unless otherwise specified .
k. fiber optic snowshoes use industry standard fiber optic snowshoes that are factorymanufactured fiber optic cable storage brackets designed for aerial installation on messenger wire cable support spans .
num delivery storage and handling package the cable for shipment on reels .
each package shall contain only one continuous length of cable .
construct the packaging so as to prevent damage to the cable during shipping and handling .
seal both ends of the cable to prevent the ingress of moisture .
attach to each reel a weatherproof reel tag identifying the reel and cable in such a manner to ensure the manufacturing history of the cable and the fiber can be traced by the manufacturer .
include with each cable a cable data sheet containing the following information num .
manufacturer name num .
cable part number num .
factory order number num .
cable length section numfiber optic system num num .
factory measured attenuation of each fiber num .
bandwidth specification where applicable num .
index of refraction num construction requirements ensure all fiber optic parts materials components and equipment installed on this contract are consistent and compliant with the latest version or edition of the standards and industry practices specified in section num.b .
if a conflict of difference exists between the requirements contained in the specified standards and practices and the requirements contained in these specifications use the most stringent material requirement for this contract .
notify the engineer of any such conflicts or differences prior to procurement of materials and components .
num personnel general provisions num through num .
num equipment furnish a portable fiber optic light source and power meter test set for testing the fiber optic cable .
provide a test set matched calibrated and referenced to work as a synchronized test system .
retain ownership of this equipment .
num preparation general provisions num through num .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a. osp and ip cable installation secure from the cable manufacturer the construction and installation procedures to be used on the project .
produce a detailed construction and installation procedure sop covering all aspects of the construction and installation process for each and all specific cable to be used on this project .
submit the sop to the engineer for review and approval .
b .
cable installation procedures and standards num .
safety precautions follow all appropriate osha and industry standards related to safety when working in manholes or underground vaults and when handling optical fibers .
num .
cable handling install all fiber optic cable according to the manufacturers recommended procedures and these specifications .
num .
pulling tension do not exceed the maximum recommended pulling tension during installation as specified by the cable manufacturer .
num .
allowable bend radius do not violate the minimum recommended bend radius during installation as specified by the cable manufacturer .
unless the manufacturers recommendations are more stringent use the following guidelines for minimum bend radius section numfiber optic system num num x cable diameter short term during installation num x cable diameter long term installed num .
cable installation guidelines before the installation begins carefully inspect the cable reels for imperfections such as nails that might cause damage to the cable as it is unreeled .
take all necessary precautions to protect reeled cable from vandals or other sources of possible damage while unattended .
any damage to the cable sections may require replacement of the entire section .
whenever unreeled cable is placed on the pavement or surface above a manhole provide means of preventing vehicular or pedestrian traffic through the area in accordance with section num of the specifications .
use the figureeight cable lay configuration to prevent kinking or twisting when the cable is unreeled or backfed .
do not coil fiber optic cable in a continuous direction except for lengths of num ft num m or less .
when figureeighting cable exercise care to relieve pressure on the cable at the crossover of the eight .
this may be done by placing cardboard shims at the crossover or by forming a second figureeight .
keep the cable continuous throughout the pull .
cable breaks are allowed only at designated splice points .
where messenger cable is required as shown in the plans lash aerial fiber optic cable to a steel strand wire messenger cable of the size specified in the plans that conforms to georgia department of transportation specification num .
num .
cable end sealing where a cable ends without termination in a fiber optic closure seal the end of the cable by reusing a cable end cap shipped with a cable reel or use a cap that is sizematched to the cable to be sealed .
clean the end of the cable .
partly fill the cap with a waterproof silicone adhesive sealant and press the cap fully onto the cable end rotating the cap to fully encapsulate the cable end with the sealant in the cap .
apply a full sealant bead between the end of the cap and the cable jacket .
c. cable storage at designated intervals throughout the cable plant pull and store excess cable for slack for future terminations or splicing .
properly store all cable to minimize susceptibility to damage .
maintain proper bend radius both short and long term during cable storage .
communication and pull boxes store the excess or slack cable in the pull box or communication box in accordance with the plans details .
hubtmctcc properly store the cable in cable troughs and plenum applications which meet nec requirements .
aerial installations store the excess or slack cable at storage loops in a bow tie configuration on the messenger strand using two fiber optic snowshoes aerial fiber cable storage brackets that maintain the proper bend radius in the fiber cable .
install one fiber optic snowshoe for drop cable and trunk cable storage at aerial splice closures to maintain the proper bend radius in the fiber optic cable .
in cable storage requirements underground osp ip unless otherwise noted on the plans the following are the requirements for cable storage for underground and ip applications a .
pull box types num nums num nums num and num apply the following storage requirements for the indicated cableclosure situations .
drop cable with no closure num ft. num m one or more trunk cables with no closure num ft. num m of each cable section numfiber optic system num two or more trunk cables with one closure store num ft. num m of each trunk cable so that the closure can be removed from the pull box approximately num ft. num m. if a drop cable is spliced to the trunk cable at this point store num ft. num m of each drop cable .
one trunk cable with one closure num ft. num m install closure in the center of the num ft. num m cable loop so that the closure can be removed from the ecb approximately num ft. num m. if a drop cable is spliced to the trunk cable at this point store num ft. num m of each drop cable .
one trunk cable with one closure and trunk cable ends num ft num m. install closure on the trunk cable at num ft num m from the pull box .
if a drop cable is spliced to the trunk cable at this point store num ft num m of each drop cable .
trunk cable ends with no closure num ft. num m b .
hub building interior do not store slack cable inside the hub building .
c. hub building exterior adjacent ecbs num ft num m d. traffic control center transportation management center osp splice vault num ft numm .
e. traffic control center transportation management center ip at equipment room cable entrance to distribution panel bay plus num ft num m f. electrical communication box ecb types num num num and num apply the following storage requirements for the indicated cableclosure situations .
more than one situation may occur in a single electrical communication box in which case apply each appropriate requirement .
trunk cable with no closure num ft num m trunk cable with one closure num ft num m. measure the storage amount from the top of the ecb manhole opening .
install closure in the center of the num ft num m cable loop so that the closure can be removed from the ecb approximately num ft num m. if a drop cables is spliced to the trunk cable at this point store num ft num m of each drop cable .
trunk cable with one closure and trunk cable ends num ft num m. install closure at num ft num m from the ecb on the trunk cable .
if a drop cables is spliced to the trunk cable at this point store num ft num m of each drop cable .
trunk cable ends with no closure num ft num m num .
minimum cable storage requirements aerial applications unless otherwise noted on the plans the following are the minimum requirements for cable storage for aerial applications a .
install a minimum num ft num m storage loop approximately one half the distance between every equipment drop or as shown in the plans .
where equipment drops are greater than num ft num m apart install a minimum num ft num m storage loop for every num ft num mof uninterrupted cable length .
b .
at aerial splice closures install num ft. num m of drop cable storage and num ft. num m of trunk cable storage unless otherwise noted in the plans to allow the fully assembled closure including the trunk cable and drop cable to be lowered to ground level for maintenance purposes .
d. cable splicing splice together each individual reel of fiber optic cable to provide the continuous length of installed cable called for on this project .
splice cable only at splice points designated on the plans or at locations approved by the engineer .
make no splices within a patch cord assembly or drop cable .
e. mid spandrop access at points where mid spandrop access is required keep all fibers intact except those being accessed for the equipment drop .
use a suitable tool for removing fibers from the buffer tube to prevent damage to the fibers remaining intact .
section numfiber optic system num f. connector termination procedures only use procedures for the termination of the connectors meeting the process set out in that connector manufacturers standard operating procedure sop for the field installation .
g. cable marking num .
materials a .
use num num mm wide num num mm long wraparound type cable markers suitable for underground and aerial use .
use uv stabilized marker material and printing inks to provide an aerial durability of at least five years .
b .
print text in bold black type on orange or yellow pvc markers as specified in section num.g.num .
fabricate markers from pvc base material with a minimum thickness of num num mm .
preprint the following text or alternate text shown in the plans legibly on markers used for all cables c. cable id xxxxxxx ga dot optical cable d. where xxxxxxx is the appropriate cable id as defined in the plans .
print the text specified above twice on every cable marker with the text of the second image reversed and abutting the first image .
in such a manner to ensure the text reads right when either short edge of the cable marker is held horizontally upright .
num .
installation a .
clean the installed cable of all dirt and grease before applying any marker .
follow the marker manufacturers recommended procedure for applying cable markers .
mark all cables in or at every communications hub electrical communications box pull box handhole equipment cabinet aerial or underground splice closure pole attachment aerial storage bracket and pole conduit riser entrance .
at every trunk cable termination reel endtoreel end splice electrical communications box pull box handhole equipment cabinet aerial splice closure and aerial storage bracket record the cable distance markings from the printline for the cable entry and exit along with the exact location by station number or location name .
record the cable distance markings in a tabular format approved by the engineer or on a documentation form provided by the department .
b .
place cable markers in the following locations within num in num mm of every cable entry to a pull box handhole ecb and hub building within num in num mm of every cable entry or termination in an equipment cabinet within num in num mm of every splice closure at cable entry points within num in num mm of every fdc or splice cabinet in a hub building in which a cable terminates or enters every num ft num m for the length of a cable in maintenance coils in electrical communications boxes or pull boxes within num in num m of every pole attachment aerial storage bracket and pole conduit riser entrance c. use orange markers at all locations except as noted below d. where a trunk cable enters and leaves a closure midspan cable entry or endtoend splice use orange markers for one leg of the trunk cable and yellow for the other leg placing corresponding color labels at the closure end of a leg and at the conduit entrance underground installation or span attachment aerial installation .
e. where two drop cables terminate in a closure use orange markers for one drop cable and yellow markers for the other drop cable throughout the entire drop cables length to its other termination .
section numfiber optic system num h. fusion splicing num .
use a .
unless otherwise noted fusion splice all fiber optic splices in accordance with industry codes and the latest version of the manufacturers recommended guidelines .
num .
procedure a .
perform all fusion splicing and install all splice enclosures according to the manufacturers recommended guidelines .
num .
splice protection num .
adequately protect all fusion splices in splice trays or organizers in an enclosure .
when splicing inside a building use a splice center where rack or wall space is available .
num .
provide the splice with strain relief and protection of the stripped fiber splice in a manner recommended by the splice tray or organizer manufacturer .
use splice types compatible with the tray design .
num .
protect fusion splices with a heat shrink tubing that protects the splice and extends over the fiber coating .
do not leave bare fiber exposed .
i .
mechanical splicing num .
use do not use mechanical splices for any purpose other than a temporary connection to fiber optic test equipment .
obtain the engineers prior approval for any other use of a mechanical splice .
num .
procedure make all mechanical splices as strain relieflocking types requiring no adhesive or polishing of the fiber ends .
ensure the fibers are selfaligning upon the closing of the mechanical splice .
ensure the splice consists of one piece construction .
ensure there is no stress on the fiber in the alignment area .
install all splice closures according to the manufacturers recommended guidelines .
num .
lab splice use a mechanical fiber optic lab splice when a temporary joining of two fibers is required such as in the testing of nonterminated fiber .
ensure the lab splice is reusable for up to num matings .
ensure the lab splice accommodates optical fibers with cladding diameters between num and num m. j. splice closures install splice closures according to all manufacturers recommendations .
install splice closures where shown in the plans and in the approximate center of fiber cable storage coils .
securely mount all splice closures in ecbs or pull boxes to cable rack hooks or mounting brackets .
k. fiber optic cable fan out num .
inside plant provide all inside plant cable with a fan out in accordance with the manufacturers recommended guidelines .
section numfiber optic system num l. temporary fiber optic cable num .
furnish and install temporary fiber optic cable systems as shown in the plans .
furnish temporary fiber optic cable as continuous length cable do not splice remnant cables together .
terminate cables and patch cords as required in the plans .
splice the cable along cable route at the points indicated in the plans .
m. external transceivers num .
shelf mount external transceivers in a manner that does not restrict the replacement of other components in the cabinet housing .
in type num traffic cabinets mount the transceiver on an aluminum shelf permanently attached to the eia num cabinet rack in the rear of the cabinet .
n. fiber distribution center fdc num .
do not install mechanical splices or field installed connectors .
equip unused panel slots with blank panels .
provide intercabinet and interbay bend radius and jumper management on each side of the fdc .
install all hardware according to the manufacturers recommended procedures and department standards .
determine specific hardware sizing from the project documents .
num .
for rackmount and wallmount fdcs array connectors in a vertical pattern with number one being at the top left position .
num .
prior to manufacture of preterminated fdcs verify the final installed location of all portions of each drop cable route from the splice closure to the equipment cabinet including but not limited to the cabinet location all conduit and pullboxes and the splice closure location to determine the required length of drop cable including all splice closure and storage coils to be factory manufactured with each fdc .
mount the preterminated fdcs with the connectors horizontal or facing downward and route the drop cable up or down as necessary .
route and secure the drop cable beside or behind the cabinet side panel such that it is fully strainrelieved does not violate the manufacturers recommended bending radius and does not interfere with the operation of or access to any cabinet equipment or electrical components .
num quality acceptance a .
fiber optic cable num .
installation test a .
test the fiber optic cabling installed on this project according to the fibers assigned use as shown in the plans and as specified below b .
upon completion of the cable installation splicing and termination and a minimum of fourteen days before equipment hookup test all terminated fibers and spare fibers for continuity events above num db and total attenuation of the cable .
in the event that fiber optic cable installed on the project is connected to existing fiber optic cable perform installation testing on both terminated fibers and spare fibers of the new cable and existing fibers to which the new fibers are spliced or connected .
submit both printed and electronic optical time domain reflectometer otdr traces as specified in subsection num .
num .
test requirements a. otdr test for all fiber links test and document the installation using otdr testing .
b .
conduct installation testing with a certified technician using an optical time domain reflectometer otdr and optical sourcepower meter .
the technician is directed to conduct the test using the standard operating procedure as defined by the manufacturer of the test equipment .
use an otdr capable of performing standard otdr functions including the ability to display individual lossgain in db per km as well as display all numpoint db loss cursors to allow isolating and viewing any and all points along a given fiber distance .
section numfiber optic system num c. use a factory patch cord of a length equal to the dead zone of the otdr to connect the otdr and the cable .
optionally the technician can use a factory fiber box of num ft num m minimum with no splices within the box .
d. conduct the tests at num nm for single mode cable .
e. attenuation test for all single mode and multimode fiber links test and document attenuation by a standard powermeter test .
f. for every fiber installed or connected to perform endtoend attenuation test .
for the test use a calibrated optical source and power meter using the standard threestage procedure .
determine acceptable link attenuation by the cumulative value of standard losses based on length number and type of splices and connectors .
num .
fiber optic cable acceptance a .
use the following criteria for acceptance of the cable b .
provide test results demonstrating the dbkm loss does not exceed num of the factory test or num of the cables published production loss .
consider the error rate for the test equipment in the test .
c. no event can exceed num db .
if any event is detected above num db replace or repair that event point .
d. the total db loss of the cable less events can not exceed the manufacturers production specifications as follows cable type max .
attenuation dbkm test wavelength singlemode num num nm num num nm e. if the total loss exceeds these specifications replace or repair that cable run and assume all expenses both labor and materials .
elevated attenuation due to exceeding the pulling tension during installation will require the replacement of the cable run at no expense to the department for either labor or materials .
f. note the department may allow the bidirectionalaveraging process of otdr testing particularly when splice losses are being unfavorably affected by mode field diameter misalignment core offset or core misalignment .
b. fusion splicing ensure that the maximum splice loss for any fusion splice does not exceed num db .
c. mechanical splicing ensure the maximum splice loss for mechanical splices does not exceed num db .
as noted in this specification mechanical splicing is only allowed when approved by the engineer for temporary applications .
d. fiber distribution center fdc test all completed and assembled preterminated fdcs at the point of manufacture and provide two copies of the manufacturer test documentation .
test each connecterized fiber in the preterminated fdc to demonstrate compliance with all requirements for cables and connectors as detailed in other subsections of these specifications .
include in the test documentation the location station number where the fdc is to be installed the serial number of the preterminated fdc the drop cable footage markings at each end of the drop cable and the total drop cable distance .
place one copy of the manufacturer test documentation in the equipment cabinet drawer where the preterminated fdc is installed and submit the other copy to the engineer .
section numfiber optic system num num contractor warranty and maintenance provide a one year manufacturer support usual and customary warranties period for all fiber optic cable materials furnished and installed as part of the fiber cable system .
include in warranty and support all contractor or manufacturer activities related to maintenance removal and replacement of cabling closures and other fiber optic system materials during the period of support .
begin the manufacturer warranty support period upon successful completion of the fiber optic quality acceptance testing as outlined in subsection of num .
ensure all manufacturer warranties are continuous throughout the period and state that they are subject to transfer to the department .
num measurement fiber optic system temporary fiber optic system testing and training complete in place accepted and of the kind size and type specified is measured as follows .
a .
outside plant fiber optic cable outside plant fiber optic cable is measured for payment by the actual number of linear feet installed complete functional and accepted .
fiber optic cable shall include but is not limited to all required fiber optic connectors fiber optic snowshoes marking and labeling patch cords and other ancillary items as required for a complete fiber optic installation .
b .
inside plant fiber optic cable inside plant fiber optic cable is measured for payment by the actual number of linear feet installed complete functional and accepted .
fiber optic cable shall include but is not limited to all required fiber optic connectors marking and labeling patch cords and other ancillary items as required for a complete fiber optic installation .
c. closures underground splice closures aerial splice closures and fdcs are measured for payment by the actual number of units installed complete functional and accepted .
closures shall include but are not limited to all required mounting and fastening hardware fiber optic connectors fdc interconnect cablespigtails marking and labeling patch cords and other ancillary items as required for a complete closure installation .
d. fiber optic splice fusion fiber optic splices fusion are measured for payment by the actual number of splices made complete and accepted .
fiber optic splices associated with the use of factoryconnectorized fdc interconnect cablespigtails on drop cables in accordance with section num will not be measured separately for payment .
mechanical splicing for temporary applications shall be included in other work and will not be measured separately for payment e. temporary fiber optic system payment for work on the temporary fiber optic system will be a lump sum project bid price and will be considered full compensation for all installed materials and labor associated with the temporary fiber optic system .
specific items include but are not limited to timber poles guys anchors lashing messenger cable conduit directional boring conduit fiber optic cable fusion splicing hardware attachments splice enclosures equipment rentals and disposal of materials .
f. transceivers external drop and repeat transceivers and external star transceivers are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
for each unit installed furnish and install all mounting and interconnection materials including but not limited to card cages hardware fiber and rsnum jumper cables rsnum converters and power supply cables at no separate cost to the department .
section numfiber optic system num num limits general provisions num through num .
num payment outside and inside fiber optic cable fdc interconnect cablespig tails splice closures splices temporary fiber optic system transceivers and testing are paid for at the contract unit price for the various items .
all other required items including fdc interconnect cablespigtails fanout kits fiber optic connectors fiber optic snowshoes and other ancillary items for a completed fiber optic system shall be included as part of the below pay items .
no separate payment shall be made for these items .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing the items complete and in place according to this specification .
payment for all items of this section is as follows payment will be made under item no .
num outside plant fiber optic cable type mode size linear feet linear meter item no .
num inside plant fiber optic cable type mode size linear feet linear meter item no .
num fiber optic closure type size per each item no .
num fiber optic closure fdc preterminated type size per each item no .
num fiber optic splice fusion per each item no .
num external transceiver mode per each item no .
num external star transceiver mode per each item no .
num temporary fiber optic system lump sum num adjustments general provisions num through num .
section numclosed circuit television cctv num general description this work includes furnishing and installing closed circuit television cctv system any specified type which is a cctv video surveillance camera including but not limited to color cctv cameras lens housing pantilt drive camera system assembly cabling mounting hardware interface panel camera control receiver and cabinet wiring .
this cctv system includes both fixed and ptz cameras as called for in the plans and provides operator control from and video imaging to the departments navigator advanced transportation management system atms or other camera operating software indicated on the plans or in the contract documents .
provide all equipment materials and work in accordance with all manufacturers recommendations including but not limited to all mounting wiring and cabling power supply surge suppression and communications equipment and materials .
use only equipment and components that meet the requirements of these minimum specifications and are listed on the departments qualified products list qpl .
num definitions cctv system type b the type b ptz dome cctv system uses a selfcontained camera system assembly with an analog ntsc video output and rsnum or rsnum serial data control interface .
this camera is used for shall be compatible with the legacy navigator system and should be used for additionsreplacement within existing system segments .
cctv camera type c the internet protocol ip ptz dome camera system ip camera uses a built in encoder to provide the moving picture experts groups mpegnum part num h.num video compression technology in accordance with the international organization for standardization iso and international electrotechnical commission iec requirements detailed in the isoiec num standard .
this camera is compatible with the legacy navigator system but should be used for new installations in expansion segments .
section numclosed circuit television cctv num cctv camera type d the internet protocol ip fixed camera system uses a built in encoder to provide the moving picture experts groups mpegnum part num h.num video compression technology in accordance with the international organization for standardization iso and international electrotechnical commission iec requirements detailed in the isoiec num standard and is for locations where fixed views are desired for dual use with video detection or at locations where power requirements prohibit other type cameras for surveillance .
cctv camera type h the internet protocol ip high definition camera system uses a built in encoder to provide the moving picture experts groups mpegnum part num h.num video compression technology in accordance with the international organization for standardization iso and international electrotechnical commission iec requirements detailed in the isoiec num standard and is compliant with smpte numm standard of num x num pixel resolution and a num format .
it is compatible with the navigator system and provides enhanced features for digital zoom and new format displays num at viewing stations .
cctv camera type n the internet protocol ip ptz camera system for night low light viewing may be provided in an outdoor external positioner or dome .
night vision will be provided by thermal imaging .
video encoder type b type b is a standalone environmentally hardened encoder for a single video signal suitable for field cabinet use .
video encoder type c type c is a high density unit that supports multiple video signals and is suitable for control center use .
video encoder type d this encoder is a standalone environmentally hardened encoder for a single video signal suitable for field cabinet use that is compatible with the existing legacy encoder and decoder video systems and otherwise would not meet type b requirements .
video encoder type e this encoder is a high density encoder card unit for multiple video signals with one encoder per video signal suitable for control center use with the existing legacy encoder and decoder video systems and otherwise would not meet type b requirements .
video encoder chassis type e this chassis is a high density mount unit that supports multiple video encoder type c or video decoder type c cards suitable for control center use with the existing legacy encoder and decoder video systems .
num related references a .
standard specifications section num strain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies section num highway lighting section num electrical wire cable and conduit section num electrical wire and cable section num electrical conduit section num traffic signal equipment section num communication and electronic equipment b. referenced documents american national standards institute ansi american society of testing and materials astm electronic industries association eia fcc rules part num subpart j insulated cable engineers association icea international electrotechnical commission iec isoiec num section numclosed circuit television cctv num international municipal signal association imsa milhdbknuma milstdnumfnum method num procedure num exterior salt atmospheres national electric code nec national electrical manufacturers association nema nemanum underwriters laboratory incorporated ul national television standards committee ntsc num submittals this subsection and the following chart provide the contractor with an outline of the submittal requirements for the equipment and components for all pay items in this section num .
this chart is to be used as a guide and does not relieve the contractor from submitting additional information to form a complete submittal package .
material specification reference catalog cuts mfg .
spec .
materials cert .
lab test install .
proced .
test plan maint .
proced .
submittal due date cal .
days after ntp training plan num x x x x num days section num submittal requirements submit test procedures required for this items within sixty num calendar days after the notice to proceed and prior to any installation unless noted otherwise in the contract documents .
submit to the engineer for approval two num printed and one num electronic copy of service and maintenance documentation for all equipment components and all other materials required within these specifications .
provide submittal data that is neat legible and orderly .
neatly organize each package of submittal data and separate by hardware item .
use the materials certification package index and transmittal form contained in section num of the special provisions for each pay item to document and list all material and components that are included in the submittal package .
any submittal data submitted without the indextransmittal form or that is incomplete will be rejected .
products appearing on the qualified products list qpl are exempt from normal submittal requirements .
these products have been evaluated by the office of traffic operations and have proven their capability of meeting the appropriate georgia department of transportation specification .
any of these products may be used without submitting catalogue cuts sampling or pretesting .
the contractor shall submit a letter to the engineer stating which qpl items they will use .
the engineer andor department designee must ascertain that the construction item is the same material identified on the appropriate qpl and will acknowledge receipt of these items in the project diary or as required by the construction manual .
a. cctv system cctv system retrofit assembly cctv system retrofit assembly furnish only num .
camera system assembly submit complete physical performance and operational materials submittal data for the camera system assembly and all associated components .
num .
camera system assembly mount submit complete physical performance and operational materials submittal data for the camera system assembly mount and all associated components and hardware .
num .
cabinet interface assembly section numclosed circuit television cctv num submit complete physical performance and operational materials submittal data for the cabinet interface assembly and all associated components and hardware .
submit complete physical performance and operational materials submittal data for all cables wire and connectors required for a complete and operational cctv system .
submit cables and connectors as specified here and as recommended by the cctv system manufacturer .
num .
submittal review demonstration test set submit demonstration test sets for department evaluation after the engineer approves the submittal materials for the equipment and materials listed below .
the demonstration test sets shall be connected to and operated through the navigator system by the engineer .
deliver the test set to the department at the location specified by the engineer .
request a delivery and test time a minimum of num days in advance .
for projects with multiple camera installations provide demonstration test sets of the materials types and quantities as shown below a. cctv system quantity num b. cctv system retrofit assembly quantity num a demonstration test set shall include all materials components assemblies control software an documentation of a cctv system and shall be a complete fully functional cctv system .
b .
acceptance testing submit acceptance test procedures and a desired acceptance test schedule .
c. warranties and guarantees submit materials submittal data providing complete example documentation on all manufacturers warranties or guarantees on all cctv system equipment and hardware components furnished as required in subsection num .
d. training prior to training submit resume and references of instructors .
obtain approval from the engineer that the instructor is qualified in hisher respective field .
submit the training plan within num days of the notice to proceed .
include in the training plan an outline of the training course .
obtain approval of the training plan from the engineer .
the training plan shall explain in detail the contents of the course and the time schedule of when the training shall be given .
coordinate actual training with installation schedules as approved by the engineer .
num materials num cctv systems camera types are as specified on the plans and may vary by location within project limits .
ensure that the individual components and assemblies of the cctv system conform to the requirements specified in the following sections .
ensure that all equipment materials components and assemblies of the cctv system conform to the cctv manufacturers requirements and recommendations .
a .
camera system assembly follow these minimum requirements for a camera system assembly including the camera dome assembly lens pantilt drive and control electronics .
num .
for dome enclosure cameras types b c and h a .
provide a downwardlooking circular domeshaped enclosure assembly .
the enclosure shall have a maximum diameter of num in num mm at its widest point and a maximum height of num in num mm from the top of the housing assembly to the bottom point of the dome .
the upper housing shall be constructed of a nonmetallic uvstabilized material of a light color or constructed of an aluminum material with a heatcured paint coating of an equivalent color .
the lower housing shall be constructed of a uvstabilized opticallycorrect acrylic material .
the maximum weight of the complete and fully functional camera system assembly including the section numclosed circuit television cctv num camera lens pantilt drive control electronics environmental control components housing assembly and hub adapter shall be num lbs num kg .
b .
use an enclosure assembly that secures to the mounting bracket arm with a num in num mm threaded pipe nipple .
hub adapters for the threaded pipe nipple on either the enclosure or the mounting arm or both are permitted .
c. all fastening and mounting hardware on or within the enclosure assembly shall be stainless steel .
d. use a pressurized enclosure assembly that uses extra dry nitrogen .
provide a pressure relief valve and a schrader valve for filling and evacuating the enclosure .
the enclosure should have an operating pressure range of num psi num kpa .
e. when an enclosure assembly requires a heater and a circulating blower fan for environmental temperature and defogging control maximum electrical load for the heater shall be no more than num va. f. ensure that the cctv camera system performs all required functions during and after being subjected to an ambient operating temperature range of numº to numº f num to num c as defined in the environmental requirements section of the nema ts num standard .
verify that the cctv camera manufacturer certifies its device has successfully completed environmental testing as defined in the environmental requirements section of the nema ts num standard .
g. ensure that the housing protects the camera and other internal components from rain dust corrosive elements and typical conditions found at a roadside environment .
ensure that the cctv camera mounting hardware and any other camerarelated material that is exposed to the environment can withstand num mph num kph wind speeds .
h. electrical power for the complete camera system assembly shall be per the manufacturers recommendations and between numv to numv dc or singlephase ac utilizing a twowire not counting ground supply from the cabinet interface assembly in the equipment cabinet .
do not use a dualvoltage power supply .
maximum electrical load with all subsystems operational including the heater shall be no more than num va. i .
for analog cameras type b ensure that the camera produces an analog ntsccompliant composite video output with a signaltonoise ratio of numdb or greater .
j .
use a camera unit with an integrated camera sensor and zoom lens assembly .
the camera shall use a ccd image sensor with a minimum of num horizontal by num vertical active picture elements .
the camera shall have a minimum resolution of num horizontal tv lines by num vertical tv lines .
k. the camera shall include onoff selectable automatic gain control and manualautomatic selectable white balance .
the camera shall include an electronic shutter mode with userselectable speeds of a minimum range from num second to num second .
the camera unit shall provide an onoff selectable daynight function where the image sensing and output automatically switch between color and blackandwhite imaging fixed color or blackandwhite imaging shall be usercontrollable .
the camera sensitivity shall be no less than num lux in color mode num second and num lux in blackandwhite mode num second ir cut removed .
l. provide a camera unit with an integrated zoom lens of a minimum of numx optical zoom and a minimum of numx hd camera type d shall have a minimum of numx digital zoom .
the camera shall not employ any digital zoom functionality unless the lens is at the full limit of optical zoom and the zoom command continues to be applied in which case the camera unit shall automatically switch from optical to digital zoom .
the camera unit shall include onoff selectable automatic focus and manualautomatic selectable iris control .
m. use a pantilt drive for the camera unit that is fullycontained within the enclosure assembly .
the drive shall be capable of num degree panning and at least num degree horizontal to num degree vertical looking downward tilting .
section numclosed circuit television cctv num the camera unit and pantilt drive shall provide automatic numdegree image output flip at the bottom of the tilt travel .
the camera unit and pantilt drive shall provide a minimum of eight privacy blackout zones each zone being individually programmable to be onoff by the user .
the panning speed when a panleft or panright command is applied by the user shall be between num and num degrees per second .
the tilting speed when a tilt up or tiltdown command is applied by the user shall be between num and num degrees per second .
n. provide a system control interface to the camera system assembly that physically and logically supplies the user commands to and monitoring from the camera system assembly including but not limited to pan tilt zoom focus position reporting and configuration .
the system control interface shall physically connect the camera system assembly to the cabinet interface .
provide a system control interface that is in compliance with all of the physical and operational requirements specified for a cctv system .
provide the capability to set the communications through the system control interface or through the user control interface in the cabinet do not require the openingdisassembly of the camera system enclosure to set the communications address .
store all user configurable settings in nonvolatile memory that is retained indefinitely upon loss of power .
num .
camera type d fixed camera .
fixed cameras shall be designed for outdoor applications meeting nema numx or ipnum rating requirements and include all necessary harness and cables to extend the video power and data from the cctv camera location to the field cabinet .
the enclosure shall be suitable for the location and meet all requirements as denoted above for other camera types .
the lens shall have a minimum fstop of num with a variable manual zoom of num num mm .
the iris shall support automatic or set to yield optical results under various outdoor lighting conditions .
the camera shall provide all other functionality as required of other types to produce a fixed view of the roadway .
num .
ip cameras types c d h shall provide the same functionality as the analog camera unit and shall include built in encoders.i.e .
ethernet ready ..
in addition ip cameras shall meet the following minimum requirements a .
power over ethernet ieeenumaf or num vac power input .
b. shall utilize h.num video coding experts group vcegmoving picture experts group mpeg video compression technology types as compatible with the navigator system .
c. shall be capable of two num simultaneous video streams .
num .
high definition cameras type h shall provide the same functionality as other ip built in encoders camera types and in addition shall meet the following minimum requirements a. hd nump resolution at num images per second ips b .
minimum numx digital zoom .
c. num aspect ratio d. digital image stabilization num .
cctv camera type n internet protocol ip ptz camera system for night low light viewing shall provide video surveillance imaging for reliable video images clearly in near total darkness .
images shall be provided in num x num resolution with dual output stream digital video in h.num mpegnum or mjpeg formats .
num camera system assembly mount provide a camera system assembly mount that includes a mounting bracket arm camera enclosure mount and disconnect mounting straps and incidental fastening hardware .
all fastening and mounting hardware shall be stainless steel .
the mounting bracket arm shall be suitable for polemounted applications using mounting straps or bolts .
the bracket shall be fabricated to exactly mate with the camera enclosure mountdisconnectpipe nipple and any needed polemount adapter with no drilling or welding required .
the bracket shall be fabricated from aluminum alloy with an exterior polyurethane coating stainless steel or mild steel with a heatcured paint coating .
all bracket coatings shall be light in color and corrosion resistant in accordance with milstdnumf num method num procedure num for exterior salt atmospheres .
section numclosed circuit television cctv num unless otherwise indicated on the plans use a mounting bracket arm that locates the vertical centerline of the camera enclosure from num in num mm to num in num mm from the exterior surface of the support pole .
the mounting bracket arm shall provide for cable entrance through the base of the bracket directly from the support pole and from the exterior through a rain tight opening on the underside of the bracket and adjacent to the support pole .
the bracket arm shall provide sufficient opening to fully enclose the cables .
provide nonmetallic cable protection grommets for both cable entrances .
unless otherwise shown in the plans mount the bracket arm to the support pole using a minimum of two ½ in num mm or greater stainless steel mounting straps .
num camera lowering system assembly mount where specified on the plans provide a camera lowering system that includes a mounting bracket arm self aligning docking system video and power surge protection .
the unit will be self contained suitable for polemounted applications using straps or bolts .
all fastening and mounting hardware shall be stainless steel .
the lowering cables shall be stainless steel .
all bracket coatings shall be light in color and corrosion resistant in accordance with milstdnumf num method num procedure num for exterior salt atmospheres .
the lowering device shall have a support capacity of num lbs .
num kg .
and shall provide for camera systems at varying heights above ground level to match the height of the mounting structure .
electrical power for the complete camera lowering system assembly shall be per the manufacturers recommendations and num vac .
num cabinet interface assembly use a cabinet interface assembly that provides electrical service for the camera system assembly and provides the user control interface connection to the navigator system andor user personnel .
install the cabinet interface assembly in the equipment cabinet .
all fastening and mounting hardware shall be stainless steel .
the cabinet interface panel assembly includes the following cctv interface enclosure camera system assembly power supply with surge suppression terminal blocks and video cable surge suppression for camera system assembly cabling user control interface to the navigator system andor user personnel with surge suppression the navigator standard cctv control protocol hereinafter called the cctv standard protocol is specified below and shall connect to the user control interface unit through an rsnum serial data interface directly from the navigator system .
provide the control software with an unrestricted noncancelable user license for the departments use with any navigator equipment at any location .
furnish three num copies each of the software license appropriate rsnum cable and user documentation per project .
a. cctv standard protocol num .
general for all camera types use the navigator standard cctv control protocol hereinafter called the cctv standard protocol or standard protocol for cctv system control communications between the camera unit and the gdot navigator central system to achieve a fully functional communications interface to utilize all of the capabilities and functions of the camera .
implement the standard protocol for all cctv equipment installed on this project .
the cctv standard protocol governs all control communications between the navigator central system hereinafter called the host and the cctv system .
num .
interface for type b cameras the cctv system hereinafter called the remote shall communicate using the cctv standard protocol over an rsnum serial interface .
data is transmitted using num start bit num data bits and num stop bit no parity at a baud rate of num .
each remote shall be identified by a unique integer address between num and num .
this address is set during installation and shall not be altered using the standard protocol .
the address is included in messages to identify the intended recipient of commands from the host and responses from the remote .
section numclosed circuit television cctv num num cabling and connectors provide cabling and connectors between the camera system assembly and the cabinet interface assembly as shown in the cctv system detail drawings and in the plans .
label all cables .
all cables shall meet industry and manufacturer recommendations .
when required for the camera application coaxial video signal cables will be provided with labels attached at both ends of each cable .
coaxial cables will use bnc connectors with goldplated center pins on the video signal cables use only connectors recommended by the cable manufacturer .
provide control cable with labels attached at both ends of the cable .
terminate control cable in the equipment cabinet as shown in the cctv system detail drawings in the plans and as recommended by the cctv system manufacturer .
ground or bond any pair shielding and any unused conductors in accordance with the cctv system manufacturers recommendations .
for ip cameras provide communications cabling outside plant category num as recommended by the cctv system manufacturer .
label all cables .
separate power cables must be clearly labeled as such and meet manufacturer recommendations .
when power over ethernet cameras are provided cabling must be sized and rated in accordance with manufacturer recommendations and clearly labeled as such .
num video encoder all types provide a video encoder in accordance with the minimum requirements below for the encoding of analog video inputs and transmission as digital streams over a network .
a .
video encoder type a not used b .
video encoder type b video encoder type b is a standalone environmentally hardened encoder for a single video signal suitable for field cabinet use .
num .
general a .
all encoders provided by the contractor shall be new and shall be from the same manufacturer and be fully compatible and interoperable with each type provided .
b .
all encoder types provided by the contractor shall be fully compatible and interoperable with the gdot existing network equipment .
c. mean time between failures mtbf encoders shall have a minimum mtbf of num hours .
d. latency the endtoend system latency between the encoder and decoder appliances shall be no more than num msec not including network delays .
the encoders shall support various frame adjustments to minimize latency .
e. remote control encoders shall be remotely adjustable via a video management system or command set so that a technician can adjust image quality controls for contrast brightness hue and color levels .
f. video equipment shall support the ntsc signal format .
g. furnish rackmountable or shelfmountable units .
h. rackmountable units shall include integrated brackets for mounting in standard eia numinch rack rack mountings .
num .
physical and environmental requirements .
a .
the video encoder shall have the following ports as a minimum network num mbps rjnum or as directed by engineer .
video connector bnc section numclosed circuit television cctv num serial data interface one num minimum rjnum portconnector .
serial port may utilize dsub connectors or thumb screw terminals as approved by the engineer .
b .
in locations where there are more than one video source and encoders with multiple video ports are approved by engineer each video input port shall meet all the video and data requirements of section numx.x.num independently .
c. the video input performance measures shall comply with ntsc and eia requirements including the eianum standard with a nominal composite video of num volt peaktopeak vpp .
the equipment shall have an electrical impedance of num ohms .
d. operating temperature of num degrees f num c to num degrees f num c with relative humidity between num to num noncondensing .
e. ventilation fans are not permitted .
f. encoders shall be installed in a field cabinet with protection from moisture and airborne contaminants blowing rain wind blowing sand blowing dust humidity roadside pollutants vandalism and theft .
g. encoders shall be resistant to vibration and shock and conform to sections num and num respectively of the nema ts num standard .
h. encoders for field site locations shall be pcb conformal coated to provide a level of protection from humidity contaminants dust pollution etc .
i. encoders shall provide led status indicators for local status display of video data network interfaces and power .
j .
cable connections datavideopower shall require no tools for installation or removal and be designed with positive locking devices such that they will not vibrate loose .
k. provide external markings for all connectors and indicators .
replaceable components shall be permanently marked and traceable to the supplied documentation including schematics and parts list .
l. the external markings shall include the product function name model number serial number and manufacturers name .
m. all parts required for a completed video system shall be made of corrosionresistant materials such as stainless steel anodized aluminum brass or goldplated metal .
n. all individual encoders shall be shelf rack nummodule or din rail mountable .
other mounting options may be submitted for review and approval by the engineer .
o. nominal power input voltage of num vac num hz .
num hz .
p. maximum power consumption of num watts .
q .
if the device requires operating voltages of less than num vac the appropriate voltage converter shall be supplied .
all voltage conversion devices shall also be temperature hardened as specified herein for location field or central .
r. the equipment or its voltage converter shall operate within a voltage range of num vac to num vac .
s. encoders shall provide for automatic recovery from an over or under voltage condition when prime power has returned to the tolerance values specified herein .
all configuration parameters shall be stored in nonvolatile memory and no reprogramming or manual adjustments shall be required upon power recovery .
num .
video data requirements section numclosed circuit television cctv num a .
the encoder shall be capable of streaming a minimum of the following video compression technology types h.num video coding experts group vcegmoving picture experts group mpeg num moving picture experts group mjpeg motion jpeg moving picture experts group b .
the encoder shall be capable of streaming multiple bandwidth and compression types simultaneously per video input channel .
c. the encoder shall support streaming multicast and unicast streams simultaneously .
d. the encoder shall have the ability to automatically initiate and stream a multicast stream upon starting without any remote request to join the multicast group .
e. the encoder shall support multiple simultaneous real time streaming protocol rtsp requests .
f. the encoder shall be able to supply multiple unique and independent video streams with frame rate bit rate and image size settings adjustable through an rtsp request .
g. the encoder shall support a minimum of num simultaneous unique and independent h.num video streams with frame rate bit rate and image size settings adjustable per video input channel .
h. the encoder shall support capturing of snapshot images of the video stream .
i. encoders shall be a hardwarebased network device able to accept a minimum of one analog national television system committee ntsc video input and encode for transport across ip networks .
j. encoders shall be specifically designed for network operation and adhere to iso standards .
k. support the following minimum encoded resolutions ntsc full dnum cifsif qcifqsif l. dynamic bandwidth control provide up to num mbps or greater rates the data rate shall be defined as the maximum committed bandwidth to be utilized which includes data bursting .. m. bandwidth increments shall be user configurable via the network .
the minimum bandwidth setting shall be numkbs or less .
n. encoder streams shall be capable of being set to variable or constant bit rates .
o .
the default bandwidth for the encoders as furnished shall be set to nummbps when communicating over fiber and numkbs when communicating otherwise .
p. provide onboard buffered video memory for protection against potential network disruptions .
q. encoders shall be capable of providing jpeg snapshots and transfer image via ftp .
r. there shall be available standard software decoders that are compatible with the provided hardware encoders .
num .
network requirements a. encoders shall meet the following minimum network requirements b .
network connection shall be ethernet compliant ieee num numu and numx num mbps or higher auto sensing fullhalfduplex operations .
c. encoders shall provide encapsulation of the video streams in a udp packet for network transmission .
section numclosed circuit television cctv num d. encoders shall connect to a network device i.e .
ethernet switchrouter ip wireless device etc .
via a rjnum connector through category numeor higher quality stranded patch cords .
e. all network rjnum ports shall be standard eiatianuma pinouts and shall be rated at nummbps or greater .
f. all encoders provided by the contractor shall be fully interoperable without customization or the addition of appliances within either the remote or primary communications network .
all devices shall be fully interoperable with the backbone communications network .
g. static ip addressing class a b and c. h. rtp udp unicast and ip multicast internet group multicast protocol igmp vnum features for digital video transmission .
i. encoders shall support real time streaming protocol rtsp over rtp .
j. encoders shall support multiple stream requests .
num .
serial data interface requirements the encoder shall meet the following minimum serial data interface requirements a .
the encoder shall provide bidirectional serial communications over ethernet num basetx via the following methods encoder serial port to decoder serial port data stream .
ip socket to encoder serial port by tcp protocol .
b .
each serial port shall provide fullduplex serial interface and data rates up to num kbps minimum .
c. serial port shall be software configurable locally or over the network to eianum mode of operation as defined by the eia for data format data rate and data structure e.g .
baud rate the number of bits parity stop bits flow control etc .
via the management software provided .
d. no serial adaptors or interface converters shall be permitted .
e. encoders shall be capable to use the serial interface port to support ptz camera control functions .
f. encoder serial port shall provide ip addressing and socket number selection and provide the capability to establish an ip connection directly from an operator workstation or server to any encoder ip address and socket number to transport serial data independent of whether or not the video stream for that ve is being viewed .
num .
on screen display requirements where osd functionality is not supplied by cameras the minimum onscreen text insertion and display requirements include a. encoders shall support a static text insertion capability and shall be capable of inserting a minimum of one num user configurable text messages of up to num characters in length .
b. encoders shall be able to generate a date and time stamp in the video stream and shall be synchronized to a timeserver on the network .
c. encoders shall be able to display camera title in the video stream .
d. encoders shall have the option to display or not display the onscreen text .
num .
management requirements a. encoders shall be manageable through snmp vnum http ftptftp andor telnetcli .
b .
the management system shall be provided to remotely configure and diagnose the encoder .
section numclosed circuit television cctv num c. have capability to resetreboot and firmware upload via the methods listed above .
d. have the capability to remotely change any of the device configuration settings including bit rates image resolution and compression settings and serial interface type .
e. provide predefined optimized video compression and streaming settings for various bit rates .
f. provide update capability for the firmware in the encoder from the central site .
ability to access the serial number firmware number ip address and equipment configuration .
g. have the capability to upload firmware to multiple units automatically .
h. provide ability for remote firmware upgrades .
i .
provide a commandline interface on the console port for local management .
j .
provide administrative access control via a configurable password .
k. provide support for managing the administrative security parameters via both the local management and remote management interfaces required herein .
j .
provide support for managing the following video streaming parameters via the remote management functionality required herein .
target address and port ttl parameter resolution frame rate ip ratio encoding bit rate onscreen text or title overlay features c. video encoder type c card video encoder type c card is a high density encoder unit card for multiple video signals with one encoder per video signal suitable for control center use in a slot based chassis .
num .
general a .
each encoder of a video encoder type c card shall meet all the video encoder type b requirements except the physical requirements as noted in section num.b .
b .
all contractor provided video encoder type c cards shall be compatible with and of the same make as video encoder type c chassis provided by the contractor .
c. all contractor provided video encoder type c cards shall be compatible with and of the same make as standalone video encoder type b provided by the contractor .
num .
physical a .
each video encoder type c card shall include a minimum of num encoders per card with a corresponding number of bnc ports per encoder .
b .
each video encoder type c card shall include one rjnum network port num mbps .
c. video encoder type c card shall be fully contained and obtain power from the video encoder type c chassis .
section numclosed circuit television cctv num d. video encoder type c chassis video encoder type c chassis is a high density rack mount unit that supports multiple video encoder type c or video decoder type c cards suitable for control center use .
num .
general all contractor provided video encoder type c chassis shall be compatible with and of the same make as video encoder type c cards provided by the contractor num .
physical chassis shall support a minimum of num video encoder type c cards or num video decoder type c cards or a combination thereof up to the minimum total cards .
a. chassis shall be numu or less and be num rack mountable .
b .
each chassis shall be capable of operating on num internal power supply .
c. each chassis shall be capable of supporting a minimum of num internal power supply .
e. video encoder type d video encoder type d is a standalone environmentally hardened encoder for a single video signal suitable for field cabinet use that is compatible with the existing legacy encoder and decoder video systems and otherwise would not meet type b requirements .
num .
general encoders of this type shall be of the same make and model of encoders that it shall replace share communication in a drop and add link with or with the decoder that shall decode its video unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
f. video encoder type e cards video encoder type ecards is a high density encoder unit for multiple video signals with one encoder per video signal suitable for control center use with the existing legacy encoder and decoder video systems and otherwise would not meet type b requirements .
num .
general encoder cards of this type shall be of the same make and model of the encoder cards that it shall replace or with the encoder cards that resides in the same chassis that it shall be added to unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
g. video encoder type e chassis video encoder type e chassis is a high density rack mount unit that supports multiple video encoder type c or video decoder type c cards suitable for control center use with the existing legacy encoder and decoder video systems and otherwise would not meet type b requirements .
num video decoder all types a .
video decoder type a not used b .
video decoder type b video decoder type b is a standalone decoder for the decoding of ip streams of the formats compatible of the video encoder type b streams into a standard ntsc analog video stream output .
num .
general section numclosed circuit television cctv num a .
all video decoder type b shall meet all the requirements of a video encoder type b unless otherwise stated .
b .
be new and shall be from the same manufacturer and be fully compatible and interoperable with each type provided .
num .
physical and environmental video output connector bnc a .
the video output performance measures shall comply with ntsc and eia requirements including the eianum standard with a nominal composite video of num volt peaktopeak vpp .
the equipment shall have an electrical impedance of num ohms .
num .
video data requirements a .
the decoder shall be capable of decoding a minimum of the following video compression technology types h.num video coding experts group vcegmoving picture experts group mpeg num moving picture experts group mjpeg motion jpeg moving picture experts group b .
the decoder shall support joining multicast groups and decode the streams of the type and video compression technology listed above .
c. the decoder shall support decoding unicast streams from a of the type and video compression technology listed above .
d. the decoder shall support decoding of streams from rtsp requests of the type and video compression technology listed above e. the decoder shall be able to decode unique and independent video streams with frame rate bit rate and image size settings adjustable through an rtsp request .
f. decoders shall be a hardwarebased network device able to provide a minimum of one analog national television system committee ntsc video output and decode ip video transported across ip networks .
g. decoders shall be specifically designed for network operation and adhere to iso standards .
h. support the following minimum encoded resolutions ntsc full dnum cifsif qcifqsif decoder streams shall be capable of decoding streams set to variable or constant bit rates num .
network requirements .
decoders shall meet the following minimum network requirements network connection shall be ethernet compliant ieee num numu and numx num mbps or higher auto sensing fullhalfduplex operations .
num .
serial data interface requirements num .
on screen display requirements a. decoders shall support a static text insertion capability and shall be capable of inserting a minimum of one num user configurable text messages of up to num characters in length .
b. decoders shall be able to generate a date and time stamp in the video stream and shall be synchronized to a timeserver on the network .
c. decoders shall be able to display camera title in the video stream .
section numclosed circuit television cctv num d. decoders shall have the option to display or not display the onscreen text .
num .
management requirements a. decoders shall be manageable through snmp vnum http ftptftp andor telnetcli .
b .
the management system shall be provided to remotely configure and diagnose the decoder .
c. video decoder type c card video decoder type c card is a high density decoder unit card for multiple video signals with one decoder per video signal suitable for control center use in a slot based chassis .
num .
general a .
each decoder of a video decoder type c card shall meet all the video decoder type b requirements except the physical requirements as noted in section num.b .
b .
all contractor provided video decoder type c cards shall be compatible with and of the same make as video decoder type c chassis provided by the contractor c. all contractor provided video decoder type c cards shall be compatible with and of the same make as standalone video decoder type b provided by the contractor num .
physical a .
each video decoder type c card shall include a minimum of num decoders per card with a corresponding number of bnc ports per decoder .
b .
each video decoder type c card shall include one rjnum network port num mbps .
c. video decoder type c card shall be fully contained and obtain power from the video decoder type c chassis .
d. video decoder type c chassis video decoder type c chassis is a high density rack mount unit that supports multiple video decoder type c or video decoder type c cards suitable for control center use .
num .
general a .
all contractor provided video decoder type c chassis shall be compatible with and of the same make as video decoder type c cards provided by the contractor num .
physical a. chassis shall support a minimum of num video decoder type c cards or num video decoder type c cards or a combination thereof up to num total cards .
b. chassis shall be numu or less and be num rack mountable .
c. each chassis shall be capable of operating on num internal power supply .
d. each chassis shall be capable of supporting a minimum of num internal power supply .
e. video decoder type d video decoder type d is a standalone environmentally hardened decoder for a single video signal suitable for field cabinet use that is compatible with the existing legacy decoder and decoder video systems and otherwise would not meet type b requirements .
num .
general section numclosed circuit television cctv num decoders of this type shall be of the same make and model of decoders that it shall replace share communication in a drop and add link with or with the decoder that shall decode its video unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
f. video decoder type e cards video decoder type ecards is a high density decoder unit for multiple video signals with one decoder per video signal suitable for control center use with the existing legacy decoder and decoder video systems and otherwise would not meet type b requirements .
num .
general decoder cards of this type shall be of the same make and model of the decoder cards that it shall replace or with the decoder cards that resides in the same chassis that it shall be added to unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
g. video decoder type e chassis video decoder type e chassis is a high density rack mount unit that supports multiple video decoder type c or video decoder type c cards suitable for control center use with the existing legacy encoder and decoder video systems and otherwise would not meet type b requirements .
num .
general encoder chassis of this type shall be of the same make and model of the encoder chassis that it shall replace unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
num delivery storage and handling for furnish only items provide all materials in protective packaging suitable for shipping and storage .
label all boxes with contents including manufacturer name model serial numbers and project number .
package each productsystem in individual boxes as units of one complete unit .
multiple boxes for one assembly is acceptable but multiple assemblies in the same box is not .
deliver assemblies to the department at the location specified by the engineer .
deliver at one time the full quantity of complete assemblies as shown in the plans multiple deliveries are not acceptable .
num construction requirements ensure that all construction for the equipment materials components and assemblies of the cctv system specified conform to the cctv manufacturers requirements and recommendations .
num personnel not applicable num equipment not applicable num preparation not applicable num fabrication not applicable num construction a .
general requirements request that the department establish the utility services required for a cctv installation as described in section num .
section numclosed circuit television cctv num b. cctv system all types num .
installation requirements mount the camera system assembly and the mounting bracket arm at the cardinal direction and height as shown in the plans .
install cables between the camera system assembly and the equipment cabinet inside new hollow metal or concrete support poles unless otherwise specified .
where devices are installed on existing wood poles install cabling on the wood poles in rigid metal conduit risers of minimum num in num mm diameter .
use weather heads on all nipple and conduit openings .
neatly install and route cabling to minimize movement in the wind and chafing against the pole device or bracket .
form a drip loop at the weather head and route cabling to prevent water entry into the weatherhead or mounting bracket arm .
install the mounting bracket arm no more than num in num mm above the weatherhead and install a drip loop that is no more than num in num mm below the weatherhead at the loops lowest point .
install the cabinet interface assembly components in the equipment cabinet as shown in the cctv system detail drawings .
neatly arrange and dress all wiring firmly lace or bundle it and mechanically secure the wiring without the use of adhesive fasteners .
route and secure all wiring and cabling to avoid sharp edges and to avoid conflicts with other equipment or cabling .
route all cctv cables separate from any numvac power wiring or surge suppressor ground wiring .
neatly coil and dress between num ft num m and num ft num m of cables in the bottom of the cabinet .
dress and route grounding wires separately from all other cabinet wiring and with the minimum length possible between the suppressor and the ground bussbar .
do not splice any cable shield or conductor used for video control communications signaling power supply or grounding .
fasten all components of the cabinet interface assembly to be mounted on the equipment cabinet side panel or on the cctv interface enclosure with stainless steel hexhead or phillipshead machine screws .
install the screws into tapped and threaded holes in the panels .
fasten studmounted components to a mounting bracket providing complete access to the studs and mounting nuts .
all fastener heads and nuts when used shall be fully accessible within the equipment cabinet and any component shall be removable without requiring removal of other components panels or mounting rails .
do not use selftapping or selfthreading fasteners .
num .
cctv system configuration program and configure the cctv system in accordance with the procedure below .
provide all required documentation in writing with all data recorded in the format of the navigator standard cctv control protocol .
perform the cctv system configuration in accordance with the acceptance procedures in subsection num .
configure each cctv system with the communications address specified by the department prior to any acceptance testing at a given cctv system site .
configure the communications address as num unless otherwise shown in the plans or directed by the engineer .
gdots atms surveillance camera control integration and calibration procedure is as follows a .
record the position status setting for the full pan left and pan right stops .
the pan left and pan right stops are defined as the camera positions when the pole initially comes into view from either direction at maximum zoom .
b .
record the position status setting and angle degrees from horizon for maximum tilt up and maximum tilt straight down num degrees down from horizontal .
c. record the position status settings for each end of maximum focus range .
d. record the position status settings for maximum zoom out and zoom in .
e. provide to the department the following information from each field installation site location as shown in plans height of camera ft above travel lanes azimuth compass heading in degrees at cameras right stop as defined above azimuth compass heading in degrees at cameras left stop as defined above section numclosed circuit television cctv num device id as shown on the plans example camnum cctv system communications address example num ip address subnet mask gateway portsocket of serial port on encoder multicast address video switch input port when connected comments num .
asbuilt drawings furnish asbuilt cctv system wiring diagrams identified by location .
include all wiring cabling conductor function connector type and connector pinouts .
num quality acceptance a .
general acceptance testing of cctv system all types consists of three phases num field installation testing num cctv system site testing and num burnin period .
after the engineers granting of burnin period completion obtain cctv system acceptance .
perform acceptance testing for all equipment hardware and work provided under this contract including each cctv video surveillance field installation assembly and all associated communications hardware at a control center or communications hub .
perform all testing in the presence of the engineer .
notify the engineer of a desired acceptance test schedule no less than fourteen calendar days prior to beginning the testing except for testing using the navigator software and existing navigator control center and communications equipment .
for acceptance testing using the navigator software and existing navigator control center and communications equipment coordinate this testing with the engineer no less than num days prior to the start of this testing .
except as provided herein regarding the departments navigator software develop provide all equipment for and perform all acceptance testing for all cctv system equipment hardware and work .
develop detailed and thorough test procedures with full test plan descriptions test and measurement equipment listings and test results data sheets .
submit these test plans to the engineer for approval .
the engineer will notify the contractor of the approval or disapproval of the test procedures only test procedures approved by the engineer can be used .
provide all necessary testing and measurement equipment .
make the acceptance testing plan a detailed and thorough procedure for both the field installation test and the cctv system site test .
demonstrate that the cctv system equipment hardware and work meet all requirements of the contract .
these requirements include but are not limited to all design construction materials equipment assembly documentation of manufacturers certification of assembly and configuration environmental performance communications video and data communications signal strength and clarity compatibility with the navigator software and documentary requirements of the contract .
prior to the beginning of any acceptance testing at a given cctv system site complete all configuration and documentation associated with gdots atms surveillance camera control integration and calibration procedure described in subsection num.b .
be prepared to demonstrate such work .
b .
field installation test perform the field installation test as an onsite test of the complete field installation assembly less the communications components no acceptance testing at a given site can begin until all work associated with that site is complete not including the communications components .
for the field equipment installation test use a pc system cctv embedded protocol control software and a color video monitor to demonstrate full operation of the cctv site .
demonstrate operation to include pan tilt focus zoom iris position feedback and communications address configuration .
measure the video signal strength at the video connector of the communications equipment .
c. cctv system site test for the cctv system site test demonstrate proper cctv system performance at the tmc or other control center determined by the department .
perform the cctv system site test only after successful completion of the field section numclosed circuit television cctv num installation acceptance test .
demonstrate the complete video image cameralens control and communications operation from each cctv site to the tmc .
use the navigator software and existing navigator control center and communications system to demonstrate the compatibility of the cctv equipment and installation in its permanent navigator configuration .
verify data communications pan tilt focus zoom iris position feedback from the tmc as defined in the departmentapproved test procedures .
d. burnin period num .
general requirements provide a numday burnin period for all work and equipment included in the contract .
the burnin period shall consist of the field operation of the cctv system in a manner that is in full accordance with the cctv system requirements of the plans and specifications .
an acceptance test procedure is not required for the system burnin .
conduct only one num burnin period on the entire contract .
commence with the burnin period only after meeting all of the following requirements a .
all work required in all contract documents for cctv may be combined with construction contract except this burnin period has been completed and inspected by the engineer .
b .
successfully complete all acceptance testing .
commence with the burnin period upon written authorization by the department to commence .
terminate the burnin period num consecutive days thereafter unless an equipment malfunction occurs .
stop the burnin period for the length of time any equipment is defective .
after repairing the equipment so that it functions properly resume the burnin period at the point it was stopped .
successful completion and acceptance of the burnin period will be granted on the numth day unless any equipment has malfunctioned during the numth through numth day of the burnin period .
if any equipment has failed during the numth through numth day final acceptance will be withheld until all the equipment is functioning properly for num days after repair .
when a specific piece of equipment has malfunctioned more than three times during the num day burnin period replace that equipment with a new unit and repeat the num day burnin period .
num .
contractor responsibilities during the burnin period maintain all work under this contract in accordance with the specifications .
restore any work or equipment to proper operating condition within num hours after notification .
num .
department responsibilities department responsibilities during the burnin period will be as follows a. expeditious notification of contractor upon failure or malfunction of equipment b .
in the event that the contractor does not provide the services enumerated above under his contract responsibilities the department or its authorized agents may in the interest of public safety take emergency action to provide for adequate traffic control .
pay any costs incurred as a result of these emergency actions .
such action by the department will not void any guaranties or warranties or other obligations set forth in the contract .
num .
burnin period acceptance the department will make burnin period acceptance after satisfactory completion of the required burnin period and on the basis of a comprehensive field inspection of the complete cctv system in accordance with the specifications .
upon burnin period acceptance but prior to final acceptance of the entire contract maintain the complete cctv system in accordance with the requirements of subsection num .
e. bench acceptance test for retrofit assemblies perform the bench acceptance test as an onsite test for all assemblies furnished as shown in the plans .
furnish a benchtop stand and associated hardware for the camera system assembly mount that securely holds the section numclosed circuit television cctv num camera system assembly while the camera is being operated .
for the bench acceptance test use a pc system cctv embedded protocol control software and a color video monitor to demonstrate full operation of the cctv site .
demonstrate operation to include picture quality pan tilt focus zoom iris position feedback and communications address configuration .
num contractor warranty and maintenance provide a manufacturers support usual and customary warranties period of three years for all equipment and materials furnished and installed as part of the pay item for cctv system equipment and materials .
include warranties or guarantees for system camera assembly and mount cabinet interface assembly and cablingconnector .
begin warranty upon successful completion of the cctv system burn in period and acceptance for maintenance .
transfer manufacturers and contractors warranties or guarantees to the agency or user responsible for the cctv system maintenance the warranties and guarantees shall be continuous throughout their duration and state that they are subject to such transfer .
num training provide installation operations and maintenance training on the cctv equipment at a site in the project area .
personnel trained by the various equipment manufacturers and authorized by said manufacturers shall perform the training .
include in the cost of training all supplies equipment materials handouts travel and subsistence necessary to conduct the training .
furnish a training notebook in a labeled numring binder to each trainee .
provide installation operations and maintenance training for up to twelve num people .
include in this training both classroom training and handson training .
limit inshop and infield training to group sizes of four num people at a time .
conduct all training in halfday sessions .
two halfday sessions may be held on the same day .
the total of the training shall consist of at least six num clock hours of training for each participant .
provide a course content of at a minimum the following installation of all cctv equipment operations of all cctv equipment explanation of video quality maintenance of all cctv components use of the cctv embedded protocol control software measurement of video signals discussion of all warrantee clauses handson use of cctv equipment in signal shop environment for each trainee infield maintenance training video encoders and decoders installation of all digital video compression system equipment explanation of mpegnum digitized video maintenance of all digital video encoder and decoder system components including software measurement of digital video signals handson use of digital video transport system equipment for each trainee cctv and encodersdecoders training shall be provided in conjunction with the digital video transport system training specified in section num .
the total of the cctv and video transport system training shall consist of at least eight num clock hours of training for each participant .
meet all video transport system training requirements of section num .
section numclosed circuit television cctv num num measurement num cctv system cctv systems type b are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
unless otherwise specified in the plans furnish and install the following minimum items for a cctv system camera system assembly including the camera lens pantilt drive except for type d control electronics and environmental enclosure .
polemounting hardware .
cabinet equipment including but not limited to the cabinet interface assembly and all associated wiring conductors terminal blocks and surge suppression .
all weather heads vertical conduit risers and conduit hardware on the cctv support pole for power service grounding communications and control .
all cables connectors hardware interfaces supplies and any other items necessary for the proper operation and function of any cctv system component with any other cctv system component .
num encodersdecoders a .
video encoders type b video encoders type b with rack mounting hardware are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
b .
video encoders type c video encoders type c with rack mounting hardware are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
c. video decoders type b video decoders type b with rack mounting hardware are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
d. video decoders type c video decoders type c with rack mounting hardware are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
e. video decoders type d video decoders type d with rack mounting hardware are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
f. video decoders type e video decoders type e with rack mounting hardware are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
num testing testing as described in section num is considered incidental to the cost of the camera systems and installation and shall not be paid for separately .
section numclosed circuit television cctv num num training training is measured as a lump sum for all supplies equipment materials handouts travel and subsistence necessary to conduct the training .
num limits not applicable num payment num cctv system cctv systems of the type specified in the plans are paid for at the contract unit price .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing or delivering the cctv system .
payment for cctv systems is made under num training the department will pay twentyfive num of the total contract bid amount for training upon approval of the training plan .
the department will pay the remaining seventyfive num after completion of all training as described in subsection num .
the total sum of all payments can not exceed the original contract amount for this item .
payment for training is made under num adjustments not applicable section numdetection systems num general description this work includes the procurement and installation of a detection system as shown in the plans .
ensure the detection system is capable of traffic data collection meeting the general and specific requirements of this specification .
ensure the firmware and software furnished and installed as part of an intelligent transportation system its project are the most current and approved releases or versions unless otherwise requested by the department .
provide all equipment materials and work in accordance with all manufacturers recommendations .
all equipment cables and hardware must be part of an engineered system that is designed by the manufacturer to fully interoperate with all other system components .
a .
video detection system vds provide an ipethernet video detection system which provides presence detection vehicle counts roadway occupancy vehicle classification and speed information to the departments central its management software .
the video detection system shall be able to provide a minimum of three programmable vehicle classifications .
the video detection system shall be able to detect in both high speed freeway and intersection presence modes .
the intersection presence video detection system processor type shall be used for detecting traffic for traffic signal andor ramp meter controllers in a traffic signal or ramp meter cabinet using card rack vehicle detector input files .
video detection systems operating in a traffic signal installation shall not be required to provide occupancy or classification data .
the freeway video detection system shall include all necessary rack enclosures to house the video processor .
the video detection system includes but item no .
num cctv system type ___ per each item no .
num cctv system type b retrofit assembly per each item no .
num cctv system type ___ retrofit assembly furnish only per each item no .
num cctv camera lowering system per each item no .
num video encoder type ___ per each item no .
num video decoder type ___ per each item no .
num training lump sum section numdetection systems num is not limited to camera image sensors including the detector housing mounting hardware an application programming interface api and protocol for system communications a video detection system processor central and local system management software cabling between the detector and the cabinet surge suppressors terminations output expansion modules which mount in the traffic signal controller cabinet input files vertical conduit weather heads and related equipment .
the video detection system processors shall communicate through an ethernet interface and tcpip transmission control protocolinternet protocol connection to multiple transportation management center tmc computers .
the detection video shall be encoded within the vds processor to mpegnum digital video format and be able to be viewed at the tmc without the use of external encoders .
b .
microwave vehicle detection system mvds provide a high resolution microwave radar detection system which provides presence detection vehicle counts classification occupancy and speed information to the departments central its management software .
the microwave radar detection system includes but is not limited to microwave radar detectors including detector housing mounting hardware an application programming interface api and protocol for system communications system management software cabling between the microwave detectors and the cabinet surge suppressors terminations and related equipment .
the high resolution microwave vehicle detection system shall be able to emulate single or dual zone loop detectors and be able to detect a minimum of num lanes with a range of up to num feet away .
these microwave detection systems are typically used for gathering near realtime information about the flow of traffic on freeways highways or other designated roadway types .
the mvds shall be provided with all necessary cabling surge protection devices and modules for local serial and ipethernet communications .
c. wireless magnetometer vehicle detection wmvd provide a wireless inpavement magnetometer system for use in both freeway and intersection applications .
the detection system shall provide accurate vehicle count occupancy and speed information as well as presencestop bar applications as needed .
the batterypowered wireless sensor shall consist of a magnetometer capable of lowpower radio communications to a roadside transceiver packaged in a small hardened plastic case suitable for inpavement mounting .
the sensors shall detect changes in the earths magnetic field to determine the presence or absence of vehicles relative to the detection zone .
detection events are transmitted via wireless radio communications to a wired access point connected to the control cabinet .
the wired access point shall utilize ipethernet communication .
the system includes but is not limited to battery operated wireless sensors battery operated wireless repeaters wired access points with respective radios mounting hardware cabling surge protection devices jumper cables and all items necessary for a complete wmvd installation .
d. shortrange radio device detection system provide a shortrange radio device detection system in which a roadside monitoring unit continually and passively listens for shortrange radio enabled devices that broadcast their bdaddr or baddr also referred to as the mac address .
the addresses shall be passively collected in order to get vehicle probe data for use in determining travel time along a route .
these devices shall not have the ability to correlate a mac address with personal information such as subscriber names andor vehicle ownership information .
this type of detection system shall not be used to collect highly accurate volume and occupancy of a roadway but rather collect a sampling of vehicles in order to derive approximate speeds and travel time for a corridor .
provide separate powered and surge protected enclosures for shortrange radio device modules so that they may be installed in various cabinet types .
all modules shall utilize ipethernet communications or cell modem by type .
the system includes but is not limited to the shortrange radio device processor antenna power supplies mounting hardware cabling surge protection devices jumper cables and all items necessary for a complete installation .
num definitions general provisions num through num num related references a .
standard specifications section num traffic control section numdetection systems num section num strain poles for overhead sign and signal assemblies section num traffic signal installation section num electrical wire and cable section num traffic signal equipment section num communication and electronics equipment section num navigator advanced transportation management system integration b. referenced documents american national standards institute ansi american society of testing and materials astm eianuma electronic industries association eia numa fcc part num subparts j and b national electric code nec numa .
fpn no .
num national electrical manufacturers association nema tsnum rnum rnum rnum section num section num nema tsnum rnum rnum rnum nema tsnum type num type num and type num standards nema num type num enclosure standards underwriters laboratory incorporated ul submittals num submittals use only equipment and components that meet the requirements of these minimum specifications and the departments qualified products list qpl .
provide submittal data for all equipment materials test procedures and routine maintenance procedures required for these items as required in these specifications .
for training submit to the engineer for consideration and approval a training schedule and all training materials within num calendar days from the ntp .
for each applicable vehicle detection system submit to the engineer for approval two num hard copies and one num electronic copy of the manufacturers descriptive literature catalog cuts technical data operational documentation service and maintenance documentation and all other materials required within these specifications .
electronic documents shall be placed on a cd as adobe pdf documents and delivered to the engineer .
provide asbuilt documentation of all detector installations after the completion of acceptance testing .
num materials num video detection system use a video camera sensor that is compatible with the video detection system processor and meets the following technical and functional requirements a .
requirements num .
video camera sensor type a section numdetection systems num furnish and install a video camera sensor that is compatible with both freeway and arterial video applications and compatible with the required detection processor type .
send a video signal from the video camera sensor to the processor using high resolution video camera sensors as the primary video source for realtime vehicle detection .
utilize high sensitivity optics in the video camera sensor to compensate for variations in lighting conditions including blooming at night caused by headlights and minor vibration caused by wind .
include a heater at the front of the enclosure or alternate method to prevent the formation of ice and condensation in cold weather .
ensure that the heater does not interfere with the operation of the video camera sensor electronics or cause interference with the video signal where applicable .
as a minimum meet the following requirements for each video camera sensor assembly installation a .
use a num to num color interline or frame transfer charge coupled device ccd .
b .
signal to noise ratio shall be greater than num db c. the video standard should be compliant with national television system committee ntsc standard rs numa compliant available as eianuma specification d. provide a lens with a minimum numx zoom .
zoom and camera controls shall be over the camera coaxial video connector e. a minimum resolution of num horizontal television lines tvl num vertical tvl f. for electromagnetic interference ensure compliance with fcc part num subpart j class a device requirements which apply to the video camera sensor and associated connected equipment in their installed condition g. power the video camera sensors with num vacnum num hz nominal num hz .
size the power conductors from the power source to the camera input so that no more than a num voltage drop is experienced nec num a. fpn no .
num .
include a provision at the rear of the camera enclosure for a waterproof connection of power and video signal cables over a single weathertight milspec connector .
provide power from the cabinet power source through a surge suppressor and then to the video camera sensor .
h. the video camera sensor enclosure shall be installed in a light colored enclosure to limit solar heating .
meet nema num type num enclosure standards for the enclosure and seal the enclosure to prevent sand dirt dust salt and water from entering .
affix a sun shield visor to the front of the enclosure which is sufficiently adjustable to divert water away from the video camera sensor lens and also prevent direct sunlight from entering the iris when mounted in its installed location .
i .
provide a single run of nonspliced outdoorrated power and coaxial video cabling from the sensor enclosure to the cabinet in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
interruptions in cable runs shall only be allowable for interfacing necessary surge protection devices .
all connectors shall be professionally sealed to manufacturer recommendations .
j .
environmental num c to num c num f to num f operating ambient temperature rated in num num relative humidity k. shock and vibration ensure that shock and vibration of the sensor adheres to nema tsnum requirements .
num .
video camera sensor type b furnish and install a thermal video camera sensor that is compatible with both freeway and arterial video applications and compatible with the required detection processor type .
send a thermal video image from the thermal video camera sensor to the processor for realtime vehicle detection .
utilize thermal imaging to compensate for variations in lighting conditions including blooming at night caused by headlights rain and ice glare and daytime cloud and sun position shadowing where a normal video camera sensor may not function as intended .
include a heater or alternate method to prevent the formation of ice and condensation in cold weather .
ensure that the heater does not interfere with the operation of the video camera sensor electronics or cause interference with the section numdetection systems num thermal video signal .
as a minimum meet the following requirements for each thermal video camera sensor assembly installation a .
use a longlife uncooled vanadium oxide vox microbolometer for the detector sensor with a spectral range of num num µm .
b .
the video standard should be compliant with ntsc standard c. the video shall have a minimum ntsc array format of num x num with a num effective resolution d. for electromagnetic interference ensure compliance with fcc part num subpart b class b device requirements e. power input voltage shall be num num vac single phase with standard operating voltage at num vac .
power consumption shall be num watts nominal at num vac with a maximum of num watts .
f. the thermal video camera sensor enclosure shall be installed in a light colored enclosure to limit solar heating and prolong equipment life g. provide a single run of nonspliced outdoorrated power and coaxial video cabling from the sensor enclosure to the cabinet in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
interruptions in cable runs shall only be allowable for interfacing necessary surge protection devices .
all connectors shall be professionally sealed to manufacturer recommendations .
h. environmental num c to num c num f to num f operating ambient temperature rated in num num relative humidity with an ipnum rating .
num .
video detection system processor a. freeway cabinet mounting the ip addressable mpegnum encoded video detection system processor shall be either shelf or rack mountable in a standard numinch rack assembly space conforming to standard ceanum num latest versionaddendum .
if the video processor is shelf mounted the contractor shall provide the shelf and the processor unit housing for each processor type .
if the video detection system requires a num rack with powered backplane the contractor shall provide the num rack and attach all power and communications cables according to manufacturer specifications .
the video detection system processor shall be designed for mounting in an enclosed cabinet andor hub building without blower fans and mounting without insulation from other electronic devices such as power supplies communications equipment etc .
the video detection system shall meet nema tsnum temperature requirements .
power the video detection system processor by num vac num hz single phase .
if a transformer is required for a num or num vdc power requirement the contractor shall supply the transformer andor enclosure and size it appropriately for the installation .
size power conductors from the power source for the video detection system processor input so that no more than a num voltage drop is experienced nec num a. fpn no .
num .
the video detection system processor shall have transient protection that meets the requirements of nema tsnum rnum rnum rnum and nema tsnum standards .
video detection system processor type a provide one num video inputs on the video detection system processor such that signals from one video camera sensor or other synchronous or nonsynchronous video source can be processed in real time .
use bnc connectors on the processor for all video inputs .
use a bnc connector or rca connector on the front of the video detection system processor for video output .
video detection system processor type b provide at least two num video inputs on the video detection system processor such that signals from up to two num video camera sensors or other synchronous or nonsynchronous video sources can be processed in real time in one cabinet .
use bnc connectors on the back of the video detection system processor for all video inputs .
use a bnc connector on the front or back of the video detection system processor for video output .
video detection system processor type c section numdetection systems num provide at least four num video inputs on the video detection system processor such that signals from up to four num video camera sensors or other synchronous or nonsynchronous video sources can be processed in real time in one cabinet .
use bnc connectors on the back of the video detection system processor for all video inputs .
use a bnc connector on the front or back of the video detection system processor for video output .
b .
signal or ramp meter cabinet mounting provide an ip addressable processor module which performs video image processing and mpegnum encoding that completely fits within the loop detector slots of the traffic signal or ramp meter controller cabinet input file and that provides a standard relay closure detector input to the controller .
provide from one to four detector outputs through the processor module which communicate through the edge card connector .
use a module that is not wider than two standard input file slots .
include detection indicators on the front panel of the processor module for each channel of detection provided through that module to indicate detector output in real time when the system is operational .
include a bnc connector with gold plated center pin or rca connector on the front panel for video output to a monitoring device and include a rjnum ethernet port connector on the front panel to connect and communicate the programming device .
provide power to the processor modules through the signal or ramp cabinet detector input file or the output expansion module .
video detection system processor type d provide one num video inputs on the video detection system processor such that signals from one video camera sensor or other synchronous or nonsynchronous video source can be processed in real time .
use bnc connectors on the processor for all video inputs .
use a bnc connector or rca connector on the front of the video detection system processor for video output .
video detection system processor type e provide at least two num video inputs on the video detection system processor such that signals from up to two num video camera sensors or other synchronous or nonsynchronous video sources can be processed in real time in one cabinet input file .
use bnc connectors on the back of the video detection system processor for all video inputs .
use a bnc connector on the front or back of the video detection system processor for video output .
video detection system processor type f provide at least four num video inputs on the video detection system processor such that signals from up to four num video camera sensors or other synchronous or nonsynchronous video sources can be processed in real time in one cabinet input file .
use bnc connectors on the back of the video detection system processor for all video inputs .
use a bnc connector on the front or back of the video detection system processor for video output .
environmental requirements all types provide a video detection system processor that operates reliably in a typical roadside traffic cabinet environment .
provide internal cabinet equipment and a video detection system processor that meet the environmental requirements of nema tsnum rnum rnum rnum and nema tsnum standards .
operating ambient temperature range numf to numf numc to numc .
additionally include a heater to prevent the formation of ice and condensation in cold weather .
do not allow the heater to interfere with the operation of the video camera sensor electronics or cause interference with the video signal .
humidity range num humidity per nema tsnum rnum rnum rnum section num .
b. functional requirements for video detection systems all types this section defines the minimally required functional aspects of the system as well as the required accuracy levels .
it also outlines the testing process that will be used to determine whether a proposed video detection system product meets these specifications .
num .
ensure that video detection systems provides vehicle presence speeds vehicle counts and roadway occupancies on a lanebylane basis .
verify that the system can at a minimum emulate the output of a pair of num ft. by num ft. in pavement loops spaced num ft. apart .
ensure that the video detection processor is capable of providing a minimum section numdetection systems num num detection zones with one video camera sensor .
verify that the system responds with the accumulated traffic data as collected since the last request .
num .
verify that the detection system is ipaddressable and that all communication addresses are user programmable .
ensure the setup program assigns an ip address to the detection processor .
ensure that configuration to the system are either in serial format using an electronic industries alliance eia standard eienum communication or an internet protocol ip interface as approved by gdots information technology group .
num .
verify that the traffic data collected by the video detection system and the system configuration is stored within internal nonvolatile memory within the video detection system processor .
perform software updates through an ethernet serial or usb port .
verify that data can be retrieved from the system either locally or via requests from computers at the central transportation management center tmc over the communications network .
num .
ensure the video detection system processor front panel includes a visual display of the status of each video input .
indicators shall display at a minimum the status of video detection system processor communications the status of the video detection system processor the status of communications and whether or not each video camera sensor is actively detecting .
the video processor shall allow a remote user with a standard web browser to gain remote access collect data control and configure the vds .
num .
ensure the video detection system includes computer software which enables the user to program calibrate operate and view current status of all system features using a laptop computer or networkconnected workstation at the central tmc .
ensure the system allows the user to view live mpegnum video from the image sensor with the programmed detectors overlaying the image .
ensure individual vehicle actuations can be viewed while observing the live mpegnum encoded video .
num .
ensure the video detection system configuration data can be uploaded and saved to a laptop or tmc workstation computer for later reloading to the video detection processor if necessary .
num .
ensure that the system offers an open application programming interface api and software development kit sdk for gdot developers and their consultants to integrate the video detection system with central software or other thirdparty software and systems .
furnish needed software licenses for the system .
num .
ensure the system user can use a laptop to reprogram calibrate adjust or alter any previously defined detector configurations in the field and also reprogram any detector configurations over the network or from a tmc workstation .
num .
provide software that can communicate concurrently between multiple users and multiple video detection processors on the same network without any interruption or conflict with the normal polling cycle .
c. additional functional requirements for signal and ramp meter video detection systems type d e f num .
system hardware provide a detection system that does not require any equipment external to the traffic signalramp meter controller cabinet input file excluding the video camera sensor video camera sensor power connection circuit breakers and surge protection for video or data .
mount the processor and expansion modules in the traffic signalramp meter controller cabinet input files using the edge card connector to obtain power and provide contact closure outputs .
rewiring of the backplane or any other cabinet panel for the system is not permitted except for power and grounding for the interface panel wiring from the video camera sensor to the loop detector panel for the video signal and wiring to obtain power for the video camera sensor .
num .
provide a system capable of providing a minimum of eight detector outputs per video camera sensor .
provide all detector outputs through edge card connectors of the processor module and output expansion modules .
rewiring external to the edge connectors is not permitted for obtaining a minimum of eight outputs for one video camera sensor .
section numdetection systems num num .
system software system processing software on the processor module that mounts in the traffic signalramp meter controller cabinet input file include the software that processes the video camera sensor signals and converts the signals into detector outputs .
detect either approaching or receding vehicles in multiple lanes within the field of view fov of each video camera sensor .
provide the capability of detecting vehicles in up to num detection zones per video camera sensor with the detection system .
allow the detection zones to be combined to form one output .
num .
detection compensation provide the capability for the processor to compensate for camera movement attributable to temperature effects wind shifting pole sway pole expansion or vibration .
num .
system configuration software on the processor module include the configuration software to program the detection system including the detection zones .
num .
on a monitoring device display the detection zones superimposed on the video camera sensors images .
provide the capability to create detection zones of varying size and shape to allow best coverage of the viewable roadway lanes and ramps .
provide the capability to save the detection zone format on the processor module card once drawn for a particular video camera sensor image .
provide the capability for the user to view the currently active detector zone format of the mpegnum encoded processor module via a monitoring device .
a .
confirmation when viewing vehicle actuations in real time on the monitoring device indicate the passage or presence of each vehicle detected by each detection zone by changing the color or intensity of that particular zone .
b .
detection during reconfiguration provide the capability for the detection system to continue detecting vehicles on all existing zones during reconfiguration except on the zone that is being reconfigured .
c. ivdsn designation ivdsn refers to all of the specific vds components necessary for operation and detection on one approach leg of an intersection .
the n denotes the approachs throughmovement controller phase in the nomenclature of a typical numphase dualring intersection operation e.g .
ivdsnum ivdsnum ivdsnum ivdsnum when four video camera sensors are installed .
if more than four video camera sensors are installed the n denotes the controller phase being detected in the nomenclature of a typical numphase dual ring intersection operation .
ivdsn is also used as a prefix to identify the individual vds components of the n approach as follows ivdsnvcs the video camera sensor for approach n ivdsncc the coaxial cable from the video camera to the controller cabinet for approach n ivdsnpc the video camera sensor power cable from the video camera to the controller cabinet for approach n ivdsncss the coaxial cable surge suppressor in the controller cabinet for approach n ivdsncj the coaxial jumper cable from the coaxial surge suppressor in the controller cabinet to the processor module or detector panel for approach n ivdsnpm the processor module for approach n where a processor module type a is installed ivdspnsnpm the processor module for approach pn and sn where pn is the primary approach and sn is the secondary approach where a processor module type b is installed .
occupancy individual lane occupancy measured in percent of time d. ramp meter controller cabinet input file a ramp meter controller cabinet input file is a chassis within a traffic signal cabinet rack that has slots where a detector card provides detector output to the traffic signal controller through its edge card connectors .
the backplane connector pin output of the edge connectors conforms to georgia traffic signal controller cabinet standards for the cabinet type specified in the plans .
e. ivdsnnn ivdsnnn refers to all of the specific vds components necessary for operation and detection related to ramp metering installations based on direction type of detection and lane assignments the first n denotes section numdetection systems num the approach direction north south east or west and the second n denotes the type of detection ppassage detection zones ddemand detection zones qqueuing detection zones mlmainline detection zones the third n denotes the lane assignment lane numlnum lane numlnumlane lnum lane lnum the e.g .
i vdsnplnum ivdssdlnum ivdseqlnum ivdswmlalnum .
the typical ramp metering layout is shown below figure num typical ramp meter layout lane numbering shall began at the median for mainline travel lanes .
lane numbering for ramp meter lanes shall began with the lane adjacent to the mainline travel lanes ivds is also used as a prefix to identify the individual ivds components used for signal and freeway ramp metering as follows ivdsnnnvcs the video camera sensor for nnn direction type of detection and lane assignment ivdsnnncc the coaxial cable from the video camera to the controller cabinet for approach nnn direction type of detection and lane assignment ivdsnnnpc the video camera sensor power cable from the video camera to the controller cabinet for approach nnn direction type of detection and lane assignment ivdsnnncss the coaxial cable surge suppressor in the controller cabinet for approach nnn direction type of detection and lane assignment ivdsnnncj the coaxial jumper cable from the coaxial surge suppressor in the controller cabinet to the processor module or detector panel for approach nnn direction type of detection and lane assignment ivdsnnnpm the processor module for approach nnn direction type of detection and lane assignment d. accuracy requirements for video detection systems provide a video detection system that meets the below minimum accuracy requirements for both daytime and night time conditions num .
for volume vehicle counts num no more than num missed actuations .
num .
for speed measurement num no more than num error in speed calculation num .
for occupancy measurement num no more than num missed actuations num .
for presence detection num no more than num error in missed actuations section numdetection systems num e. testing vendors are required to submit an independent test evaluation report from a third party which verifies the accuracies stated within their specifications .
develop and submit plans for postinstallation testing to the engineer for consideration and approval .
ensure the plans test all functional requirements outlined in section num and the accuracy requirements stipulated in section num d. provide the engineer with application protocol interface api documentation and software development kit sdk for the video detection system as requested by the department .
gdot will have num days from receipt of the api and sdk to make a determination if it can be integrated .
if the device can not be integrated the engineer will give notice that the contractor must submit a device that can be integrated into the central system software .
num .
post installation test requirements utilize the following test procedures after the video detection system has been installed in its entirety as shown on the plans .
commence no postinstallation testing until all video detection systems in the project have been configured andor calibrated to gather speed volume occupancy andor presence detection and programmed to communicate on the gdot network .
including the accuracy testing requirements at a minimum provide the following on the test plan to be submitted and approved by the engineer a .
inspect all vehicle detection system field components to ensure proper installation and cable termination .
b. verify that field construction has been completed as specified in the plans .
c. inspect the quality and tightness of ground and surge protector connections .
d. check power supply voltage and outputs and ensure device connections are as specified in the plans .
e. verify that the installation of cables and connections between all detectors and field cabinets are as specified in the plans f. demonstrate that each video detection system is fully operational and gathering the required data types at the specified interval .
perform this test from the hub building through which the detection system is connected .
g. upon satisfactory completion of step f gdot will add the new video detection systems into the central system num microwave vehicle detection system mvds a .
requirements num .
microwave detector a .
provide a microwave detection system that meets the following minimum requirements microwave transmission the microwave radar detector shall transmit on a frequency band of num twentyfour ghz or another approved spectral band .
it shall comply with the limits for a class a digital device pursuant to part num of the fcc rules or the appropriate spectrum management authority .
the microwave unit shall not interfere with any known equipment .
b .
area of coverage the microwave units field of view shall cover an area defined by an oval shaped beam and its maximum detection range shall be as follows elevation beam width num degrees or more azimuth beam width num degrees or less range num to num feet c. detection zones section numdetection systems num the minimum number of detection zones defined shall be no less than ten num. d. capabilities the microwave unit shall be a true presence detector .
it shall be suitable for mounting on roadside poles or on overhead structures at a mounting height determined by the manufacturer to provide the following presence indication of moving or stopped vehicles in its detection zones .
traffic data periodically accumulated over user defined time intervals in a num to num sec range shall be transmitted via serial rsnum communications lines to a serial port on the terminal server provided by the contractor and as specified in specification num .
traffic data shall be available simultaneously with detection zone contact closures and serial communications .
supply all modules as necessary for simultaneous communications .
sidefired configuration data shall include the following in each of up to ten num detection zones lanes volume lane occupancy average speed vehicle classification by length in a minimum of num user defined classes .
microwave units in forwardlooking configuration shall monitor traffic in one lane and be capable of providing the following data volume occupancy average speed and travel direction in the lane per vehicle speed and direction binning of volume data in up to num speed bins mvds shall allow the user to define the contents of transmitted data .
furnish the unit with the required software for data collection processing configuration and setup and data logging and retrieval .
an operator shall be able to use the software to set detector count periods sensitivities and other operational features and parameters .
the software must be capable of providing both manual and automatic setup and calibration .
e. environmental conditions and protection except as stated otherwise herein the equipment shall meet all its specified requirements during and after subjecting to any combination of the following ambient temperature range of num to num c relative humidity from num to num percent noncondensing power surge of numkv rise time num sec hold num sec applied in differential mode to all lines power and output as defined by iec num and en num standards or numv tsnum the microwave radar detector shall be resistant to vibration in accordance with iec num test fc nema tsnum section num or approved equivalent the microwave detector shall be resistant to shock in accordance with iec num test a nema ts num section num or approved equivalent f. mechanical the microwave radar detector shall be enclosed in a rugged weather proof box and sealed to protect the unit from wind up to num mph dust and airborne particles and exposure to moisture nema type numr or numx enclosure .
the mounting assembly shall have all coated steel stainless steel or aluminium construction and shall support a load of num pounds .
the mounting assembly shall incorporate an approved mechanism that can be tilted in both axes and then locked into place to provide the optimum area of coverage .
section numdetection systems num g. electrical the mvds unit shall be operable from num num vdc .
power supply shall be obtained from the mvds communications wiring module in the device cabinet .
alternative power sources and adapters shall be submitted and approved by the engineer .
the mvds unit shall include power management features allowing remote shutdown or cyclical shutdown of the unit .
h. cables connection between the mvds and the cabinet equipment shall be provided by a single mvds unit harness cable that is msconnector terminated at the mvds detector and terminated to the mvds communications wiring module in the equipment cabinets .
no splices are permitted in the cable .
the cable shall at a minimum provide power and the rsnum serial data interface to the mvds unit .
the ms connector pins must be crimped to the cable conductors and assembled and tested by the manufacturer prior to installation and pulling of cable on site .
rsnum signal ground shall be provided by the shield drain wire an additional conductor or an additional shielded pair in accordance with the mvds unit manufacturers recommendations .
twisted pairs shall be identified by separate insulation colours .
communications pairs shall be individually or commonly shielded .
low voltage power conductors shall not be shielded in common with the communications pairs .
i .
electrical isolation and surge protection all power lines contact closures and the serial port shall be surge protected within the unit .
contact closures and the serial port shall be isolated .
ensure that the surge protection of all cables and connections meets the minimum requirements of section num a part num surge protection .
j .
data interface data communications shall be full duplex asynchronous configurable as optoisolated rsnum port at rates from num up to num bits per second .
separate local control rsnum serial port serial data format shall be standard binary nrz num bits data num stop bit no parity .
both pointtopoint and multidropped configurations shall be supported .
b. functional requirements for microwave detection systems this section defines the minimally required functional aspects of the microwave detection system as well as the required accuracy levels .
it also outlines the testing process that will be used to determine whether a proposed microwave detection system product meets these specifications .
num .
ensure that microwave detection systems proposed for use provides vehicle presence classification speeds vehicle counts and roadway occupancies on a lanebylane basis at a user definable reporting period between num to num seconds and can detect a minimum of num detection zones where the farthest lane at ideal mounting height can detect at a maximum distance of num feet .
num .
verify that the traffic data collected by the microwave detection system is stored within internal nonvolatile memory .
verify that data can be retrieved from the system either locally or via requests from computers at the central transportation management center tmc over the communications network .
verify that the system configuration data and system software is also stored within internal nonvolatile memory .
num .
ensure the microwave detection system includes computer software for the user to program calibrate operate and view current status of all system features using a laptop computer or networkconnected workstation at the central tmc .
ensure the system allows the user to view live actuations from the microwave detector with the programmed detectors overlaying a representation of the roadway .
section numdetection systems num num .
ensure the microwave detection system configuration data can be uploaded and saved to a laptop or tmc workstation computer for later reloading to the video detection processor if necessary .
ensure the system user can use a laptop or tmc workstation to reprogram calibrate adjust or alter any previously defined detector configurations .
ensure no periodic adjustments or finetuning is required except in the case of physical roadway changes such as laneshifts new construction or closures .
num .
ensure that the system offers an open application programming interface api and software development kit sdk for gdot developers and their consultants to integrate the microwave detection system with gdot central software or other thirdparty software and systems .
furnish needed software licenses for the system .
c. accuracy requirements for microwave detection systems provide a microwave detection system that meets the below minimum accuracy requirements for all conditions .
accuracy measurements for the testing shall be done with an appropriate sample size of vehicles over a specific time period .
submit to the engineer the test plan for accuracy testing at the location that is site specific to the plans .
the test plan shall take into account the roadway type freeway arterial location urban rural and traffic conditions in order to determine appropriate testing length and sample size .
the following conditions shall be met for each sensor installed measurement accuracy the following error levels shall be achievable and demonstrated during testing .
parameter error percentage presence num volume num lane occupancy num average speed num length classification limits num time event numms input voltage num d. testing develop and submit plans for postinstallation testing to the engineer for consideration and approval .
ensure the plans test all functional requirements outlined in section num b and the accuracy requirements stipulated in section num c. provide the engineer with application protocol interface api documentation and software development kit sdk for the microwave detection system .
gdot will have num days from receipt of the api and sdk to make a determination if it can be integrated .
if the device can not be integrated the engineer will give notice that the contractor must submit a device that can be integrated into the central system software .
num .
postinstallation test requirements utilize the following test procedures after the microwave detection system has been installed in its entirety as shown on the plans .
commence no postinstallation testing until all microwave detection systems in the project have been configured andor calibrated to gather speed volume classification and occupancy and programmed to communicate on the gdot network .
including the accuracy testing requirement at a minimum provide the following on the test plan to be submitted and approved by the engineer .
a .
inspect all microwave detection system field components to ensure proper installation and cable termination .
b. verify that field construction has been completed as specified in the plans .
c. inspect the quality and tightness of ground and surge protector connections .
section numdetection systems num d. check power supply voltage and outputs and ensure device connections are as specified in the plans .
e. verify that the installation of cables and connections between all detectors and field cabinets are as specified in the plans and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
f. demonstrate that each microwave detection system is fully operational and gathering the required data types at the specified interval .
perform this test from the hub building through which the detection system is connected .
g. upon satisfactory completion of step f gdot will add the new microwave detection systems into the central system num wireless magnetometer vehicle detector system wmvd this specification sets forth the minimum requirements for a system to detect vehicles on a roadway by using batterypowered magnetometertype sensors that communicate their detection data by radio to a roadside communications hub before the data is relayed to a freeway cabinet a local traffic controller cabinet a central software system andor a data server as required by the application .
the application of the wmvds and equipment specified shall be as shown in the plans .
these specifications cover both intersection presence based vehicle detection used for traffic controller input as well as freeway system or advanced system detection data collection of volume occupancy and speed .
a .
requirements the detection system shall provide accurate roadway information as needed to support the traffic management application .
num .
the wireless batterypowered magnetometer vehicle detection system shall consist of one or more of the following a. batterypowered wireless sensors installed inpavement in each traffic lane w reuse enclosure .
b .
serial port protocol spp digital radios mounted on the side of the roadway w cable and mount .
c. wireless batterypowered repeaters rps mounted on the side of the roadway serving to extend the radio range of an spp w mount .
d. access point contact closure interface apcc cards to provide sensor information processing and support the interface between an spp and a standard traffic controller using contact closure signals or mounted in a stand alone cabinet w direct ip communications .
e. extension ex contact closure cards to provide additional detector outputs to a traffic controller f. isolation iso modules to provide surge protection and isolation as well as providing signal conditioning to enhance the communication distance from the spp and the apcc .
g. inputoutput io modules used to provide additional communication options memory options and a battery backed real time clock .
h. software to control and configure the sensors apcc spps and rps .
i .
communications between a sensor and spp can be direct via a single repeater or via two repeaters operating in tandem .
communications between the sensors and the spp or rp and between the rp and spp or another rp shall be via radio .
j .
detection data shall be capable of being relayed from each ap to a local traffic controller for realtime vehicle detection using contact closure signals .
data shall also be capable of being relayed directly from each ap to a central software system or central server over standard ip internet protocol networks .
num .
wmvd sensor type section numdetection systems num a .
all sensor components shall be contained within a single housing .
the sensor housing shall conform to nema type nump and iec ipnum standards .
the sensor components shall be fully encapsulated within the housing to prevent moisture from degrading the components .
b .
a sensor shall operate at temperatures from num f num c to num f num c. c. a sensor shall be batterypowered with an average lifetime of ten num years when the sensor is configured for and operating under normal traffic conditions .
d. two configurations of sensors shall be available from the manufacturer type a shall provide all sensor functions including data collection functions type b shall support presence detection only the drawings andor plans shall dictate the sensor type required .
num .
serial port protocol spp device a .
an spp shall support at least num sensors with a num second latency .
b .
an spp shall operate at temperatures from num f num c to num f num c. c. all spp components shall be contained within a single housing .
the spp housing shall conform to nema type numx and iec ipnum standards .
d. the spp shall communicate to the apcc utilizing a standard catnume or higher ethernet cable .
e. the spp shall have a weatherproof ethernet connector on the bottom .
f. the ethernet connector shall be shipped with a cover firmly attached to provide protection from the elements prior to cable connection .
the weatherproof connector shall not require any specialized tools for installation .
num .
wmvd repeater rp a .
an rp communicating directly to an ap shall support at least num sensors .
b .
an rp communicating to an ap via an intermediate rp i.e .
tandem operation shall support at least num sensors .
c. an rp shall be batterypowered and battery shall last for a minimum of seven years when operating in normal traffic conditions .
d. the rp battery shall be field replaceable .
e. an rp shall operate at temperatures from num f num c to num f num c. f. all rp components shall be contained within a single housing .
the rp housing shall conform to nema type numx and iec ipnum standards .
num .
wmvd access point contact closure apcc card type a .
each apcc card shall be capable of communicating with at least num spp modules .
b .
optional extension ex cards shall provide additional contact closures in a signal cabinet user configurable form num to num outputs each .
c. the apcc shall provide all the higher level processing and interface functions of the system .
d. each apcc card shall provide detector data as contact closure signals to the traffic controller .
section numdetection systems num type a an apcc card shall directly plug in to standard num input files .
type b an apcc card shall be supplied within a standard enclosure to supply power for use in freeway applications .
e. the apcc and ex cards front panel shall be either software or via front panel switches configurable to provide presence or pulse mode delay timing extension timing f. an apcc and ex card shall operate at temperatures from num f num c to num f num c. g. an apcc and ex card shall operate in humidity up to num noncondensing .
num .
isolator module a .
an isolator module shall be used between each spp and apcc to extend communications range and protect the apcc card from transient surges .
b .
the isolator module shall extend the communication range between the apcc and spp from num feet num m to num feet num m. c. the isolator module shall provide electrical isolation of numv .
d the isolator module shall provide surge protection of up to numv .
e. the isolator module shall provide ac power cross protection .
num .
inputoutput io module type an io module shall expand the capabilities of an apcc by adding a sd memory card slot and battery backed up real time clock .
the module shall be of the following types .
a .
type a rsnum port for serial communications b .
type b detection data shall be communicated as ip data over gsmbased cellular data services via a gprs cellular modem .
c. type c detection data shall be communicated as ip data over cdmabased cellular data services via a numxrtt cellular modem .
the io module shall be physically mounted to the apcc and shall be the same width .
the combined apcc with io module shall be the width of a standard num slot wide detector amplifier .
b. functional requirements for wireless magnetometer vehicle detection num .
sensors each sensor shall detect a vehicle by measuring changes in the earths magnetic field near the sensor as caused by a stopped or passing vehicle i.e .
magnetometertype detection a .
the sensor shall communicate timestamped on and off vehicle detection events b .
each sensor shall automatically recalibrate in the event of a detector lock c. each sensor shall communicate by radio to a nearby spp or rp d. each sensor shall automatically retransmit a detected event if no acknowledgement is received from the ap e. each sensor shall respond within num seconds when the ap is powered on and transmitting section numdetection systems num num .
the radio links between each sensor and spp or rp and between each rp and spp or each rp and rp shall conform to the following a .
the center frequencies bandwidths and transmit power levels of the radio links shall allow operation in an unlicensed frequency band b .
frequency channels shall be employed by the sensors aps and rps to avoid interference with other devices operating in the unlicensed band c. frequency channels shall be userconfigurable d. at least num frequency channels shall be supported num .
if detection data is relayed to a central software system or central server each installation of the wireless battery powered magnetometer vehicle detection system shall provide the following measurements as required by the application a .
vehicle volume count per lane over a specified time interval b .
lane occupancy percent over a specified time interval c. vehicle speed mph or kph when more than one sensor is deployed in a lane d. pervehicle speed e. median speed over a specified time interval f. mean speed over a specified time interval g. distribution of speeds over a specified time interval h. vehicle classification when more than one sensor is deployed in a lane i. pervehicle length j .
report distribution of vehicle lengths over a specified time interval k. the time interval for measurements shall be selectable from num seconds to num hours num .
each sensor in an installation shall be capable of being individually configured with its own sensitivity level .
a .
a single sensor shall be capable of being configured with a sensitivity level that approximates the detection zone of a standard num x num numm x numm inductive loop b .
each sensor shall be capable of being configured with relatively higher or lower sensitivity levels as may be required to detect bicycles motorcycles or light rail c. an apcc shall support the relay of sensor detection data through several interfaces as required by the application .
the apcc shall be capable of simultaneously communicating detection data via the contact closure interface ethernet interface and cellular data modem interface as applicable .
c. accuracy requirements for the wireless magnetometer vehicle detection system provide a wmvd system that meets the below minimum accuracy requirements for all conditions .
accuracy measurements for the testing shall be done with an appropriate sample size of vehicles over a specific time period .
submit to the engineer the test plan for accuracy testing at the location that is site specific to the plans .
the test plan shall take into account the roadway type freeway arterial location urban rural and traffic conditions in order to determine appropriate testing length and sample size .
the following conditions shall be met for each sensor installed section numdetection systems num d. measurement accuracy the following error levels shall be achievable and demonstrated during testing .
parameter error percentage presence num volume num lane occupancy num average speed num length classification limits num e. testing develop and submit plans for postinstallation testing to the engineer for consideration and approval .
ensure the plans test all functional requirements outlined in section numb and the accuracy requirements stipulated in section numc .
provide the engineer with application protocol interface api documentation and software development kit sdk for the wvds detection system .
gdot will have num days from receipt of the api and sdk to make a determination if it can be integrated .
if the device can not be integrated the engineer will give notice that the contractor must submit a device that can be integrated into the central system software .
the testing shall prove that all inpavement sensors are configured and collecting data as required in this specification and as shown on the plans .
num .
postinstallation test procedures num .
utilize the following test procedures after the wvds system has been installed in its entirety as shown on the plans .
commence no postinstallation testing until all wvds systems in the project have been configured andor calibrated to gather speed volume classification occupancy andor presence and programmed to communicate on the gdot network .
including the accuracy testing requirement at a minimum provide the following on the test plan to be submitted and approved by the engineer a .
inspect all detection system field components to ensure proper installation and cable termination .
b. verify that field construction has been completed as specified in the plans .
c. inspect the quality and tightness of cable ground and surge protector connections .
d. check voltage and outputs and ensure device connections are as specified in the plans and manufacturer recommendations .
e. verify that the installation of cables and connections between all apccs and field cabinets are as specified in the plans f. demonstrate that each wireless inpavement vehicle detection system is fully operational communicating and gathering the required data types at the specified interval .
num shortrange radio device detector system the shortrange radio device detection system shall be capable of monitoring and measuring vehicular and pedestrian movement by identifying and comparing unique mac media access control addresses associated with shortrange radio enabled electronic devices .
the system can be used to collect high quality highdensity travel times by sampling a portion of actual travel activity from the traffic stream of a predetermined route .
the mac address received by a sequence of two or more shortrange radio device receivers shall be matched and used to develop a sample of travel time for that particular segment of the roadway based on the relative detection times recorded by the adjacent units .
the shortrange radio enabled device sensor shall be an anonymous shortrange radio device mac address which is a hardware identifier for the manufacturer and specific electronic device type .
mac addresses are not associated with any specific user account or any specific vehicle .
the mac address shall not be linked to a specific person through any type of section numdetection systems num central database but is assigned by the shortrange radio device electronic chip manufacturer and shall not be tracked through the sales chain .
privacy concerns typically associated with alterative probe systems shall be eliminated .
a .
requirements type a type b and type c the shortrange radio device detection system shall be connected to and work in conjunction with the support data processing system located in a designated server at the tmc .
all the shortrange radio device detection units shall adhere to the following requirements shortrange radio device class num transceiver with num db to num db omni directional antenna environmental numc to numc num num humidity connectivity ipethernet num baset minimum io ports minimum one num rjnum ethernet port and one num rsnum configuration serial port num .
shortrange radio device detection system type a provide a shortrange radio device detection system that can be installed in a typical signal or its cabinet .
the unit shall be enclosed in its own housing and sit on a shelf within the cabinet .
utilize a conduit as shown on the plans for routing the antenna cable and attach the antenna at the location shown on the plans .
the power for the shortrange radio device detection system type a unit shall come from typical cabinet power num vac receptacles or terminal block .
supply all wiring for the shortrange radio device detection system type a unit .
should the unit require a poe adapter or transformer to vdc submit the adapter or transformer to the department for review .
the contractor shall supply all surge protection devices for the external poe adapter or transformer .
num .
shortrange radio device detection system type b provide a shortrange radio device detection system that is self enclosed in a nema numx enclosure that can be mounted to a pole mast arm or cabinet structure .
the voltage input shall be between num and num vdc or be able to connect to num vac with appropriate transformers and adapters as determined by the department .
the shortrange radio device detection system type b unit shall be wired to a cabinet or approved communicationpower source as shown on the plans .
the unit shall not reside within the cabinet .
provide all grounding wiring adapters transformers and surge protection devices needed to support the shortrange radio device detection system type b unit as installed .
num .
shortrange radio device detection system type c provide a shortrange radio device detection system that is self enclosed in a nema numx enclosure that can be mounted to a pole mast arm or cabinet structure .
provide a solar power array which includes the solar panel charging unit and batteries necessary for solar power .
the shortrange radio device detection system type c unit shall also include a gsm cellular modem with antennas or approved equivalent .
this shortrange radio device detection system type shall be a completely wireless installation .
provide all grounding wiring adapters transformers and surge protection devices needed to support the shortrange radio device detection system type c unit as installed .
num .
shortrange radio device detection system support data system software and database provide a support data system software package including all necessary database numrd party software required in order for the software to run as intended in support and conjunction of the shortrange radio device sensor system .
the software shall be installed on a server designated by the department .
it is the contractors responsibility to populate and configure the database for each field shortrange radio device detection system and to test the accuracy of the data .
the data shall be in an xml format compatible with the departments central software .
the software shall also display a real time chart or graph showing calculated travel time and speeds of the sampled vehicles and mac address counts .
the shortrange radio device detection system support software is required for section numdetection systems num all new shortrange radio device detection system installations but shall not be required for additional short range radio device detection system sensor installations on an existing network .
b. functional requirements for the shortrange radio device detection system the sensor shall be capable of delivering data from both an ethernet connection and a gsm wireless modem .
the short range radio device detection sensor working in conjunction with the networks support data processing system must deliver realtime speed and travel time information in xml format to the central software system for routes where the sensors are deployed .
the system shall be able to add multiple pairs of shortrange radio device detection sensors to form a network of manageable travel routes .
each route will display the data for the first and last sensor in addition to the traveltime and speed information for that segment .
the shortrange radio device detection sensor shall be able to detect at a minimum within a radius of num feet when mounted on a pole or mast arm .
the data processing shall be able to filter and throw out mac addresses that do not supply accurate information when compared to other device time stamps of the segment between two shortrange radio detection devices .
the data shall be smoothed and be able to process median and mean average speeds .
the following data shall be able to be compared and filtered as needed to deliver the most accurate information num .
pedestrians num .
oversize vehicles num .
mass transit i.e .
nearby trains or buses the shortrange radio device detection system equipment shall contain advanced features designed to allow the unit to operate efficiently in a remote environment .
diagnostic and configuration information shall be able to be viewed remotely such that the health and operating status of the sensor is known .
the system shall be designed to be able to automatically or remotely reboot if a condition is detected that requires such action .
c. testing develop and submit plans for postinstallation testing to the engineer for consideration and approval .
ensure the plans test all functional requirements outlined in section numb .
provide the engineer with the appropriate xml data interface as necessary for testing of the travel time accuracy and integration into the central software .
num .
postinstallation test procedures utilize the following test procedures after the shortrange radio device detection system has been installed in its entirety as shown on the plans .
commence no postinstallation testing until all short range radio device detection sensors systems in the project have been configured calibrated and programmed to communicate on the gdot network to the support data system software .
at a minimum provide the following on the test plan to be submitted and approved by the engineer a .
inspect all shortrange radio device detection system field components to ensure proper installation and cable termination .
b. verify that field construction has been completed as specified in the plans .
c. inspect the quality and tightness of ground and surge protector connections .
d. check power supply voltage and outputs and ensure device connections are as specified in the plans .
e. verify that the installation of cables and connections between all shortrange radio device units antennas and field cabinets andor components are as specified in the plans f. demonstrate that each shortrange radio device unit is fully operational and gathering the required data types at the specified and necessary interval .
section numdetection systems num num constructioninstallation requirements this section shall include typical construction requirements for installing and configuring the vehicle detection systems .
this specification only gives general requirements of installations .
it is the contractors responsibility to be fully certified and trained in the detection technology application and the required installation of such devices by the manufacturer .
all cable connections shall be manufacturerrated and secured from outside elements .
the contractor shall be experienced andor certified in proper cableconnector crimping and manufacturer sealing methods so as to ensure a watertight and corrosion resistant installation .
wrap all other exposed cable connections with self sealing tape for weatherproofing and moisture seal .
refer to subsection num of the specifications regarding proper conduct of the work .
num personnel all personnel shall be fully trained and manufacturer certified in the applicable vehicle detection installation application .
when installing into a signal or ramp meter cabinet the technician shall be minimum international municipal signal association imsa level ii certified .
num equipment use machinery such as trucks derricks bucket vehicles saws trenchers and other equipment necessary for the work and approved by the engineer prior to installation operations .
num preparation utility permits a .
application apply for obtain and pay for utility services and pole attachment permits required in the plans .
b .
maintenance maintain these utility services until final acceptance of each installation .
after final acceptance transfer these services and permits to the department local government or jurisdiction responsible for maintenance and operation .
ensure that the transfer does not interrupt service .
c. utility location when installing aerial cable of any type ensure that overhead clearance and separation requirements conform to local utility company standards osha the nec and the nesc .
refer to the standard details drawings for further information on utility clearances .
num fabrication general provisions num through num .
num construction a .
video detection system installation requirements num .
general installation requirements a .
install all video camera sensors video detection system processors output expansion modules and associated enclosures and equipment at the locations specified in the plans and per manufacturer recommendations .
for traffic signalramp meter controller cabinets type d e and f processors mount the processor and output expansion modules within the input files or at a location as designated by the engineer .
physical changes to the cabinet input files are not permitted .
make all necessary adjustments and modifications to the detection system prior to obtaining recommendation for system acceptance testing .
for freeway applications type a b and c processors install all rackmounted equipment with one rack unit space between adjacent equipment in the freeway its cabinet .
section numdetection systems num b .
installation surge protection and all cabling shall comply with manufacturers recommendation at a minimum or as specified in these plans .
all equipment cables and hardware must be part of an engineered system that is designed by the manufacturer to fully interoperate with all other system components and be fully protected from all surge potential .
connectors installed outside the cabinets and enclosures shall be manufacturer terminated and be corrosion resistant weather proof and watertight .
use a ul listed cable that is ozone and uv resistant and weather resistant .
label cables with permanent cable labels at each end .
c. wiring and cables must be continuous without splices between the vds camera sensor and processor except for surge protection connections between sensor and cabinet so that both the camera and processor are appropriately protected .
coil a minimum of num feet of slack in the bottom of the controller or freeway cabinet .
tape ends of unused and spare conductors to prevent accidental contact to other circuits .
label conductors inside the cabinet for the functions depicted in the approved detailed diagrams of the cabinet and vds documents .
d. furnish an asbuilt cabinet wiring diagram identified by location for each vds cabinet .
include all wiring cabling connections and camera mounting height .
place all documentation in a weatherproof holder in the cabinet .
e. for freeway installations type a b and c processors install vds power supply or transformer on a standard din rail using standard mounting hardware and power conductors wired to terminal blocks in the cabinet .
num .
camera sensor installation all types adjust the video camera sensor lens as recommended by the manufacturer and as required to minimize vehicle occlusion .
for type a camera sensors aim the camera so that no part of the horizon is in the video image so as to protect it from the effects of the sun .
mount the camera on the specified pole or structure for that location as shown on the plans .
mounting bracket assembly mount the video camera sensor on a mounting bracket such that its height and position provide a clear view of the approach or lanes .
mount the video camera sensor securely such that it is stable and steady .
the mounting bracket assembly includes a video camera sensor mounting bracket nipple pipe cablemount nipple clamp and all associated hardware and materials .
mount the video camera sensor on a mounting bracket assembly which meets the following requirements unless otherwise specified in the plans a .
use stainless steel fastening hardware with lock washers on threaded fasteners b .
use a video camera sensor enclosure mounting bracket that is nonrusting and is made from die cast aluminum extruded aluminum powdercoated galvanized steel or hot dipped galvanized steel .
provide a mounting bracket that permits vertical and horizontal adjustment of the video camera sensor .
provide a mounting bracket that securely fastens to the video camera sensor enclosure and mounts to the nipple pipe by threading onto the pipe or as a slipfit using a setscrew fastener in either above method .
c. use a num ½ num mm aluminum nipple pipe that is threaded on both ends .
d. fasten the nipple pipe to the mast arm using a cable mount nipple clamp with minimum num num num mm u bolts .
use aircraft grade galvanized steel cables with stainless steel fastening hardware and that make at least two wraps around the mast arm .
do not use banding straps .
install all vds equipment into a cabinet type as shown in the plans with the following equipment num .
cabinet equipment all types a. wiring conductors and terminal blocks use stranded copper for all conductors including those in jacketed cables except for earth ground conductors which may be solid copper .
neatly arrange all wiring firmly lace or bundle it and mechanically secure the wiring without the use of adhesive fasteners .
route and secure all wiring and cabling to avoid sharp edges and to avoid conflicts with other equipment or cabling .
route camera control section numdetection systems num wiring and num vac power wiring separately .
terminate all wiring on a terminal block strip bussbar or device clamp or lug do not splice any wiring .
use a minimum num awg for all conductors of num vac circuits or as recommended by the manufacturer of the vds device .
label coaxial cables for vds cameras .
number all terminal blocks terminal strips circuit breakers and bussbar breakers and have each item and each terminal position numbered and named according to function .
labels shall be weather and wear resistant .
b .
surge protection protect all copper wiring and cabling entering the cabinet housing by surge protection devices as specified in these specifications and per section num section a part num .
terminate all wiring between cabinet devices and the transient surge protection devices except for the video signal coaxial feed on terminal strips .
use a minimum num awg grounding of each surge protection device or larger if recommended by the surge protection device manufacturer .
do not daisy chain with the grounding wires of other devices including other surge suppressors .
dress and route grounding wires separately from all other cabinet wiring .
install grounding wires with the absolute minimum length possible between the surge protection device and the ground bussbar .
label all surge protection devices with silkscreened lettering on the mounting panel .
furnish and install a surge suppressor for each video signal coaxial line .
install a bnc connector three stage surge protection device for the coax cable that employs gas discharge tubes series current limiting components and secondary fine protection .
the coax surge protection device shall have a surge current rating of num ka .
for each cabinet housing include surge protection devices for the vds camera power lines installed on the terminal bloc .
all surge protection shall be furnished and installed by the contractor to protect not only the cabinet processor but the camera sensor itself from ground rise potential i.e .
surge up to the camera sensor .
c. documentation provide the following documentation in a waterproof documentation pouch in each cabinet one operation manual with programming instructions one maintenance manual with schematics three legible wiring prints showing all vds components model and serial number and connections with the cabinet num .
cabinet equipment type a b and c a .
component installation fasten all components of the cabinet assembly to be mounted on cabinet side panels with hexhead or phillipshead machine screws .
install the screws into tapped and threaded holes in the panels .
these components include but are not limited to terminal blocks bussbars panel and socket mounted surge protection devices accessory and equipment outlets and dc power supply chassis .
fasten all other cabinet components with hexhead or phillipshead machine screws insulated with nuts with locking washer or insert or into tapped and threaded holes .
all fastener heads and nuts when used shall be fully accessible within a complete cabinet assembly and any component shall be removable without requiring removal of other components panels or mounting rails .
do not use selftapping or selfthreading fasteners .
num .
cabinet equipment type d e and f a .
exercise extreme caution when installing vds equipment and materials at traffic signalramp meter installations .
installation technicians accessing a signal cabinet shall be accompanied by a certified minimum international municipal signal association imsa level ii traffic signal technician .
repair any damage to existing trafficramp meter control equipment and materials which occurred during vds installation to the engineers satisfaction at the contractors sole expense .
b .
in nums cabinets locate the vds power termination panel on the equipment rail in the lower left portion of the rear of the cabinet as shown in the details and plans .
adjust the panel as far toward the cabinet sidewall as possible while still providing access to the circuit breaker .
notify the engineer immediately if there is any section numdetection systems num conflict with existing cabinet equipment in this position .
ensure that there is no conflict with doormounted components when the door is closed .
c. in num and num cabinets locate the vds coax termination panel in the lower open section of the front of the cabinet equipment rack as shown in the details .
notify the engineer immediately if there is any conflict with existing cabinet equipment in this position .
ensure that there is no conflict with doormounted components when the door is closed .
dress label and secure all coaxial cabling to and from the coax termination panel such that the panel can be hinged open a minimum of num degrees without binding or stressing any coaxial cable .
b .
microwave detection system installation requirements num .
general installation requirements install all detectors and associated equipment at the locations specified in the plans .
installation must comply with manufacturers recommendation .
all detector equipment cables and hardware must be part of an engineered system that is designed by the manufacturer to fully interoperate with all other system components for the microwave detection system .
surge protection devices must be approved by the manufacturer and must be of quality or better than manufacturer recommendations .
num .
detector furnish and install the microwave radar detector on poles as shown in the plans using contractor supplied materials and brackets .
install the microwave radar detector to achieve the field of coverage shown in the plans .
aiming and alignment shall be per the manufacturers recommendations .
the contractor shall verify height requirements based on manufacturer recommendations and shall notify the engineer should the mounting height vary from the plans .
it is the contractors responsibility to make all field adjustments to the locations shown in the plans in order to match manufacturer recommendations for operation .
all field adjustments shall be approved by the engineer .
the contractor shall use his laptop to setup the detection zones using detector manufacturer specific software .
use only the latest software that is compatible with the detector as provided by the manufacturer .
use mounting hardware that meets hardware specifications as described in the video detection system installation requirements mounting hardware assembly .
num .
cabinet equipment a. wiring conductors and terminal blocks furnish and install a manufacturer terminated cable of length necessary for the detector installation .
use only cables provided by the manufacturer of the detection system .
the detector endconnector shall be manufacturer assembled and tested prior to installation .
it shall be completely watertight and weather resistant .
all cabling shall be uv rated for outdoor and underground use .
use only stranded copper for all conductors including those in jacketed cables except for earth ground conductors which may be solid copper .
neatly arrange all wiring firmly lace or bundle it and mechanically secure the wiring without the use of adhesive fasteners .
route and secure all wiring and cabling to avoid sharp edges and to avoid conflicts with other equipment or cabling .
route microwave radar detector control wiring and numvac power wiring separately so as no transient voltage bleeds over to the detector cable .
terminate all wiring on a terminal block strip bussbar or device clamp or lug do not splice any wiring from the detector unit to the terminal blocks .
number and label all terminal blocks terminal strips circuit breakers and bussbar breakers and have each item and each terminal position numbered and named according to function .
label terminal blocks terminal strips circuit breakers and bussbars with weather and wear resistant labels .
b .
surge protection devices spd protect all copper wiring and cabling entering the cabinet housing by surge protection devices as specified in this specification and the minimum requirements of section num section a part num .
terminate all wiring between cabinet devices and the transient surge protection devices and between section numdetection systems num the microwave radar detection unit and the surge protectors on terminal strips .
use a minimum num awg grounding for each surge protection device or larger if recommended by the surge protection device manufacturer .
use insulated green wire and connect the ground wire directly to the ground bussbar .
do not daisy chain with the grounding wires of other devices including other surge protection devices .
dress and route grounding wires separately from all other cabinet wiring .
install grounding wires with the absolute minimum length possible between the suppressor and the ground bussbar .
label all surge suppressors with silk screened lettering on the mounting panel .
furnish and install all necessary transient surge protection devices for the microwave radar detection units such that the detector and cabinet equipment are protected .
c. component installation fasten all components of the cabinet assembly to be mounted on cabinet side panels with hexhead or phillipshead machine screws .
install the screws into tapped and threaded holes in the panels .
the components include but are not limited to terminal blocks bussbars panel and socket mounted surge protectors terminal servers ethernet switches circuit breakers and accessory and equipment outlets .
fasten all other cabinet components with hexhead or phillipshead machine screws installed with nuts with locking washer or insert or into tapped and threaded holes .
fasten studmounted components to a mounting bracket providing complete access to the studs and mounting nuts .
all fastener heads and nuts when used shall be fully accessible within a complete cabinet assembly and any component shall be removable without requiring removal of other components panels or mounting rails .
do not use selftapping of or selfthreading fasteners .
d. asbuilt drawings furnish an asbuilt cabinet wiring diagram identified by location for each cabinet .
include label names and numbering surge protection devices spds wiring cabling and connections .
place all documentation in a weatherproof holder in the cabinet .
num .
cables conduit and power service furnish and install electrical cables used for control communications signaling and power supply as required by the manufacturer .
do not splice any cable shield or conductor used for control communications signaling or power supply .
identify all conductors of all cables by color and number .
identify the conductor function in asbuilt documentation included in the cabinet documentation .
after termination and dressing the cables in the cabinet neatly coil and store a minimum of num ft of cable slack in the bottom of the cabinet .
cut unused conductors to a length that can reach any appropriate terminal .
bend back unused conductors over their outer jackets and individually tape them .
install cabling inside new hollow metal or concrete support poles unless otherwise specified .
where devices are installed on existing wood poles install cabling on the wood poles in rigid metal conduit risers of minimum num inch num cm diameter .
use weatherheads on all nipple and conduit openings .
neatly install and route cabling to minimize movement in the wind and chafing against the pole device or bracket .
form a drip loop at the weather head and route cabling to minimize water entry into the cable connector .
use a num diameter drip loop where cables enter a weatherhead .
num .
asbuilt drawings furnish asbuilt drawings that include the cabinet wiring diagrams as outlined in numd above .
asbuilt drawings shall include but not be limited to microwave radar detection locations microwave radar detection mounting heights and component lists with brand model and serial numbers .
place one copy of the asbuilt drawings in the cabinet documentation pouch and submit another copy to the engineer .
c. wireless magnetometer vehicle detection num .
general installation requirements each installation of the wireless batterypowered magnetometer vehicle detection system shall consist of one or more sensors installed in the center of each traffic lane avoiding sources of magnetic noise such as underground section numdetection systems num power cables overhead high tension power cables light rail or subway tracks and power generation stations and substations .
a .
the sensors shall be located as specified by the plans b .
for count applications sensors shall be placed in areas with minimum stopandgo traffic flow c. if vehicle speeds are to be determined by the system then at least two sensors are required in each lane separated according to the anticipated average vehicle speed .
if the anticipated average vehicle speed is less than num mph num kph the spacing between sensors shall be approximately num feet num meters and measured precisely at the time of installation in order to properly configure the system if the anticipated average vehicle speed is greater than num mph num kph but less than num mph num kph the spacing between sensors shall be approximately num to num feet num to num meters and measured precisely at the time of installation in order to properly configure the system if the anticipated average vehicle speed is greater than num mph num kph the spacing between sensors shall be approximately num to num feet num to num meters and measured precisely at the time of installation in order to properly configure the system prior to installation the contractor shall provide personnel that have been certified by the manufacturer to test and preconfigure the components including assigning channels and sensors to spp rps etc .
the contractor shall record all detection component id numbers on a project plans drawing or intersection detail prior to installation and supply all drawings showing the recordings as part of the asbuilts at the end of the project .
the contractor shall install each sensor in the roadway per manufacturers recommendations .
the contractor will install type b sensors for stop bar detection only where presence is only required and type a sensors will be deployed for all other detection applications .
num .
sensor installation for a sensor installed just below the roadway surface a .
the roadway shall be core drilled to provide a num diameter hole a minimum num num cm deep b .
the sensor shall be placed inside a small clear plastic shell formed to provide a tight fit around the sensor .
c. a small layer of epoxy approximately num num cm shall be applied to the bottom of the cored hole .
d. the epoxy must adhere to the following requirements the epoxy shall be a two part polyurea based joint sealant .
it shall have self leveling characteristics .
the surface the epoxy will be bonding to shall be free of debris moisture and anything else which might interfere with the bonding process .
e. the epoxy shall be approved by the manufacturer of the detection system f. the sensor shall then be placed on top of this layer of epoxy in the correct orientation as clearly marked on the sensor g. the sensor shall be fully encapsulated with the epoxy to the lip of the cored hole num .
sensor to repeater or sensor to spp installation the maximum distance between a sensor installed in the roadway and an spp or an rp with a clear lineofsight between devices shall be a .
at least num feet num meters for an spp or rp installed num feet num meters above the roadway b .
at least num feet num meters for an spp or rp installed num feet num meters above the roadway section numdetection systems num c. at least num feet num meters for an spp or rp installed num feet num meters above the roadway d. the maximum distance between an spp and an rp or between an rp and another rp shall be at least num feet num meters when both units are installed num feet num meters above the roadway and with a clear lineofsight between devices num .
repeater to spp installation maximum wireless distances shall be based on the following a. spp or repeater front of the housing shall be aimed directly at the device spp rp or sensor it is communicating with b. deviations from the centerline of the front of the spp or rp shall reduce the effective distance of communication d. shortrange radio device detection system installation requirements num .
general installation requirements a .
install the shortrange radio device detection antenna andor nema numx enclosure on poles as shown in the plans using contractor supplied materials and brackets .
install the shortrange radio device detector to achieve the field of coverage shown in the plans .
make field adjustments to the locations shown in the plans only with the engineers approval .
b .
the minimum recommended mounting height for the shortrange radio device sensor antenna shall be num feet above grade unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
when using a solar power supply the panel shall be mounted in accordance with environmental and location geographic conditions and as shown and noted in the plans .
it shall be the contractors responsibility to tune the sensor for best coverage of the roadway vehicles being detected .
c. all mounting hardware shall be stainless steel or aluminum and shall not be susceptible to weather and rusting .
use mounting hardware specifications as outlined in the video detection system installation requirements .
route all cabling within new conduit unless otherwise approved by the engineer .
protect the shortrange radio device processor from the antenna with a surge protection device of specification recommended by the manufacturer .
d. it is the contractors responsibility to populate and configure the database and support data system software package and to test the accuracy of the data .
each shortrange radio device detector shall be configured in the software and show that it is taking a representative sample of vehicles from the traffic stream .
num quality acceptancetesting the acceptance testing of the vehicle detection systems shall consist of two phases num post installation detection system site testing as outlined in the specific detection technology sections and num burnin period .
perform acceptance testing for all equipment hardware and work as provided under this contract .
perform all testing in the presence of the engineer .
submit all testing plans and documents to the engineer during the submittal phase of the vehicle detection equipment .
a. burnin period num .
general requirements a .
provide a numday burnin period for all work and equipment included in the contract and associated with the vehicle detection equipment .
the burnin period shall consist of the field operation of the specific vehicle detection system in a manner that is in full accordance with the requirements of the plans and specifications .
section numdetection systems num b .
conduct only one num burnin period on the entire contract for all vehicle detection devices .
commence with the burnin period only after meeting all of the following requirements all work required in all contract documents for the vehicle detection system projectwide has been completed and inspected by the engineer .
successfully complete the postinstallation vehicle detection system site testing .
c. commence with the burnin period upon written authorization by the department to commence .
terminate the burnin period num consecutive days thereafter unless an equipment malfunction occurs .
stop the burnin period for the length of time any equipment is defective .
after repairing the equipment so that it functions properly resume the burnin period at the point it was stopped .
d. successful completion and acceptance of the burnin period will be granted on the numst day unless any equipment has malfunctioned .
if any equipment has failed during the burnin period final acceptance will be withheld until all the equipment is functioning properly .
e. when one specific piece of equipment has malfunctioned more than three times during the num day burnin period replace that unit with a new unit at no cost to the department .
multiple failures of detection devices in different locations shall be determined as a failure of the num day burnin period .
the contractor shall investigate the detection system failure and shall give a full report to the engineer .
the contractor shall replace the failed devices and shall restart the burnin period at day num once those devices have been replaced and retested .
num .
contractor responsibilities during the burnin period maintain all work under this contract in accordance with the specifications .
restore any work or equipment to proper operating condition within num hours after notification .
num .
department responsibilities department responsibilities during the burnin period will be as follows expeditious notification of contractor upon failure or malfunction of equipment in the event that the contractor does not provide the services enumerated above under his contract responsibilities the department or its authorized agents may in the interest of public safety take emergency action to provide for adequate traffic control .
pay any costs incurred as a result of these emergency actions .
such action by the department will not void any guaranties or warranties or other obligations set forth in the contract .
num .
burnin period acceptance the department will make burnin period acceptance after satisfactory completion of the required burnin period and on the basis of a comprehensive field inspection of the complete vehicle detection system in accordance with the specifications .
upon burnin period acceptance but prior to final acceptance of the entire contract maintain the complete vehicle detection system in accordance with the specifications .
num contractor warranty and maintenance provide all manufacturers warranties and guarantees for all equipment purchased and turned over to the department as part of this contract .
ensure equipment provided under this specification shall be warranted by the manufacturer to be free from defects in materials and workmanship for a period of a minimum of three num years from project final acceptance .
ensure that manufacturers and suppliers warranties and guarantees are transferable to the agency or user that is responsible for maintenance are continuous throughout their duration and state that they are subject to such transfer .
ensure the manufacturer will repair any faulty equipment during this period at no charge to the department for parts labor or shipping to and from the factory .
when the department detects a failure of any component of the system during the warranty period the department will notify the contractor distributor andor manufacturer in writing of the problem .
section numdetection systems num during the warranty period supply any firmware or software upgrades associated with the detection system to the department at no charge .
in addition provide phone consultation as needed at no cost during the warranty period for operating questions or problems that arise .
if the department desires it may enter into a separate agreement with the suppliers for technical support and software upgrades .
make available such a program to the department after the original warranty period .
num training provide a minimum of at least eight num hours of configuration and maintenance training .
the persons to be trained will be determined by the engineer .
configuration training should last a minimum of three num hours and must include instructions for programming hands on training in programming detection zones adjusting and calibrating the detection system .
one hands on unit shall be provided per attendee during training .
operation and maintenance training should last a minimum of five num hours and must include instructions on troubleshooting maintenance and operation for all detection system components .
each class will have a maximum of eight num people .
the contractor must provide a training notebook to each trainee and an electronic copy of the training notebook to the engineer .
the contractor must provide a location for holding the courses and pay all costs associated with travel and accommodation of the trainees if training is conducted away from the project area .
notify the engineer num days before training and agree on a time and place to conduct the training .
if agreement can not be reached the engineer will determine the time .
num measurement num video detection system a .
video camera sensor assembly all types video camera sensor assemblies are measured for payment per each actually installed complete functional and accepted .
unless otherwise specified in the plans furnish and install the following minimum items for a video camera sensor assembly .
num .
camera environmental enclosure and mounting assembly with all associated hardware .
num .
cabinet equipment including but not limited to wiring conductors terminal blocks surge protection devices and mounting panels num .
all weather heads vertical conduit risers and conduit hardware on the vds support pole for power service grounding communications and control .
if vds and cctv are mounted on the same pole install common weather heads conduit risers and conduit hardware under section num of the specifications .
num .
all hardware and materials necessary to provide electrical power service to the vds field location as shown in the plans including but not limited to vertical sections of conduit conduit hardware wire circuit breakers disconnect closures and grounding .
the department will pay for horizontal sections of conduit separately .
num .
all cables connectors hardware interfaces supplies and any other items necessary for the proper operation and function of any vds system component to carry video signals to the video detection system processor .
all cables shall have manufacturer installed and tested connector ends at the detection side of the cable .
b .
video detection system processor all types video detection system processors are measured for payment per each actually installed configured complete functional and accepted .
unless otherwise specified in the plans furnish and install a video detection system processor to include at a minimum the following num .
video detection system processor module num .
appropriate power supplies power and communication wiring .
section numdetection systems num num .
necessary housing and rack assemblies for processors that do not plug directly into signal cabinet input files num .
system software provided within the video detection system processor and configuration software c. output expansion module output expansion modules are measured for payment per each actually installed complete functional and accepted .
unless otherwise specified in the plans furnish and install an output expansion module to include at a minimum the following num .
output expansion module num .
any cabling and hardware required to connect to the processor module or additional expansion modules to the cabinet and controller input pins d. testing testing is measured as a lump sum for full delivery of testing and acceptance requirements .
e. training training is measured as a lump sum for all supplies equipment materials handouts travel and subsistence necessary to conduct the training .
num microwave radar detection a .
microwave radar detector assembly microwave radar detection assemblies are measured for payment per each actually installed complete functional and accepted .
unless otherwise specified in the plans furnish and install the following minimum items for a microwave detection assembly num .
microwave radar detector including housing num .
field cabling surge protection devices and cabinet equipment .
field cable shall have manufacturer installed end connector at the detection end num .
power supply modules num .
serial communication modules num .
local communication modules num .
mounting brackets num .
all weatherheads vertical conduit risers and conduit hardware on the support pole for power and detector signal as shown in the plans num .
configuration and software b .
testing testing is measured as a lump sum for full delivery of testing and acceptance requirements .
c. training training is measured as a lump sum for all supplies equipment materials handouts travel and subsistence necessary to conduct the training .
section numdetection systems num num wireless inpavement vehicle detection a. sensor all types sensors are measured for payment per each actually installed complete functional and accepted .
unless otherwise specified in the plans furnish and install the following minimum items for a sensor detection assembly num .
sensor num .
epoxy num .
core drilling and placement num .
sensor plastic enclosure num .
configuration and software b .
access point contact closure all types access point contact closure assemblies are measured for payment per each actually installed complete functional and accepted .
unless otherwise specified in the plans the apcc shall include all configuration software enclosures surge protection devices and power supplies as necessary for a full installation .
provide all modules and cabling with the apcc for connection directly into an ethernet switch .
c. wireless repeater repeaters are measured for payment per each actually installed complete functional and accepted .
unless otherwise specified in the plans furnish and install the following minimum items for a wireless repeater assembly repeater including housing num .
numyear battery num .
mounting hardware num .
configuration and software d. serial port protocol unit spp spps are measured for payment per each actually installed complete functional and accepted .
unless otherwise specified in the plans furnish and install the following minimum items for a spp assembly num .
radio unit including housing num .
cabling surge protection devices and connectors from unit to cabinet num .
mounting hardware num .
configuration and software e. expansion contact closure card expansion contact closure cards ex are measured for payment per each actually installed complete functional and accepted .
the ex card shall include all configuration to provide a full contact closure detection system .
f. isolator module isolator modules are measured for payment per each actually installed complete functional and accepted .
unless otherwise specified in the plans furnish and install the isolation module at all locations the wireless inpavement detection system is called out in the plans .
ensure that the isolation module is installed per the manufacturer section numdetection systems num recommendation and is providing protection and amplification of the signal .
this shall include all configuration of the unit .
g. inputoutput module inputoutput modules are measured for payment per each actually installed complete functional and accepted .
ensure that the inputoutput module is installed per the manufacturer recommendation and is providing the correct communications options necessary for the installation .
this shall include all configuration of the unit .
h. testing testing is measured as a lump sum for full delivery of testing and acceptance requirements .
i .
training training is measured as a lump sum for all supplies equipment materials handouts travel and subsistence necessary to conduct the training .
num shortrange radio device detection system all types a. shortrange radio device detection system all types shortrange radio device detectors are measured for payment per each actually installed complete functional and accepted .
each type of system shall be complete installed and in place and include all units necessary for full operation as determined by type .
unless otherwise specified in the plans furnish and install the following minimum items for a shortrange radio device detection assembly num .
shortrange radio device detection assembly including housing and necessary power supplies num .
power and communications cabling num .
antenna and mounting hardware num .
surge protection devices num .
cellular modem if applicable num .
solar panel array if applicable num .
solar battery charger if applicable num .
batteries if applicable num .
nema numx enclosure if applicable num .
configuration b. shortrange radio device detection system support data system software and database package shortrange radio device detection system software and database packages are measured for payment per each package actually installed complete functional and accepted .
each type of system shall be complete installed and in place .
unless otherwise specified in the plans furnish and install the following minimum items for shortrange radio device detection system software num .
installation of the software on a department determined server num .
installation of the database software on a department determined server num .
configuration of the shortrange radio device detection system units and initial testing on the software num .
testing of the xml data and interface to the central system section numdetection systems num num payment a .
general all vehicle detection assemblies complete in place and accepted by the department after a successful num day burnin period are paid for at the contract unit price .
payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing the vehicle detection technology as shown on the plans .
b .
testing the department will pay for testing performed as prescribed by this item measured as provided under measurement at the lump sum contract bid price .
c. training training is paid for as a lump sum for all supplies equipment materials handouts travel and subsistence necessary to conduct the training measured as provided under measurement at the lump sum contract bid price payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing the items complete in plans according to this specification .
payment will be made under item no .
num video camera sensor assembly type_ per each item no .
num vds system processor type _ per each item no .
num output expansion module type _ per each item no .
num testing video detection system lump sum item no .
num training video detection system lump sum item no .
num microwave radar detection assembly per each item no .
num testing microwave detection system lump sum item no .
num training microwave detection system lump sum item no .
num wireless magnetometer sensor type _ per each item no .
num access point contact closure type _ per each item no .
num wireless repeater per each item no .
num serial port protocol unit per each item no .
num expansion contact closure card per each item no .
num isolator module per each item no .
num inputoutput module per each item no .
num testing wmvd system lump sum item no .
num training wmvd system lump sum item no .
num shortrange radio device detection system type _ per each item no .
num shortrange radio device support data processing software package per each section numdetection systems num item no .
num testing shortrange radio device detection system lump sum item no .
num training shortrange radio device detection system lump sum section numcommunication and electronic equipment num general description this work includes installation acceptance testing warranty and guaranty of items that are either components of several navigator subsystems or elements of the communication network .
provide all equipment and materials of like kind and function to be of the exact same manufacture model revision firmware etc .
provide all equipment materials and work in accordance with all manufacturers recommendations .
num definitions type a cabinet the type a cabinet housing is a standard model num stretch nums housing with approximate exterior dimensions of num in .
num m h x num in .
num m w x num in .
num m d. type b cabinet the type b cabinet housing is a standard model num housing with approximate exterior dimensions of num in .
num m h x num in .
num m w x num in .
num m d. type c cabinet the type c cabinet housing is a standard model num housing with approximate exterior dimensions of num in .
num m h x num in .
num m w x num in .
num m d. type d cabinet the type d cabinet housing is a standard model num stretch nums housing with approximate exterior dimensions of num in .
num m h x num in .
num m w x num in .
num m d. the difference between a type d and type a cabinet is the difference in interior cabinet configuration .
type f cabinet the type f cabinet housing shall be a standard its cabinet housing num with approximate exterior dimensions of num in .
num m h x num in .
num m w x num in .
num m d. gbic type lx gbic is a fiber interface module to the network switches and the lx type is for shorter distances on single mode fiber of up to num km in length .
gbic type ex gbic is a fiber interface module to the network switches and the ex type is for medium distances on single mode fiber of up to num km in length .
gbic type zx gbic is a fiber interface module to the network switches and the lx type is for longer distances on single mode fiber of up to num km in length .
field switch type a is a hardened network field cabinet switch with a minimum of two num gigabitethernet sfp gbic sockets used in a typical drop and insert over fiber link .
field switch type b is a hardened network field cabinet switch with a minimum of three num gigabitethernet sfp gbic sockets used in a drop and insert over fiber link when two links come together or split .
field switch type c is a hardened network field cabinet switch with a minimum of eight num gigabitethernet sfp gbic sockets used where multiple drop and insert links come together .
field switch poe type a is a hardened network field cabinet switch with a minimum of two num gigabitethernet sfp gbic sockets used in a typical drop and insert over fiber link and where power over ethernet capability from the switch is needed for poe devices .
field switch poe type b is a hardened network field cabinet switch with a minimum of three num gigabitethernet sfp gbic sockets used in a drop and insert over fiber link when two links come together or split and where power over ethernet capability from the switch is needed for poe devices .
section numcommunication and electronic equipment num field switch poe type c is a hardened network field cabinet switch with a minimum of eight num gigabitethernet sfp gbic sockets used where multiple drop and insert links come together and where power over ethernet capability from the switch is needed for poe devices .
num related references a. georgia standard specifications section num permanent changeable message sign section num electrical wire cable and conduit section num buildings section num electrical wire and cable section num electrical conduit section num traffic signal equipment section num fiber optic system section num closed circuit television system cctv section num detection systems section num navigator advanced transportation management system integration b. referenced documents american society of testing and materials astm american national standards institute ansi caltrans tees caltrans transportation electrical equipment specifications as published by the state of california business transportation housing agency department of transportation current edition and all current addenda .
caltrans tsces caltrans traffic signal control equipment specifications as published by the state of california business transportation housing agency department of transportation current edition and all current addenda canadian standards association csa deutsches institut für normung german institute for standardization din electronics industry association eia standards of the european committee for standardization en icea table k.nummethod num institute of electrical and electronics engineers ieee international electrotechnical commission iec international standards organization iso international telecommunications union itu motion pictures expert group mpeg national electric code nec national electric safety code nesc national electrical manufacturers association nema national television system committee ntsc national transportation communications for its protocol ntcip section numcommunication and electronic equipment num telecommunications industry association tia underwriters laboratory incorporated ul association for electrical electronic information technologies germany vde num submittals use only equipment and components that meet the requirements of these minimum specifications and that are approved on the departments qualified products list .
products appearing on the qualified products list qpl are exempt from normal submittal requirements .
these products have been evaluated by the office of traffic operations and have proven their capability of meeting the applicable georgia department of transportation specification .
any of these products may be used without submitting catalogue cuts sampling or pretesting .
the contractor shall submit a letter to the engineer stating which qpl items they will use .
the engineer andor department designee must ascertain that the construction item is the same material identified on the qpl and will acknowledge receipt of these items in the project diary or as required by the construction manual .
the following chart provides the contractor with an outline of the submittal requirements for the equipment and components not on the qualified products lists for this pay item .
this chart is to be used as a guide and does not relieve the contractor from submitting additional information to form a complete submittal package .
section num submittal requirements item specification subsection catalog cuts factory specifications independent test lab certification installation procedure test plans maintenance procedures submittal due date cal .
days after ntp serial data terminal server all types num x x x num days patch cords num num days hub ups num x x x num days network switch layer num gige all types num x x x num days gbic routing switch module all types num x x x num days gbics all types num x x x num days field switch all types num x x x num days equipment rack num x num days equipment cabinet assembly all types num.a x x x num days training plan num x x num days submit submittal data for all equipment materials test procedures and routine maintenance procedures required for these items within sixty num calendar days after the notice to proceed and prior to any installation unless noted otherwise in the contract documents .
submit to the engineer for approval two num copies of the manufacturers descriptive literature catalog cuts technical data operational documentation service and maintenance documentation and all other materials required within these specifications .
an electronic copy which includes all the aforementioned documents shall be placed on a cd as pdf documents and delivered to the engineer .
provide submittal data that is neat legible and orderly .
neatly organize each package of submittal data and separate by hardware item .
use the materials certification package index and transmittal form contained in section num of the specifications for each pay item to document and list all material and components that are included in the submittal package .
any submittal data submitted without the indextransmittal form or that is incomplete will be rejected .
section numcommunication and electronic equipment num a .
equipment materials submittal data for items specified herein shall include but not be limited equipment performance and technical specifications electricalpower specifications sizeweightmounting configuration requirements and environmental operating conditions .
provide a diagram showing the location of all equipment within the tcc hub andor equipment cabinet num days prior to any installation activities at the site .
include in this diagram the dimensions power requirements power service materials and heat dissipation specifications for all of the equipment .
submit and provide all equipment and corresponding ancillary and incidental materials of a like kind to be the exact same manufacturer model revision firmware etc .
for the entire quantity in the project .
like kind equipment shall include but is not limited to serial data terminal servers uninterruptible power supplies network switches gbic routing switch modules gbics field switches video encoders and decoders and equipment racks .
b .
testing provide test equipment and system setup and diagnostic software required for the testing operation maintenance and troubleshooting of the equipment along with operations installation and maintenance manuals for these software packages .
submit all testing plans and procedures for department approval in accordance with the chart above .
num materials num not applicable num serial data terminal server provide multiport serial data terminal servers terminal servers that are compatible with the existing navigator serial port control system .
the existing serial port control system consists of serial data terminal servers digiboard portserver ii addressed with the digiboard realport system interface .
a .
ensure all terminal servers meet the following requirements num .
compatible with the existing navigator serial port control system num .
ip addressable supporting ethernet numbasettx with rjnum port num .
rsnum serial ports with rjnum ports num .
management access by http telnet and console ports all password protected num .
snmp readwrite management of terminal server and individual serial ports num .
each serial port individually configurable comm .
settings and tcpudp socket support num .
rsnum selectable serial connections num .
each serial port with minimum numkbs throughput with numkbps buffering and data capture num .
firmware upgradeable by ftptftp num .
uploaddownload of configuration settings num .
diagnostic leds for ethernet connection and unit status num .
ul approval b .
ensure serial data terminal server num port meet the following additional requirements num .
eia numinch rackmounted units with maximum vertical height of num inch num mm .
section numcommunication and electronic equipment num num .
num rsnum ports mounted on the front of the unit .
num .
internal numvac power supply .
c. ensure serial data terminal server type b meet the following additional requirements num .
operating temperature of unit and power supply of numºf to numºf numºc to numºc .
num .
conformalcoated circuit boards .
num .
capable of being panelmounted rackmounted and shelfmounted in equipment cabinets .
num .
minimum of two num rsnum ports mounted on the front of the unit .
num .
internal or external numvac power supply .
num patch cords a .
general requirements provide all necessary patch cords with all electronic equipment for interconnection .
verify that patch cords consist of a length of cable that is connectorized on both ends primarily used for interconnecting termination or patching facilities andor equipment .
num .
all patch cords shall be factory assembled and connectorized and be certified by the patch cord manufacturer to meet the relevant performance standards required below .
all connectors shall incorporate mechanical cable strain relief and protective boots .
num .
coaxial video patch cords ensure that coaxial video patch cords are numohm precision doubleshielded cables with tinned copper braid shield and minimum numawg solid copper stranded center conductor .
use bnc connectors with goldplated center pins at both ends .
connectorized coaxial video patch cords shall be num sweep tested .
provide only adapters with goldplated pins .
num .
networkfield switchdata patch cords verify that networkfielddata patch cords meet all ansieiatia requirements for categorynume numpair unshielded twisted pair cabling with stranded conductors and rjnum connectors .
num .
voicetelephone patch cords provide voicetelephone patch cords that meet all ansieiatia requirements for category num unshielded twisted pair cabling with stranded conductors unless otherwise required by the voicetelephone equipment manufacturer .
num .
fiber optic patch cords provide fiber optic patch cords that meet all requirements of section num .
num hub uninterruptible power supply ensure the hub ups provides ac backup power for network electronics and other equipment as shown in the contract documents .
a .
provide a hub ups meeting the following requirements num .
num rack mounted maximum height of six num rack units num .
num .
num vac single phase num hz output num .
input line cord plug type nema lnump num .
num output receptacles type nemanumr num .
pure sine wave output at num vac num num .
transfer time of num ms or less section numcommunication and electronic equipment num num .
capacity of num vanum w num .
load factor range of num to num num .
peak current capability of num kva num .
software adjustable high and low voltage buckboost function num .
snmp manageable hardware and software with numbaset connection rjnum num .
addressable snmp command set shall minimally include ups state battery condition capacity age internal temperature current ac input conditions voltage phase frequency failure condition current ac output conditions voltage frequency load and diagnosticselftest control and status .
num .
remote environmental sensing hardware and software integrated with snmp minimally capable of temperature and humidity monitoring and num dry contact closures num .
network connection to ethernet port on hub network switch layer num gige num .
printed and electronic user documentation for all management configuration and operation hardware and firmware settings installation procedures and the mib .
num .
sealed maintenancefree leadacid batteries num .
maximum audible noise of num dba at num ft num m. num .
upgradeable for increased runtime capacity minimum numx with additional battery packs num .
expansion battery pack that is num rack mounted with maximum height of five num rack units num .
num network switch layer num gige furnish a gigabit ethernet layer num network routing switch that is compatible with the existing gdot ethernet switching network .
the existing network consists of cisco networks num layer num routing switches .
the network switches shall be managed by the departments existing network management software .
furnish and configure the network switches as complete compatible assemblies .
switches shall be modular stackable and the modules configurable to be operated as a single switch .
configure the network switch es at the locations shown in the plans as applicable to the following minimum requirements minimum num port num base sfp gbic routing switch .
one num numport autosensing num basettx ethernet layer num switching interface .
three num numvac power supplies including north american power cables configured for numvac service eia num rack mounted all modules shall be hotswappable .
meet the ieee numu fast ethernet num mbps standard .
meet the ieee numx full duplex with flow control standard .
meet the ieee nump priority queuing standard .
meet the ieee numq vlan standard per port for up to num vlans .
meet the ieee numw rapid spanning tree protocol standard .
meet the ieee numd virtual bridge standard .
meet the ieee numx authentication standard .
meet the ieee numad port trunking standard for a minimum of two groups of four ports .
full implementation of rip protocol full implementation of ospf protocol capable of mirroring any port to any other port within the switch .
section numcommunication and electronic equipment num full implementation of snmpvnum snmpvnumc and snmpvnum .
full implementation of gmrp generic multicast registration protocol .
full implementation of gvrp generic vlan registration protocol .
full implementation of igmp igmpvnum and igmp snooping .
full implementation of pimsm and pimdm .
full implementation of dvmrpvnum .
full implementation of vrrp .
additionally configure each network switch layer num gige type e with four num type e gbics .
include four num duplex fiber optic singlemode patch cords num ft. num m in length in accordance with section num and with lc connectors on one end at the fdc and an lcconnector on the other end at the network switch .
additionally configure each network switch layer num gige type f with four num type e gbics and four num type f gbics .
include eight num duplex fiber optic singlemode patch cords num ft. num m in length in accordance with section num and with lcconnectors on one end at the fdc and an lcconnector on the other end at the network switch .
num gbic routing switch module provide a gbic routing switch module type b which consists of numbase sfp gbic ports populated with gbics as calledout on the plans and as specified herein .
all modules and gbics provided shall be compatible with the network switch layer num gige .
num gbic gigabit interface converter a .
the gbics shall meet the following minimum requirements num .
support singlemode operation num .
fully compliant with ieee numz standards num .
small form factor plugin module that operates at nummbps and fullduplex two fiber operation supporting the following types num .
gbic type lx num .
gbic type ex num .
gbic type zx num .
allow for hot swapping failed components .
num .
operate as its own switched port .
num .
support detecting and shutting down oneway link failures using autonegotiation .
num .
the gbic optical receiver saturation level shall be greater or equal to the maximum optical output of the mating transmitter minus numdb .
where required for manufacturers recommended operations provide fiber optic patch cords in accordance with section num with integral optical attenuators for optical power control in accordance with the ethernet switch network switch field switch etc .
manufacturers recommendations .
num .
gbics all types furnished with field switches shall meet the same environmental operating requirements as the field switch .
num field switch a .
all field switches shall meet the following requirements general characteristics and capabilities section numcommunication and electronic equipment num num .
meet the ieee num nummbps ethernet standard num .
meet the ieee numu fast ethernet num mbps standard num .
provide gigabitethernet sfp gbic sockets as specified in field switch types subsection num .
provide a minimum of six num num basettx ports unless otherwise specified in the field switch types subsection .
each numbasettx port shall connect via rjnum connector .
the ports shall operate as halfduplex or fullduplex ieee numx over numm segment lengths and provide autonegotiation num .
bit error ratio number of erroneous bits divided by the total number of bits transmitted received or processed shall not increase over the optical channel when two units are connected with a fiber optic jumper having total optical losses of numdb including connector losses num .
operate with nonblocking store and forward switching at full wire speed num .
minimum mtbf of num hrs using bellcore tsnum standard b .
network capabilities and features the field switch shall supportcomply with the following minimum requirements num .
provide full implementation of igmpvnum and igmp snooping num .
meet the ieee numx full duplex with flow control standard num .
meet the ieee nump priority queuing standard num .
meet the ieee numq vlan standard per port for up to four vlans num .
the switch shall meet the ieee numd spanning tree protocol and ieee numw rapid spanning tree standards num .
meet the ieee numad link aggregation standard for a minimum of two groups of four ports num .
full implementation of gvrp generic vlan registration protocol c. port security the field switch shall supportcomply with the following remotely minimum requirements num .
ability to configure static mac addresses access num .
ability to disable automatic address learning per ports known hereafter as secure port .
secure ports only forward statically configured mac addresses num .
trap and alarm upon any unauthorized mac address and shutdown .
port shutdown requires administrator to manually reset the port before communications are allowed d. network management functions the field switch shall supportcomply with the following minimum requirements num .
password manageable num .
full implementation of snmpvnum and snmpvnumc .
num .
full implementation of rmon i statistics history alarms and events objects .
num .
capable of mirroring any port to any other port within the switch .
section numcommunication and electronic equipment num e. remote management and configuration the field switch shall supportcomply with the following minimum requirements num .
snmp num .
telnetcli num .
http embedded web server with secure sockets layer ssl .
num .
full implementation of rfc num tftp to allow remote firmware upgrades .
f. mounting all necessary hardware and adaptors for mounting shall be included .
provide a perforated shelf and secure with rack mounting hardware for a field switch that is not rack mountable with integral rack ears .
provide a sufficient quantity of fiber optic patch cords to match the populated optical ports on the field switch .
include duplex fiber optic singlemode patch cords num ft. num m in length in accordance with section num and with stconnectors on one end at the fdc and an lcconnector on the other end at the field switch .
g. environmental the field switch shall supportcomply with the following minimum requirements num .
operate between num to num degree celsius .
numºf to numºf .
no fans are permitted .
num .
operate from num to num humidity h. electricalsafety the field switch shall supportcomply with the following num .
operate from num vac to num vac numvac nominal numhz as shown on the detail drawings in this section .
the field switch shall be provided with all power conversion which is temperature hardened from numº f to numº f num to num degrees celsius and all regulation necessary to support electronics operation .
the power input circuitry shall be designed to protect the electronics from damage by a power surge or under voltage condition .
all power transformers provided shall be fastening mechanism type .
no plugin types will be provided .
all corded transformers shall be mountable with the ability to neatly secure power cords .
include ul approval provide rubber dust capscovers with insertionremoval handles that completely seal the port opening for all unused copper and optical ports .
i .
status indicators the field switch shall supportcomply with the following minimum requirements num .
power on off num .
network status per port transmit receive link speed num .
status indicators shall be led .
j .
field switch types in addition to meeting all the requirements specified herein the field switch sfp gbic sockets shall be populated as indicated on the plans and shall be of gbic type compatible with the devices it shall interface to as also indicated on the plans .
the field switch types are defined as follows section numcommunication and electronic equipment num num .
field switch type a provide a minimum of two num gigabitethernet sfp gbic sockets .
num .
field switch type b provide a minimum of three num gigabitethernet sfp gbic sockets .
num .
field switch type c provide a minimum of eight num gigabitethernet sfp gbic sockets num field switch poe field switch poe is a power over ethernet capable field switch that is to be used where poe field devices are installed and shall meet all the requirements of field switch as indicated in section num except as indicated by the following requirements each numbasettx port shall be capable of providing power over ethernet poe with each port numaf numat compliant .
each port shall be autosensing that provide power only to poe end devices or shall be able to turn poe capability on or off on a per port basis .
a .
field switch poe types in addition to meeting all the requirements specified herein the field switch poe sfp gbic sockets shall be populated as indicated on the plans .
the field switch types are defined as follows num .
field switch poe type a provide a minimum of two num gigabitethernet sfp gbic sockets .
num .
field switch poe type b provide a minimum of three num gigabitethernet sfp gbic sockets .
num .
field switch poe type c provide a minimum of eight num gigabitethernet sfp gbic sockets num equipment rack provide equipment racks as applicable and required within the equipment cabinets as specified herein .
num equipment cabinet assembly provide equipment cabinet assemblies as show on the plans and as specified herein .
ensure that all cabinets exhibit a smooth uniform natural aluminum finish .
all bolts nuts washers screws hinges and hinge pins shall be stainless steel .
manufacture the exterior mounting bracket and fixtures of aluminum or galvanized steel and manufacture all fastening and mounting hardware of stainless steel .
verify that the bottom of the polemounted cabinet is fully enclosed .
where base mounting of equipment cabinets is specified the cabinet bottom shall be open .
verify that all electrical cables between the cabinet and the device are ullisted tray cable with num awg numstrand copper conductors with pvcnylon insulation and a uvresistant pvc outer jacket rated for numv num f num c dry num f num c wet and wetdry direct burial use .
conductor colorcoding shall be in accordance with icea table k.nummethod num .
a .
general num .
standard cabinet housing a .
general requirements unless otherwise specified furnish cabinet housings that conform to the cabinet housing details as defined in chapter num sections num num and num and the cabinet housing details of the caltrans traffic signal control equipment specification latest version tsces .
the police panel and associated wiring circuits are not required as part of this cabinet assembly .
all cabinets shall have hooks welded to the inside of the front cabinet door for hanging the plastic documentation pouch .
b .
unless otherwise specified in these specifications or in the plans configure all equipment cabinet assemblies for pole mounting .
the holes for pole mounting shall be properly reinforced with metal plates of adequate size and strength welded longitudinally across the inside depth of the cabinet .
where basemounting of equipment cabinets is specified section numcommunication and electronic equipment num make the cabinet bottom open and provide an approved base mounting adapter in accordance with the departments standard specification for traffic signal equipment .
num .
type a standard cabinet housing not applicable num .
type b standard cabinet housing not applicable num .
type c standard cabinet housing a .
the type c cabinet housing is a standard model num housing with approximate exterior dimensions of num in .
num m h x num in .
num m w x num in .
num m d. b. equip all type c cabinet housings with the standard eia numinch rack cabinet cage as described in section num of the caltrans specification .
install side panels within the two sides of the cabinet cage .
each side panel shall be fabricated from num sheet aluminum alloy with a minimum thickness of num in num mm .
c. equip type c cabinet housings with a cabinet sliding drawer .
follow the drawer specifications given in subsection num.b.l d. provide a ground fault interrupt numa duplex receptacle nema numr in the cabinet as an accessory outlet .
install two num nonground fault protected numa equipment outlet strips each with ten num receptacles .
mount the strip outlets vertically near the top of the cabinet .
num .
type d standard cabinet housing a .
the type d cabinet housing shall be a standard model num stretch nums housing with approximate exterior dimensions of num in .
num m h x num in .
num m w x num in .
num m d. the minimum door opening dimensions shall be num in .
num m h x num in .
num m w. b. equip all type d cabinet housings with the standard eia numinch rack cabinet cage as described in section num of the caltrans specifications .
the minimum clear vertical inside dimension of the rack for equipment mounting shall be num in .
num m. install side panels within the two sides of the cabinet cage .
use side panels fabricated from num sheet aluminum alloy with a minimum thickness of num in num mm .
c. equip the type d cabinet housing with a cabinetsliding drawer .
follow the drawer specifications given in subsection num.b.l .
d. provide a ground fault interrupt numa duplex receptacle nema numr in the cabinet as an accessory outlet .
provide rack mounted power strip outlets near the top of the cabinet .
the power strip shall incorporate eight num nema numr receptacles .
the power strip receptacle shall face the back of the cabinet and shall be recessed within the cabinet rack to provide a minimum spacing of three num inches between the outlets face and the cabinet door when the door is closed .
num .
type f standard cabinet housing a .
the type f cabinet housing shall be a standard its cabinet housing num with approximate exterior dimensions of num in .
num m h x num in .
num m w x num in .
num m d as specified in the caltrans transportation electrical equipment specifications latest version and all addenda tees .
the minimum door opening dimensions shall be num in .
num m h x num in .
num m w. b. equip all type f cabinet housings with two standard eia numinch rack cabinet cages as described in the caltrans tees .
equip all type f cabinet housing with four num side mounting panels in the rack cabinet cages side mounting panels shall mount from inside the rack cabinet cage only .
the minimum clear vertical inside dimension of the rack for equipment mounting shall be num in .
num m. use side panels fabricated from num sheet aluminum alloy with a minimum thickness of num in num mm with minimum dimensions of num in num m h x num in .
num m w. section numcommunication and electronic equipment num c. provide a minimum of four num wiring passthrough holes on the inside mounting panels to permit patch cords to pass between the two cabinet sides .
each passthrough hole shall be num in .
num mm in diameter and shall be fully grommetted for patch cord protection with the holes positioned with two num in the cabinet front and two num in the cabinet rear and aligning horizontally between the two side panels .
d. provide a minimum of num plastic or rubbercoated jhooks or drings minimum num in .
num mm depth and height on the inside rails of the rack cabinet cages to organize patch cords passing between the two cabinet sides .
install the jhooks in horizontallyaligned pairs on the inside rails with four num pairs in the cabinet front and four num pairs in the cabinet rear .
e. equip the type f cabinet housing with two cabinetsliding drawers .
follow the drawer specifications given in subsection num.b.l .
f. provide a ground fault interrupt numa duplex receptacle nema numr in the cabinet as an accessory outlet .
provide rack mounted power strip outlets near the top of the cabinet .
the power strip shall incorporate eight num nema numr receptacles .
the power strip receptacle shall face the back of the cabinet and shall be recessed within the cabinet rack to provide a minimum spacing of num in .
num mm between the outlets face and the cabinet door when the door is closed .
b .
internal cabinet assembly components num .
unless otherwise specified in the plans or approved by the engineer construct all cabinet assemblies in conformance with this subsection num.b all applicable provisions of the georgia dot standard specifications for traffic signal equipment and applicable provisions of the caltrans tsces or tees .
do not include with the cabinet assembly the power supply assembly power distribution assembly input file output file monitor unit assembly field terminal hookup blocks modularserialcontrol bus acdc power assembly and extension and related wiring assemblies as described in the caltrans tsces or tees .
num .
provide a plastic documentation pouch to store the cabinet and equipment documentation .
use a pouch that is side opening resealable opaque and of a heavyduty plastic material .
use a pouch that has metal or hardplastic reinforced holes for hanging from hooks included on the cabinet door .
the pouch shall be of the size and strength to easily hold all wiring diagrams equipment documentation and the maintenance logbook num .
wiring conductors and terminal blocks all numvac service entrance power distribution grounding and protection shall be provided by components mounted on nummm din standard rails .
devices include terminal blocks circuit breakers and surge protection devices .
all din rail mounted components will be certified to meet or exceed ulnum ulnum ulnum ulnum iecnum iecnum csanum or as specified in the details or special provisions .
din rail mounted power distribution devices supplied shall be configured as shown in the details and shall meet or exceed the specifications and certifications listed below .
a .
mounting rail use din rail with prepunched holes for mounting and certified to meet en num en num and din num num .
din mounting rail shall be nummm wide num mm high num mm thick perforated for flexible mounting and cut to length .
rail will cut between mounting holes to allow mounting at both ends of the rail section .
rail shall be provided burr free with no sharp edges or deformation from the standard profile .
the portion of the rail at the mounting bolt holes shall be cleaned of any coating to expose the underlying steel .
the area under the bolt hole and the aluminum power panel mounting point shall be covered with an anti corrosion paste to provide a solid and long lasting electrical connection between the din rail and the power panel .
din rail shall be attached to the power panel by nut and bolt with star washers to provide a low resistance electrical connection between the rail and the power panel .
b. terminal blocks section numcommunication and electronic equipment num use din terminal blocks with voltage and current ratings greater than the voltage and current ratings of the wires that are terminated on the blocks metallic terminal block connection hardware and components shall be nonferrous copper or nickeltinplated copper alloy or equivalent .
all terminal blocks and wire shall be supplied in the colors listed below .
black line white neutral green or greenyellow ground c. service entrance terminal blocks make the terminal block for the numvac cabinet service entrance se a num mm single level screw type device .
the terminal block shall accommodate num num awg wiring and shall be provided in colors as specified herein .
the ground terminal shall be the same size and pitch as the power terminals and shall provide positive electrical and mechanical connection to the mounting rail .
ground terminals may be provided in the color green or the international green and yellow style .
provide the quantity of terminals as shown in the details .
d. distribution terminal blocks terminal blocks for distribution of num vac tbnum and ground located on the protected side of the power distribution assembly shall be a num mm single level screw type device .
the terminal block shall accommodate num awg wiring and shall be provided in colors as specified herein .
the ground terminal shall be the same size and pitch as the power terminals and shall provide positive electrical and mechanical connection to the mounting rail .
ground terminals may be provided in the color green or the international green and yellow style .
provide the quantity of terminals as shown in the details .
e. cross connection bridge cross connection bridge strips shall be provided to connect a number of terminal blocks to create the specified power distribution design .
the bridge strips shall match the pitch and construction of the terminals to be connected and shall be certified by the terminal block manufacturer to be compatible with the connected terminal blocks .
cross connection bridge strips shall be fully insulated to prevent operator contact .
connected terminal blocks of any number shall be connected by a single cross connection bridge strip .
f. circuit breaker provide circuit breakers as shown in the detail drawings in this section .
use only circuit breakers that are ul num and csa num approved and plainly marked with trip frame sizes and ampere rating .
all circuit breakers shall be quickmake quickbreak on either automatic or manual operation .
ensure that contacts are silver alloy and enclosed in an arcquenching chamber .
overload tripping shall not be influenced by an ambient air temperature range from num degrees c to num degrees c. minimum interrupting capacity shall be num amperes rms .
use only circuit breakers that are num mm din rail mounted .
g. end brackets provide screwclamped end brackets to positively lock all din rail mounted devices to the rail .
h. spacer spacers or dividers shall be placed between terminal blocks and other components as shown in the details for visual separation .
spacers shall snap on to din rail be approximately num mm thick and match the size of the terminals they separate .
i .
safety cover a safety covers shall be provided on terminal blocks to prevent contact with exposed conductors or any metallic components .
this cover will provide electrical and visual separation between terminal blocks and other rail mounted devices .
covers shall be approximately nummm thick and sized to match the terminal blocks they protect or separate .
j .
surge suppressor section numcommunication and electronic equipment num provide a din rail mounted tvss transient voltage surge suppressor with rfiemi filtering for ac power service to the cabinet housing .
the tvss shall provide protection from all conductors to ground and meet or exceed the following requirements and levels of protection .
nominal operating voltage num v max .
continuous operating voltage numv max .
surge current rating num ka nominal surge current rating for numxnumµs surge num ka internal thermal fuses failure replacement indication operating temperature numc to numc meet ulnum numnd ed .
vdenum csanum and ce marked k. wiring use a minimum num awg grounding of each surge suppression device or larger if recommended by the surge suppression device manufacturer or indicated in the details .
use insulated green wire and connect the ground wire directly to the ground terminals .
do not daisy chain with the grounding wires of other devices including other surge suppressors .
terminate all ground wiring between cabinet surge suppressor devices on the din rail mounted ground terminal blocks .
dress and route grounding wires separately from all other cabinet wiring .
install grounding wires with the absolute minimum length possible between the suppressor and the ground terminals .
label all surge suppressors with silkscreened lettering on the mounting panel .
use minimum num awg insulated thhnthwn conductors between the surge suppression device and the power distribution terminal .
l. sliding drawer install drawer that is an aluminum storage compartment mounted in the rack assembly with the approximate following dimensions num in num mm h x num in num mm w x num in num mm d. ensure the compartment has telescoping drawer guides to allow full extension from the rack assembly .
when extended the storage compartment shall open to provide storage space for cabinet documentation and other miscellaneous items .
install a storage compartment that is of adequate construction to support a weight of num lb num kg when extended .
the top of the storage compartment shall have a nonslip plastic laminate attached which covers a minimum of num of the surface area of the top .
num delivery storage and handling not applicable num construction requirements num personnel have trained personnel available for troubleshooting and problem solving until all equipment is fully functional and ready to start the acceptance phase .
num equipment not applicable num preparation a .
network equipment programming perform network equipment programming and testing in accordance with the network equipment programming procedure below and as directed by the engineer .
network equipment is defined as any traffic control and monitoring equipment with an ethernet interface and includes equipment from these and the following gdot specifications and special provisions section numcommunication and electronic equipment num num .
section numchangeable message signs num .
section numtraffic signal equipment num .
section num cctv system num .
section numdetection system num .
section numdetection num .
section numnavigator system integration the contractor is responsible for all steps work and activities in the procedure below except when department responsibility is expressly indicated .
at all times the contractor is responsible for all equipment and materials including while being programmed by the department and including operation warranties and technical support .
coordinate all aspects of the procedure through the engineer .
perform all network equipment programming for a complete project at one time .
the contractor may request in writing for a staged equipment programming provide a plan with schedule for the complete project that details all of the proposed stages and identifies all network equipment and field sites for each stage .
if approved by the department the procedure below applies independently and fully to each individual stage .
field sites will always be programmed concurrently for all of the equipment at that site .
materials submittal reviews for all network equipment and related equipment shall be successfully completed prior to beginning the network equipment programming procedure .
step num request in writing for gdot to prepare and provide the basic equipment programming data .
the request shall clearly identify the project .
if the contractor desires a staged equipment programming that request must be identified at this time and the staging plan must be submitted .
step num once the contractors request is complete the department will provide the basic equipment programming data within num days from the departments acceptance of the contractors request .
basic equipment programming data will include the ip address subnet and gateway for each network device .
the programming data will be provided in spreadsheet form .
step num complete installation of all field equipment including but not limited to support poles equipment cabinets power service field and network devices and fiber communications infrastructure .
complete all basic equipment programming .
furnish network switch gbics to gdot .
furnish all fiber patch cords in the hubs but make no connections to the network switch .
provide in spreadsheet form the equipment model numbers serial numbers mac addresses and firmware revision numbers for each network equipment device in its installed location .
complete all field testing required prior to the interim field subnet ifs test and conduct an ifs test dryrun .
step num request in writing to begin the ifs test a minimum of num days in advance of the desired start date .
conduct ifs test in the presence of the engineer .
if the ifs test fails identify the defects and make corrections provide a written report on the diagnosis and corrections made and request in writing an ifs retest a minimum of num days in advance of the desired start date .
step num upon successful and accepted completion of ifs testing the department will have num days to complete all network and system programming and navigator integration of the field devices and hub equipment .
continue with all remaining field construction that has no impact on any equipment or communications infrastructure associated with the network programming .
any disruption of the equipment or communications infrastructure shall result in stopping the num day period for department programming .
step num section numcommunication and electronic equipment num the department will notify the contractor when network programming is successfully completed at which time the network equipment programming procedure will be considered completed .
continue with all remaining project activities including remaining acceptance testing .
num fabrication not applicable num construction a .
equipment num .
installation install all equipment in new andor existing equipment racks and equipment frames in accordance with the equipment manufacturers recommendations including mounting interconnection wiring and electrical service .
furnish and install all mounting hardware and incidental materials including fasteners and auxiliary supporting framesbrackets as recommended by the manufacturer .
furnish and install all miscellaneous hardware materials wiringcabling configuration and any other incidental items necessary for fully operational components and subsystems shown in the contract documents and section num of the standard specifications except when specifically identified as existing or as work to be performed by the department .
work in this project may require access to various department buildings and hubs requiring coordination of all work activities in these locations with the engineer before access is needed .
work in this project requires system configuration tasks to be performed by the department before some contractorinstalled items can be brought online and completely system tested .
coordinate all work activities needing system configuration with the engineer a minimum of num days prior to any testing .
install all hub and control center equipment in the presence of the engineer .
locate new equipment in new or existing equipment racks or equipment frames as shown in the plans .
provide proper electrical service including grounding and current rating in the equipment racks and equipment frames for all hardware installed under this project .
this requirement includes existing and new equipment racks and equipment frames .
obtain engineer approval prior to installation of all electrical service for hardware in control centers .
furnish and install additional power outlet strips in new and existing equipment racks and equipment frames if needed for the new equipment .
for any equipment that is not rack mountable with rack ears provide perforated shelves and secure all shelf mounted equipment with rack mounting hardware .
label all wiring and cabling including building entrance cables jumper and patch cords and power supply cables using cable identification numbers as shown in the plans or provided by the engineer .
apply cable labels at each end and in the center of the cable .
cable labels shall consist of permanent ink printed or legibly written on selflaminating and overwrapping label material .
protect cable ends at all times with acceptable end caps .
never subject any coaxial cable to a bend radius of less than six num inches .
provide grommets guides andor strain relief material where necessary to avoid abrasion of or excess tension on wire and cable .
num .
serial data terminal server for hubs install the serial data terminal servers num port in equipment frames as shown in the plans and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
for equipment cabinets and as required install the serial data terminal servers type b as shown in the plans and in accordance with the manufacturers recommendations .
furnish and install all interconnection wiring and power service connections .
num .
patch cords a .
general requirements use patch cords only within control center buildings communication hubs and equipment cabinets .
section numcommunication and electronic equipment num label all patch cords using cable identification numbers as shown in the plans or provided by the engineer .
apply cable labels at each end and in the center of the cable .
use printergenerated adhesive overlapping cable labels .
neatly route dress and secure patch cords in the equipment racks or frames and at both ends .
use all available cable management devices andor trays .
route patch cords only vertically on the sides of the equipment racks and frames or horizontally across the bottom or top of the racks and frames no diagonal routing is permitted .
follow all manufacturers recommendations including bend radius requirements during all patch cord installation .
b .
fiber optic patch cords furnish and install fiber optic patch cords in accordance with section num and this section .
c. coaxial video patch cords where an equipment or termination facility has a connector other than bnc such as an rca furnish and install a bnc adapter to connect the patch cord to the equipment or termination facility .
d. data patch cords use data patch cords to connect all local area network and rsstandard e.g .
rsnum rs num serial data termination facilities and equipment .
where an equipment or termination facility has a connector other than an rjnum outlet such as a dshell connector furnish and install rjnum adapters between the connectors and the networkdata patch cords as approved by the department .
for any type of rjnum adapter provide the proper pinout of the adapter as part of the documentation .
e. network switch field switch patch cables furnish and install categorynume unshielded twisted pair utpshielded twisted pair stp patch cables that comply with eiatianum current edition for all network to device interconnects device to switch .
the maximum length of categorynume cable should not exceed num feet .
in no case shall the total cable distance device to switch including risers connectors and connecting patch cables exceed num feet num meters .
all cables over num feet shall be tested for transmission capability and cable certification using a network tester .
all tests shall be performed with the engineer present .
f. voicetelephone patch cords use voicetelephone patch cords to connect all voice or telephone communications facilities and equipment .
furnish and install the voicetelephone patch cords with the necessary pair sizing and connector for the equipment being connected .
num .
network switch layer num gige for hubs furnish and install network switches layer num gige that are compatible with the existing navigator ethernet network as shown in the plans as applicable .
the existing network consists of nortel networks num layer num gige switches .
furnish and install the network switch and all fiber optic jumper cabling necessary to connect to the fiber optic cable fdc as shown in the plans .
num .
hub uninterruptible power supply furnish and install a dedicated electrical service branch circuit from the hub main service panel for the ups system .
ensure that the ups system branch circuit is in accordance with all recommendation of the ups manufacturer including the provision of a locking plugreceptacle connection .
make all electrical conduit and fittings rigid emt or approved equivalent .
locate the branch circuit receptacle as close as possible to the ups mounting position to minimize the ups input line cord and to minimize tripping hazards .
configure the electrical service inputs for all network switches serial data terminal servers video encodersdecoders and video switches to be supplied by the ups .
furnish and install line cords power strips and all incidental materials to configure the ups service to the above equipment .
section numcommunication and electronic equipment num b .
communications subsystem num .
general a .
use network switches layer num gige field switches serial data terminal servers and video encodersdecoders as necessary or required to establish for traffic signals digital data communications between local controllers and system masters and to and from hubs and control centers for ramp meters digital data communications to and from equipment cabinetshubscontrol centers digital camera video and control data communications to and from equipment cabinetshubscontrol centers digital cms control data communications to and from equipment cabinetshubscontrol centers digital detector data communications to and from equipment cabinetshubscontrol centers digital vds processor control data communications to and from equipment cabinetshubscontrol centers b. furnish and install network switches layer num gige field switches serial data terminal servers and video encodersdecoders as necessary or required as specified in the plans to ensure proper communications .
num .
installation requirements a .
install all communications equipment and materials necessary for a complete communications path from the field site to the control center or communications hub as shown in the plans .
furnish and install all mounting and interconnection materials including but not limited to card cages mounting panels and rack hardware fiber patchjumper cables and power supply cables .
mount card cages and mounting panels as shown in the plans and detail drawings in this section .
furnish and install the type and quantity of equipment shown in the plans .
where the plans show that new field switches video encoders vds system processors modems andor other devices are to be placed in existing cabinet space furnish and install compatible mounting hardware as required .
b. label all wiring and cabling including entrance cables jumper and patch cords and power supply cables .
cable labels shall consist of permanent ink printed or legibly written on selflaminating and overwrapping label material .
c. equipment cabinet mounting all field equipment shall be mounted in a manner as to not restrict the replacement of other components in the cabinet housing .
d. hubcontrol center mounting where data is transmitted to a receiving end such as a hub tcc or tmc permanently mount the equipment as required within an equipment rack frame .
num .
equipment cabinet assembly a .
general requirements furnish and install the equipment cabinet assembly to include all devicescomponents assembly wiring and materials required in this subsection num.c and in subsection num.b .
the equipment cabinet assembly as described below shall conform to all applicable sections of the caltrans specifications and georgia dot standard specifications .
b .
classification of types num .
furnish and install equipment cabinet assemblies as called for in the plans in accordance with the following requirements for each type .
a .
type a cabinet not applicable .
section numcommunication and electronic equipment num b .
type b cabinet not applicable .
c. type c cabinet furnish and install a type c cabinet that conforms with all materials and installation requirements of this subsection num.c and subsection num.b using a type c standard cabinet housing .
d. type d cabinet furnish and install a type d cabinet assembly that conforms with all materials and installation requirements of this subsection num.c and subsection num.b using a type d standard cabinet housing .
e. type f cabinet furnish and install a type f cabinet assembly that conforms with all materials and installation requirements of this subsection num.c and subsection num.b using a type f standard cabinet housing .
num quality acceptance the engineer based on justification of public interest may order any completed or partially completed portions of the project placed in service .
such action is not an acceptance of the project in whole or in part nor is it a waiver by the engineer of any provision of the specifications .
assume no right to additional compensation or extension of time for completion of the work or any other concession because of the use of the project or any part thereof prior to final acceptance of the completed project .
fully maintain all equipment prior to final acceptance which includes but is not limited to equipment configuration and communication systems .
perform all acceptance testing in the presence of the engineer .
notify the engineer of a desired acceptance test schedule no less than num calendar days prior to beginning the testing except for testing using the navigator software and existing navigator control center and communications equipment .
for acceptance testing using the navigator software and existing navigator control center and communications equipment coordinate the testing schedule with the engineer no less than num days prior to the start of this testing .
do not conduct any testing during any state or federal holiday .
a .
equipment num .
general coordinate all work activities needing system configuration with the engineer a minimum of num days prior to any testing .
work in this project includes furnishing specific equipment to the department for configuration and use by the department during the course of the project .
operate this equipment and maintain the proper configuration until final acceptance of the project including throughout the project duration after the department has started using the equipment .
num .
startup testing provide startup testing for the various devices supplied as described herein and as further detailed in the respective equipment specification section .
the contractor shall provide a test plan and procedures for review and approval by the engineer prior to any testing .
the contractor shall conduct a pretest prior to contacting the engineer prior to final inspection .
pretest shall be defined as all tests that are performed for the engineer during inspection .
the contractor shall provide all test equipment and software necessary to perform the tests .
perform all tests in the presence of the engineer unless otherwise specified .
include in the test plan and procedures as a minimum the following tests a .
device or system poweron self test b .
conduct visual inspection of device or system to confirm presence of all components and features specified by the contract specifications and otherwise customarily provided by the manufacturer section numcommunication and electronic equipment num c. test using the builtin manufacturers product or system diagnostics to confirm proper performance d. test all input and output ports e. demonstrate that all functional features of the device or system are operational f. an operational test demonstrating equipment performs as intended and as prescribed by the manufacturer and meets the requirements of the contract specifications .
g. configure the components of the device make necessary settings or adjustments and poweron according to the manufacturers instructions .
num .
serial data terminal server prior to acceptance of any serial data terminal servers all types the following shall be performed a. connect with serial cable to serial data terminal server with pc or laptop using hyperterminal .
b .
ensure that the serial data terminal server recognizes all ports and attached expansion modules .
c. input addressing for serial data terminal server and reset .
d. determine successful ethernet connectivity link light at hubswitch .
e. successfully telnet from pc or laptop to serial data terminal server through hubswitch .
f. print to screen configuration information that is consistent with addressing data previously entered into serial data terminal server .
num .
field switches prior to acceptance of any field switch all types the following shall be performed a. standalone acceptance test sat the contractor shall provide the test plan and procedures for review and approval by the department prior to any sat activities .
the test procedures shall provide comprehensive tests to verify and demonstrate full compliance with these specifications and device functionality .
pass and fail criteria shall be identified for each test for review and approval by the department .
the contractor shall provide all test equipment and software necessary to perform the tests .
the department will perform the sat in a test area provided by the department .
a contractor representative shall be present during the sat .
the field switch will be assembled and connected to power in a standalone configuration .
the field switch will be powered up and allowed to initialize boot and run selfdiagnostic tests as defined in the departmentapproved test procedures .
after the field switch has started and initialized test procedures will be executed .
after the test procedures have been executed the field switch will be allowed to run uninterrupted for period of seventytwo num hours and then rebooted .
the switch shall hold all settings and configurations through reboots and power failures .
once this is confirmed the num day burnin period would then begin .
at the end of the burnin period the unit will be restarted and configuration verified .
upon completion of all test procedures the contractor will be notified of sat field switch acceptance or failure .
if the unit fails the test the contractor shall replace it at no additional cost to the department and the test procedure shall be restarted .
b .
operational test section numcommunication and electronic equipment num the contractor shall provide the test plan and procedures for review and approval by the department prior to any operational test activities .
the test procedures shall provide comprehensive tests to verify and demonstrate full compliance with these specifications in regards to device or subsystem network performance .
pass and fail criteria shall be identified for each tests for review and approval by the department .
upon completion of all test procedures the contractor will be notified of sat field switch acceptance or failure .
if the unit fails the test the contractor shall replace it at no additional cost to the department and the test procedure shall be restarted .
the contractor shall provide all test equipment and software necessary to perform the tests .
after successful completion of the sat the department will configure and connect the field switch to the gdot network .
verify communications and network control from the field switch tofrom the hub and tmc .
verify system integrity through comprehensive diagnostics .
verify numbasettx interfaces and operations .
verify numbasex interfaces and operations .
upon completion of all the tests the contractor will be notified of operational field switch acceptance or failure .
if the unit fails the test the contractor shall replace the unit at no additional cost to the department and the test procedure shall be restarted .
num .
interim field subnet test prior to acceptance of any network communications equipment or field device connected to the communications network perform and successfully complete an interim field subnet ifs test .
all startup and standalone testing shall be successfully completed on all devices before an ifs test can begin .
include in the ifs test all network communications devices in the project including but not limited to all field switches video encoders and decoders vds processors cms controllers microwave radar detectors serial data terminal servers ramp meter signal controllers and traffic signal controllers .
a .
provide the test plan and procedures for review and approval by the department prior to any ifs activities .
the test procedures shall provide comprehensive tests to verify and demonstrate full compliance with these specifications and device functionality .
pass and fail criteria shall be identified for each test for review and approval by the department .
the test procedures shall identify all field sites and devices in the project as well as the field subnets the sites are attached to .
b. furnish all test equipment and software necessary to perform the tests including but not limited to laptop pc with web browser and network analysis software temporary field switch or other compatible media converter and all necessary patch cords .
c. prior to conducting a scheduled ifs test conduct a dryrun test to ensure all preparations for the ifs test are complete .
the engineer reserves the right to attend the dryrun test .
d. an ifs test shall be conducted for each field subnet which is typically a group of field sites connected to a fiber pair ring between two hubs .
the test shall be conducted from one of the hubs .
during the test every network device shall be pinged probed by snmp or equivalent status queries logged into and connected to by other methods as needed to demonstrate that the equipment is functional contains the proper base programming data and is in the proper location .
num contractor warranty and maintenance provide a num year manufacturers support usual and customary warranties period for all equipment and materials furnished and installed as part of the communications and electronic equipment system .
include in warranty and support all contractor or manufacturer activities related to maintenance removal and replacement of parts and materials during the period of support .
begin the manufacturer warranty support period upon successful completion of equipment cabling and component section numcommunication and electronic equipment num testing as outlined in subsection num .
all manufacturer warranties shall be continuous throughout the period and state that they are subject to transfer to the department .
num training provide training as required herein .
include with training all supplies equipment materials handouts travel and subsistence necessary to conduct the training .
furnish a training notebook in a labeled numring binder to each trainee .
provide installation operations and maintenance training on the equipment at a site near the project area .
personnel trained by the various equipment manufacturers and authorized by said manufacturers shall perform the training .
provide installation operations and maintenance training for up to twelve num people .
include in this training both classroom training and hands on training .
limit inshop and infield training to group sizes of four num people at a time .
conduct all training in halfday sessions .
two halfday sessions may be held on the same day .
the total of the training shall consist of at least six num clock hours of training for each participant .
provide a course content of at a minimum the following a .
field switches num .
unit setup and configuration num .
diagnostic and maintenance num .
performance tuning num .
handson use of field switches for each trainee num measurement a .
equipment for each equipment unit listed below furnish and install all mounting and interconnection materials including but not limited to card cages mounting hardware all patch cords of all types and power strips and power supply cables at no separate cost to the department .
if software device driverscommunication protocols not currently incorporated into navigator software are needed provide and integrate them at no separate cost to the department .
num .
serial data terminal server serial data terminal servers num port and all types are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
for each unit provided furnish and install any required serial data terminal servers and serial port concentrators as specified in subsection num.a.num and in the plans at no separate cost to the department .
num .
hub uninterruptible power supply hub uninterruptible power supplies are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
num .
network switch layer num gige network switches layer num gige all types are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
for each unit provided furnish and install any required switching hubs router and switching chassis as specified in subsection num.a.num and in the plans at no separate cost to the department .
num .
gbic routing switch module gbic routing switching modules all types are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
num .
gbics gbics all types are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
section numcommunication and electronic equipment num num .
field switches field switches all types with rack mounting hardware are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
num .
field switches with power over ethernet poe field switches poe all types with rack mounting hardware are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
num .
equipment frame equipment frames are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
b .
equipment cabinet assembly equipment cabinet assemblies are measured for payment by the number actually installed complete functional and accepted .
for each unit installed furnish all required items including but not limited to identification and documentation lighting contact switch fan contactclosure sensor patch cords and cables at no separate cost to the department c. testing testing is to be included in the cost of the project and providing the devices .
d. training training is measured as a lump sum for all supplies equipment materials handouts travel and subsistence necessary to conduct the training .
include in the lump sum bid price for training all supplies equipment materials handouts travel and subsistence necessary to conduct the training .
num limits not applicable num payment payment is full compensation for furnishing and installing the items complete in place according to this specification .
payment for all items is as follows item no .
num serial data terminal server num port and type _ per each item no .
num type__ cabinet per each item no .
num network switch layer num gige type _ per each item no .
num gbic routing switch module type _ per each item no .
num gbic type _ per each item no .
num field switch type _ per each item no .
num field switch poe type _ per each item no .
num hub uninterruptible power supply per each item no .
num equipment frame per each item no .
num training lump sum num adjustments not applicable num section numnavigator advanced transportation management system integration num general description this work includes coordination and integration of the project into the departments navigator advanced transportation management system to provide a complete and fully operational expansion of the departments navigator system as shown in the contract documents .
integration requirements all field devices communications and network systems installed during the project shall be fully integrated into the existing navigator system and shall form a complete usable and fully integrated system capable of being fully controlled and operated from the transportation management center .
num related references a .
standard specifications section num permanent changeable message signs section num traffic signal installation section num hub buildings section num traffic signal equipment section num fiber optic system section num closed circuit television system cctv section num detection systems section num communication and electronic equipment b. referenced documents not applicable num submittals submit six copies of the integration plan to the engineer within num days of contract notice to proceed .
submit six copies of the acceptance test plan to the engineer within num days of contract notice to proceed .
num materials not applicable num construction requirements not applicable num personnel not applicable num equipment not applicable num preparation not applicable num fabrication not applicable section numnavigator advanced transprotation management system integration num num construction contractors that need access to the gdot hub buildings during the construction activity to complete their work shall purchase an electronic programmable key and key programmer .
contractors needing access to a hub building must submit a system change request scr form if installation of new equipment is being performed or a maintenance and repair report marr form for regular routine maintenance .
these forms shall be submitted via email to gdot at least num hours in advance .
the system currently in use for hub building access is cyberlock by videx .
to purchase keys key programmers and get technical assistance on the gdot cyberlock system contact glen peifer peifer companies llc num knight arnold rd .
memphis tn num num phone num fax www.peiferlock.com num quality acceptance a .
overall system testing while each individual device and subsystem requires specific testing the overall system requires detailed testing to demonstrate that the system is fully integrated and forms a complete and usable system .
acceptance of the overall system requires successful completion of all individual subsystem tests and then completion of an overall num day burnin period of the complete system once it is fully integrated and functioning as a complete system .
perform all acceptance testing in the presence of the engineer .
notify the engineer of a desired acceptance test no less than fourteen calendar days prior to beginning the testing except for testing using the navigator software and existing navigator control center and communications equipment .
for acceptance testing using the navigator software and existing navigator control center and communications equipment coordinate the testing schedule with the engineer no less than num days prior to the start of this testing .
do not conduct any testing during any state or federal holiday .
if in the departments judgment the contractor is not demonstrating progress in solving any technical problem the contractor may be directed to supply factory technical representation and diagnostic equipment at no cost to the department until satisfactory resolution of those defined problems .
the engineer may direct any completed or partially completed portions of the project to be placed in service .
such action can not be deemed an acceptance of the project in whole or in part nor shall such action be construed as a waiver by the engineer of any provision of the specifications .
assume no right to additional compensation or extension of time for completion of the work .
fully maintain all equipment until final acceptance which includes but is not limited to equipment configuration and communication systems that are being integrated .
make the acceptance testing plan a detailed and thorough procedure that demonstrates that all equipment hardware and work meet all requirements of the contract .
these requirements include but are not limited to all design construction materials equipment assembly documentation of manufacturers certification of assembly and configuration environmental performance communications video and data communications signal strength and clarity compatibility with the navigator software and documentary requirements of the contract .
b. burnin period provide a numday burnin period for all work and equipment included in the contract .
the burnin period shall consist of full operation of the entire system from the transportation management center or an alternate location designated by the engineer .
section numnavigator advanced transprotation management system integration num commence with the burnin period upon written authorization by the department to commence .
terminate the burnin period num consecutive days thereafter unless an equipment malfunction occurs .
stop the burnin period for the length of time any equipment is defective .
after repairing the equipment the department shall determine that it functions properly .
successful completion and acceptance of the burnin period will be granted on the numth day unless any equipment has malfunctioned during the the burnin period .
if any equipment has failed during the numst through numth day then the final acceptance shall be withheld until all the equipment is functioning properly for num consecutive days after repair .
if any equipment has failed during the numth through numth day final acceptance will be withheld until all the equipment is functioning properly for num consecutive days after repair .
when a specific piece of equipment has malfunctioned more than three times during the num day burnin period replace that equipment with a new unit and repeat the num day burnin period .
c. contractor responsibilities during the burnin period maintain all work under this contract in accordance with the specifications .
restore any work or equipment to proper operating condition within num hours after notification .
d. department responsibilities department responsibilities during the burnin period will be as follows num .
expeditious notification of contractor upon failure or malfunction of equipment .
num .
in the event that the contractor does not provide the services enumerated above under his contract responsibilities the department or its authorized agents may in the interest of public safety take emergency action to provide for adequate traffic control .
pay any costs incurred as a result of these emergency actions .
such action by the department will not void any guaranties or warranties or other obligations set forth in the contract .
e. burnin period acceptance the department will make burnin period acceptance after satisfactory completion of the required burnin period and on the basis of a comprehensive field inspection of the complete system in accordance with the specifications .
upon burnin period acceptance but prior to final acceptance of the entire contract maintain the system in accordance with all contract requirements .
f. ramp meter testing the contractor shall submit to and obtain approval from the engineer a ramp metering testing procedure for each specific ramp meter location .
the testing procedure shall demonstrate that all components hardware cable and connections furnished and installed by the contractor operates correctly and that all functions are in conformance with the specifications .
testing requirements are also outlined in section num .
the department will provide controller firmware .
the contractor shall provide the controller to the department .
the department will load the firmware into the controller and return to the contractor .
at a minimum the contractor shall demonstrate to the engineer num .
the ivds and loop detectors at each location are functioning with expected accuracy as specified .
num .
the ramp meter signals function properly at all stages including nonmetering startup metering and shutdown .
num .
in multilane configurations the ramp meter can operate a simultaneous release of vehicles from all lanes as well as an alternating or staggered release of vehicles from the two or three lanes .
num .
queue detectors are functioning as specified including both queue detection and queue override .
num .
the ramp meter functions properly for both local traffic responsiveness and time of day operations .
num .
the advance warning sign can be clearly seen and can be activated and deactivated properly .
section numnavigator advanced transprotation management system integration num num .
the ramp meter can communicate properly with the hubtmc .
num .
the traffic enforcement heads are operating as per the plans and can be seen by enforcement personnel .
the contractor shall coordinate closely with the navigator system integrator for conducting ramp meter operational tests .
note pretest should be performed prior to calling the engineer for inspection .
pretest shall be defined as all tests that will be performed during the engineers inspection .
begin operational tests after the engineer is satisfied that all work has been completed .
after the ramp meter has been placed in operation the contractor in coordination with the system integrator shall demonstrate that all equipment furnished and installed by the contractor operates with all software and firmware as specified .
after successful completion of the test procedure each ramp meter assembly shall go through a burnin period for num consecutive days of normal ramp metering operations .
during the burnin period the contractor shall ensure that all contractorsupplied equipment operates without failures of any type .
if any equipment component malfunctions or fails to provide the specified functionality during the numday burnin period the contractor shall replace or repair the defective equipment within num hours of notification by the engineer .
after the malfunctioning components have been repaired or replaced to the satisfaction of the engineer the contractor shall begin a new numday burnin period .
the new numday burnin period shall apply only to equipment components supplied by the contractor .
in the event of a failure or malfunctioning of equipment furnished by others which prevents the numday burnin test from continuing the engineer will suspend the burnin test and resume when the other equipment failures are corrected .
g. asbuilt documentation submit asbuilt documentation of all work provided in accordance with this specification prior to contract final acceptance .
include in the asbuilt documents the following documents as a minimum as they are applicable .
supply manuals and wiring diagrams at the time of installation .
deliver asbuilts no later than num days after completion of installation or as otherwise specified in the plans or specifications .
provide complete and accepted asbuilts which shall be reviewed and approved by the department prior to any final acceptance or payment .
num .
operators manual a. furnish a manual containing detailed operating instructions for each different type of equipment .
num .
maintenance procedures manuals a. furnish a manufacturers manual containing detailed preventative and corrective maintenance procedures for each different type or model of equipment .
num .
system connection diagrams a. furnish diagrams showing fiber optic and electric system interconnection cables and terminations .
include a diagram showing the location of all equipment in the new equipment racks or frames in hubs .
include diagrams that clearly indicate the use of each fiber .
num .
as built drawings a .
provide asbuilt drawings showing the final location of all new equipment and communications installed including but not limited to cctv and vds support poles new utility poles new equipment cabinets detection systems cms and ramp meter support poles .
show all routes and locations of the final cable installation in place and complete .
for aerial cable installations show poles pole attachment heights spans colocations splice closures maintenancestorage coils and vertical risers .
for underground cable installations show conduit size quantity and routes pull boxes and ecbs closures and cabinet terminations .
provide the cable distance marking documentation required in num.g.num .
the asbuilt drawings shall also include any other device specific details that are required in the individual specifications .
section numnavigator advanced transprotation management system integration num b .
the location for all items noted above shall be indicated with the stateplane gps coordinates shown on the plans beside each item .
all markups on the plans shall be shown in red .
a separate excel file with the gps coordinates for each item shall also be submitted with the asbuilt drawings .
c. except for standard bound materials bind all numxnum documentation including num x num drawings folded to numxnum in logical groupings in looseleaf binders of either the numring or plastic slidering type .
permanently and appropriately label each such bound grouping of documentation .
d. furnish five num copies of all bound documentation .
num contractor warranty and maintenance not applicable num training not applicable num measurement the department will pay all costs of coordination with and integration of the project into navigator under the integration pay item when the pay item is included in the contract .
the integration pay item is measured as a lump sum for all supplies materials and subsistence it requires .
when the integration pay item is not included in the contract all costs of coordination with and integration of the project into navigator with all supplies materials and subsistence it requires shall be included in other contract items .
the department will make no separate payment for integration .
num limits not applicable num payment the department will pay for integration that is complete in place and accepted by the department .
payment is full compensation for the work .
payment for section num is made under or not applicable when the integration pay item is not included on the job .
num adjustments not applicable item no .
num navigator integration lump sum num section nummacrosynthetic fibers for concrete reinforcement num general description this section includes the requirements for manufacturing macrosynthetic fibers which are permitted as reinforcement in lieu of steel reinforcement in the following selected precast concrete products precast concrete manhole riser sections precast concrete flared end sections num related references a .
standard specifications section numprecast concrete catch basin drop inlet and manhole units b. referenced documents astm c num astm c num astm d num qpl num gdot standard num num materials for a list of sources see qpl num .
num macrosynthetic fibers for concrete reinforcement a .
requirements num .
ensure that macrosynthetic fibers are manufactured from virgin polyolefins polypropylene and polyethylene and comply with astm c num .
fibers manufactured from materials other than polyolefins must show documentary evidence confirming their long term resistance to deterioration when in contact with the moisture and alkalies present in cement paste andor the substances present in airentraining and chemical admixtures .
num .
the minimum fiber length required is num in num mm .
num .
ensure that macrosynthetic fibers have an aspect ratio length divided by the equivalent diameter of the fiber between num and num .
b .
acceptance num .
ensure that macrosynthetic fibers have a minimum tensile strength of num ksi num mpa when tested in accordance with astm d num .
num .
minimum dosage rate in pounds of fibers per cubic yard is established by determining a minimum average residual strength of no less than num psi num kpa when tested in accordance with astm c num .
in all cases ensure a minimum fiber dosage rate of num lbsydnum num kgmnum and a maximum fiber dosage rate of num lbsydnum num kgmnum .
num .
ensure that macrosynthetic fibers have a minimum modulus of elasticity of num ksi num mpa when tested in accordance with astm d num .
num .
the fiber manufacturer is required to obtain independently performed test results that confirm the requirements listed herein and submit those for approval by the engineer .
num .
approved fibers are listed on the departments qualified products list num qplnum macrosynthetic fibers for concrete reinforcement .
num c. materials warranty general provisions num through num .
section numtelecommunication facilities num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numcable systems num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numnoninvasive magnetoinductivevehical sensor num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numhighway advisory radio system num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section numprecast reinforced concrete three sided culvert num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
section nummowing num general description specifications for this work will be included elsewhere in the contract .
num gdot pay software symbols english metric unit of measure gdot pay software symbol unit of measure astm enum symbol gdot pay software symbol inch in millimeter mm mm linear foot lf linear meter m lmnum gross linear foot glf gross linear meter m glmnum mile mi kilometer km km gross linear mile glm gross linear kilometer km glkm acre ac hectare ha ha square foot sf square meter mnum mnum square yard sy square meter mnum mnum cubic foot cf cubic meter mnum mnum cubic yard cy cubic meter mnum mnum gallon gl liter l l thousand gallons mg cubic meter mnum mnum thousand foot board measure mbm cubic meter mnum mnum thousand m k k k pound lb kilogram kg kg ton num lb tn megagram num kg mg mg i alphabetic index a abandoned obstructions num num abbreviations num num abrasives for blast cleaning num num num adjusting to grade of miscellaneous roadway structures num num agreement num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num agricultural lime num num num num num num num num num num airentraining num num num num num num num num airentraining admixtures num num num num num alteration of plans or character of work num aluminum alloy bolts num num aluminum alloy materials num num aluminum alloy pipe num num num num num num num num aluminum alloy rivets num num aluminum alloy sheet and plate num num num aluminum alloy shims num num aluminum alloy washers num num aluminum caulking compound num aluminum handrail num aluminum powder num num num num num aluminum structural shape posts num num anchor bolts num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num appurtenances for water systems num arch culverts num num num asphalt concrete num num num num num num num num num num num num num asphalt plank num num asphalt plank bridge floor num asphalt plant num num num num num num asphaltrubber joint and crack seal num authority of num num num authority to make changes num award and execution of contract num b backfill for minor structures num num num num num num num num num backfill materials num num num num num num num num num num num num bags num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num bar reinforcement steel num num num num num num num num barbed wire num num num num num num ii alphabetic index barricades num num num num num num num num num barriers num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num base and subbase courses num num num num num num num num num bearing plates with polytetrafluroethylene surfaces num bearing surfaces num num bidding requirements and conditions num bids num num num num num num num bituminous adhesive for raised pavement markers num num num bituminous coated corrugated steel culvert pipe num bituminous material num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num bituminous plastic cement num num num num num num bituminous prime num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num bituminous surface treatment num num num num num num num num num bituminous tack coat num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num bituminous treated roving num num blanket num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num blanket for fill slopes num num boiled linseed oil num num num borrow num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num borrow excavation num num num num num num num num bracing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num brick num num num num num num num num brick masonry num num num num bridge complete num num num bridge excavation and backfill num num num num bronze num num num num num num num num num bronze bearings num bronze plates num num num buildings num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num burlap num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num bushings num num num num num num num num num num num c calcium chloride num num num num num num num num capacity num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num cast aluminum alloy railing posts num cast iron soil pipe num castings and forgings num num num num num num catch basins num num num num num num num num num num cationic asphalt emulsion num num num num num num num num num cattle pass num cement grout num num num num num cement stabilized num num num num num num num num num num num certified mill test reports num num num num num chain link fence num num num channel excavation num num num num channel type shear connectors num check point shelter num num chemical admixtures num num num num num num num chlorides num num num num num num num num num num num claims for adjustments and disputes num num num iii alphabetic index clay pipe num num clay underdrain pipe num closed circuit television cctv num num coal tar emulsion seal coat num coarse aggregate for asphaltic concrete num num num coarse aggregate for underdrains num cofferdams num num num num commissioner num num num num num compensation num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num concrete pavement num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num concrete sidewalks num num concrete slope drains num num concrete slope paving num num concrete spillways num num num concrete underdrain pipe num num num conformity with plans and specifications num connectors num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num construction layout num num construction stakes num contract bond num num num num num contract time num num num num num num num num num num num num num control of materials num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num control of soil erosion and sedimentation num num num num num control of work num num num num num num num num num num controlled low strength flowable fill num cooperation num num num num cooperation by contractor num num copper pipe num corrugated aluminum alloy num num num num num num corrugated polyethylene underdrain pipe num num num corrugated steel num num num num num num num num num num corrugated steel bridge plank num num corrugated steel underdrain pipe num num cotton num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num crushed aggregate subbase num num crushed stone base num num crushed stone drainage num num cubic yard num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num culverts num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num curb num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num curing agents num num num num num num num num num num num cutback num num num num num num num num num num num d deck drain system num deduction num num num num num num num num num default of contract num definitions and terms num num num num iv alphabetic index delay in completing work on time num num num delineator posts num num num num delineators num num num num num detour bridges num num num detours num num num num num num num num num deviations num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num display and interior furnishings num ditch checks num ditch excavation num num num docks num num dowel bars and tie bars num drilled caisson foundations num num drilled wells num drop inlets num num num num num duck num num num num num num dynamic testing of pile num e edgedrains num elastomeric bearing pads num num num num num num num elastomeric profile bridge joint seals num num electrical conduit num num num num num num num num num num num num num num electrical wire num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num electrical work num num num eliminated items num num emulsified asphalt slurry seal num num emulsion num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num epoxy adhesives num num num epoxy coated steel reinforcement num num num num num num epoxy pressure injection of concrete cracks num epoxy resin adhesives num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num erection num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num erosion control num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num erosion control check dams num num num num excavation for minor structures num expanded mortar num num num num num num num expansion joint num num num num num num num num num expansion plates num num num num num extension agreement num num extra work num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num extruded aluminum num num num num num num num num f failure num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num failure to execute contract num failure to maintain roadway or structures num num fertilizers num num num num num num fiber optic system num num num num num num fiber stabilizing additives num num num num fiberglass blanket num num field fencing num num num field laboratory num num num num num num num num num num num num field laboratory building num num num num num num field office num num num num v alphabetic index filter fabric for embankment stabilization num num final cleaning up num num num num final finishing of roadway num final inspection and acceptance num num num num final payment num num num num fine aggregate for asphaltic concrete num num num fine aggregate for cushion num fine aggregate for portland cement concrete num num fine aggregate for sand cement rip rap num fire hydrants num fittings num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num flag pole num foamed asphalt stabilized base course num force account num num num num num num num num num force account work num num forest protection num full depth slab replacement num num g galvanized steel sign posts num galvanized steel structural shape posts num num num num galvanizing repair compound num num num num num gasket joints num num gaskets num num num num num num num num num num gate valves num num geogrid materials num geogrid reinforcement num graded aggregate num num num num num num num num num num num num num graded aggregate construction num num num grading complete num num num graffiti proof coating for concrete num granite curb num num granular embankment num num grassing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num grind concrete num num num num num grind concrete pavement num num num num num grout pump num num num num grout pumping equipment num grouting num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num grouting equipment num num num grubbing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num guard rail num num num num num num num num num num num num num num gutter num num num num num num num num num num num num num h handling materials num handrail num num num num num num num num num num num haul roads num num num num heat stable antistripping additive num high early strength concrete num num high level lighting systems num num num num high mounting height luminaires num high tensile strength bolts num highway lighting num num num num num num num num num num highway provisions num highway signs num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num holidays num num num num hot asphaltvulcanized rubber seal treatment num hot inplace recycled asphaltic concrete num hot mix recycled asphaltic concrete num num hydrated lime num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num vi alphabetic index i illuminated sign system num num imperfect trench num num inplace embankment num num information center building num num inoculants num num num insect control num num interpretation of estimates num iron pipe num num num num irrigation system num num item numbers num j jacking or boring pipe num num num num joint fillers and sealers num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num jointing num junction box num num num num num num num num num jute mesh erosion control num k knots num num num num num l lead joints num legal regulations and responsibility to the public num num num num num num num num num num num num num num liability num num num num num num num num num num num num lighting standards and towers num num num num lighting towers num num num limefly ash soil construction num limitations num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num linseed oil num num num num num num num num num num liquidated damages num num num num num num load restrictions num num local material sources num num num lumber and timber num num num num num luminaires num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num lump sum construction num m maintenance during construction num num maintenance of traffic num manholes num num num num num num num num num masonry materials num num num num num num num num mast arm assemblies num num num num num num num num material guaranty num membrane curing compound num num num num num num merchantable timber num metal drain inlet num metal drain inlets num metal shell piling num num num num num num num num method of handling classes of soils num micro surfacing num microwave radar detection num num num num num mill asphaltic concrete pavement num mineral filler num num num num num num num num num num num num num num mineral spirits num num num num num minor drainage structures for detours num miscellaneous bridge hardware num vii alphabetic index miscellaneous concrete num num num num num num num miscellaneous drainage structures num num miscellaneous electrical materials num num num num miscellaneous erosion control items num num num num num num miscellaneous metals num num num miscellaneous pipe num num num miscellaneous planting materials num num num num num num miscellaneous steel materials num num num num num num num num num num mitigation site construction num num mobile operations office num num mobilization num num num modification of existing signs num modular expansion joints num monuments and road markers num mowing num num num num num num num mulch num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num n navigation num num num num num navigation lighting num num num num navigation lighting luminaires num nonreinforced concrete pipe num num num num normal backfill num num num num num notice num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num nuts num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num o obliteration of old roads num offset luminaires num num outdoor furniture num overrun in contract time num num p painting existing steel structures num painting structures num num num num num num num num num num painting traffic stripe num num paints for structural steel num patching portland cement concrete pavement num patented devices num num paved ditches num num num pavement arrow with raised reflectors num peat moss num pedestrian overpass bridge num permanent anchored walls num permanent changeable message signs num num num permanent soil reinforcing mat num pile encasement num num num piling and round timber num num num num num pilot vehicles num num num pine bark num num pine seedlings num pipe appurtenances num num num num num num num pipearch num num num pits num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num plain portland cement concrete shoulders num plans and working drawings num num plant establishment num num num num num num plant inspection num num num num plant laboratory num num num num plant topsoil num num num num num num num num num num viii alphabetic index planting zones num num num num plastic pipe num plastic sheets num num pneumatic ejector lift station num pneumatically applied concrete num polymer concrete num num porous material num num portland cement concrete end dams and patches num portland cement concrete pavement num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num portland cement concrete subbase num num portland cement concrete whitetopping num post tensioning num posttensioning steel wire num num num pot bearings num precast concrete num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num precast concrete header curb num preformed joint filler num num num num num preformed plastic gaskets num num num num preformed plastic pavement markings num num num premolded asphalt plank num num prepared plant topsoil num num num num num prequalification of bidders num preservative treatment num num num num num num num num num num num num num num preservative treatment of timber products num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num pressure grouting num num num num num num num num num pressure grouting portland cement concrete pavement num prestressed concrete bridge members num num num num num num num num num num num num num num prestressed concrete piling num num num num num num num pretensioning steel wire strand num num num progress num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num proposal guaranty num num num num prosecution and progress num num num num num num protection and restoration of property num num protective concrete collar for existing columns num protective platforms num public num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num pumping underseal grout num putty num num num num q quality control num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num r radiographic num num num railroad num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num railroad construction num num railroad grade separation structures num raise existing bridge num raised pavement markers num num num num num num raised traffic bars num random clearing and grubbing num num num num num rapid setting cement concrete end dams and patches num rapid setting patching materials for portland cement concrete num num num raw linseed oil num num num num ready mix concrete num num num num reclamation of material pits num num num num num num reclamation of material pits and waste areas num num num num num reconstructed base course num num red primer num num reflective and nonreflective characters num num reflective sheeting signs num ix alphabetic index reflectorizing materials num num num num num num num num num reinforced concrete approach slabs num num reinforcement and tensioning steel num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num reinforcement steel num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num rejection of proposals num removal of miscellaneous roadway items num num removal of pavement markings num num num num num num num num num removal of portland cement concrete roadway slabs num num num removal of unacceptable and unauthorized work num repair of galvanized coatings num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num resident engineer num responsibility num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num rest area luminaires num rest room building num restoration or alteration of lakes and ponds num retaining walls num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num retarding admixtures num num right of way num num num num num num rip rap num num num num num num num num num num num rivets num num num num num num num roads num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num roadway excavation num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num roadway luminaires num roadway materials num num num num num num num num num num num rock num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num rock embankment num num num root protection num rubber gasket joints num rubber impregnated cotton duck num rubber seal treatment num num rubble num num num num num rubble masonry num num num num num rumble strips num num num s sample holes num sand bituminous stabilized base course num sanitary sewer num num sanitary sewers num sawed joints in existing pavements num scales num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num scope of payment num sealing roadway and bridge joints num num num num num num num seamless steel pile num seasonal limitations num num num num num seed and sod num num num num num num num seeding num num num num num num num num num num num selected material surface course num selective clearing num selflubricating bronze plates num num num sewage pumping station num num shear connectors num num num num num num shop and working drawings num num shoring num num num num num x alphabetic index shoulder num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num shoulder materials num num num sign blanks and panels num num num num num sign paint num num num sign posts num num num num num num num num num num silt control gates num num num num silt filter bag num silt retention barrier num num num siltation control num num slag cement num slope drains num num num num num num num num num smooth lined corrugated polyethylene pe culvert pipe num num num sod num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num soil aggregate num num num soil aggregate bases num num soil aggregate construction num soil base materials num num num num num num num soilcement construction num num num num num soillime construction num solar application num sound barriers num num spar varnish num special subgrade compaction num special subgrade compaction and test rolling num special surface coating for concrete num num num special work num specialty items num num splicing num num num num num num num num num num num num num spring box num num square yard num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num stabilized base material for patching num stabilizer aggregate num num num num num num num num standard release form num num static scale system num num num num num steel bolts num num num num num num num num num num num num steel forgings num num num steel joints num num num num steel pile num num num num steel pipe num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num steel plate num num num num num num num steel shell pile num num steel sign posts num num num storage of materials num storm drain pipe num num strain poles num num num num num num num num num num num num num num stripping excavation num num num structural steel num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num structural supports for overhead signs num num studs num num num num num num num num num num num subgrade stabilization num num num substitution of sources of materials num supplemental agreement num num num num num num num num num num surcharge removal num surety num num num num num num num num num surface finish num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num survey aids num xi alphabetic index swaybracing num num num num num num num num num num t tackifiers num temporary silt fence num num num num num temporary suspension of work num test piles num num num num thermoplastic traffic stripe num num tie bars num num num num num timber piling num num num num num num num num num num timber poles num num num num num num num num num num num num num timber structures num num traffic control num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num traffic impact attenuator num traffic signal installation num num num num num num num num num num num traffic stripe num num num num num num training program num num num num num travel trailer sanitary disposal station num trees num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num triangular silt barrier num num num truck weigh station communication system num truck weigh station height checking device num num truck weigh station length estimating device num num truck weigh station traffic control signs num truck weighing station building num num tubing num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num tunnel liner num turf establishment num turpentine num num num twentyfourhour accelerated strength concrete num u unbalanced bids num unclassified excavation num num num num num num num underdrains num num num num num num underpass luminaires num uniform traffic control devices num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num unpaved shoulders num num unsuitable material excavation num use of explosives num num v vehicle maintenance building num num velocity dissipators num num num video detection system num num num num num num num num num num num w waiver num num num num num num num num num num num waste water treatment plant num water distribution system num num water reducing admixtures num water storage tanks num num waterproof paper num num waterproofing fabrics num num num weather limitations num num num num num num num num num num num weed control num num num welcome station building num num xii alphabetic index welded steel wire fabric for concrete reinforcement num num welding num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num well pumps num num wildflower seeding num wood fence posts num num num wood posts and bracing num num num num num num wood sign posts num num num working drawings num num num num num num num num num num woven wire fence num num num z zinc num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num num
